Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions and Construction
[Adopted 10-16-1972 (§§ 1-2 and 1-3 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 1-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
For the purpose of the Code of the Township of Freehold, and in the
interpretation and application of all other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly elected pursuant
to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township government
assigned to such organizational unit by the Township Committee.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Freehold in the County of Monmouth and
State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — The duly elected
Committeemen or Committeewomen of the Township.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-2. Construction.
A. For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
B. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
C. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
D. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
E. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
F. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township
are closed, that day shall be excluded.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
H. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
§ 1-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-84-10 (§ 6-11 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-02-8]
§ 1-3. Maximum penalty. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-16-16]
§ 1-4. Penalty for solid waste disposal violations. [Added 4-27-2004
by Ord. No. O-04-18]
For a violation of any ordinance of the Township pertaining to solid waste
disposal, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, the minimum penalty shall be $500,
upon conviction, and the maximum fine shall not exceed $10,000, upon
conviction.
§ 1-5. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-6. Application.
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lessor penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a
particular case or violation.
A. For a violation of any provision of this Code, or any other ordinance of
the Township where no specific penalty is provided regarding the
section or sections violated, the maximum penalty, upon conviction,
shall be one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. In the event that a fine greater than $1,250 is imposed upon an owner
for violations of housing or zoning codes, the owner shall be provided
with a thirty-day period in which the owner shall be afforded the
opportunity to cure or abate the condition and shall also be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an
independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the
expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be
imposed if a court has not determined otherwise, or, upon reinspection
of the property, it is determined that the abatement has not been
substantially completed.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 1-7. Adoption of Code. [Amended 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-8]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Freehold
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee
of the Township of Freehold, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 355, 399 and 400, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Township of Freehold," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-8. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1972 Revised General
Ordinances, adopted 10-16-1972 and all general and permanent ordinances
enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are
hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-9. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication according
to law, specifically the General Ordinance by the Township Committee, the
Health-Related Ordinance by the Board of Health and the Shade Tree-
Related Ordinance by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 1-10. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Freehold by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-11. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Freehold" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:7
§ 1-12. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Freehold, pursuant to law, shall this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-14. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Township Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Freehold to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-16. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 1-17
1:8
§ 1-17. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-18. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 1-19. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-18 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to Ord. No. O-05-32 adopted
9-27-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Township's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9
§ 1-20. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Sections 2-28.1 through and including 2-28.5 of the 1972 Revised
General Ordinances pertaining to interlocal services, community
development block grants, etc.
O. Ordinance Nos. O-15-16, O-05-24 and O-05-31 (vehicles and traffic
ordinances not approved by DOT at time of publication of Code).
P. Ordinance O-03-26.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes: Throughout the Code the following
nomenclature changes have been made:
(1) Department of Water and/or Sewers to Department of Utilities.
(2) Dog Warden to Animal Control Officer.
(3) Chief police official to Chief of Police.
(4) Department of Public Works to Department of Public Works and
Automotive Services.
C. Throughout the Code, statutory references have been updated or
revised to the current citation. Consolidated (N.J.S.A.) references have
been added to unconsolidated (P.L.) where appropriate.
D. In the following sections, the specific penalty has been amended to
delete the penalty and make reference instead to the general penalty in
Chapter 1, Article II or a penalty section has been added referring to
the General Penalty in Chapter 1: §§ 26-14, 67-10, 71-15, 75-7, 75-19,
92-8, 97-8, 107-3, 111-10, 119-5, 123-9, 127-4, 142-12, 162-3, 162-21,
162-31, 166-14, 186-11, 195-15, 195-27, 203-9, 207-6, 217-4, 224-5,
§ 1-19 FREEHOLD CODE § 1-20
1:10
232-2, 236-9, 236-17, 236-35, 240-6, 245-5, 245-7B, 245-13, 245-16,
253-9, 257-16A, 261-12, 270-11, 270-14, 273-6, 278-5, 282-6, 286-11A,
290-10, 300-3A, 300-14, 300-38, 305-15, 315-16, 319-4, 341-6, 347-4,
355-7, 351-20.
E. In the following sections, the fees have been moved to Chapter 150,
Fees, and reference made to said Chapter 150: §§ 67-4C, 71-6A, 75-3,
75-9, 79-2F, 79-3E, 97-6, 101-1, 111-3, 115-5, 115-7, 123-3, 142-7,
162-10, 162-13, 166-8C(1) and (3)(a), 177-5C, 182-15A(3), 182-16,
186-5, 190-181D(2) and (3), 199-1, 213-5A and B(2), 213-6A, 228-3,
236-3, 236-14, 245-11, 257-12, 261-8D(2), 261-9D, 261-10, 270-3R,
270-10A and C(3), 282-4C, 286-5, 300-3A, 300-17, 305-4, 315-5A(1)(l)
and C, 315-8A, 315-11D, 319-21A, 319-23, 327-5, 327-7, 336-10A,
336-10G(15)(b)[5], 336-11D, 336-18B(1)(d), 351-4B and C; 351-6C,
351-6D(1)and (2), 351-6D(7), 351-6F and G, 351-8D, E, K and R, 351-9F,
351-10F, 351-12, 351-19C(2) and (3), 351-19D(2).
F. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-20F, the chapters and sections which were amended
or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by footnotes or chapter
histories referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes and histories indicating amendments and deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (deleted) 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 10.
Fire Department — See Ch. 26.
Personnel — See Ch. 47.
Police Department — See Ch. 51.
Public access to records — See Ch. 249.
§ 1-20 FREEHOLD CODE § 1-20
1:12
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 2-1. Citation.
This chapter may be cited as the Administrative Code of the Township of
Freehold and is referred to herein as the "code."
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1
1:13

ARTICLE II
Elective Officers
§ 2-2. Enumeration. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
The elective officers of the Township shall be the members of the Township
Committee.
§ 2-3. Residency requirement; terms.
All officers shall be residents of the Township and except where otherwise
provided by law shall hold office for three years beginning January 1,
next succeeding their election. No Township officer whether elected or
appointed shall hold over in his office after the expiration of the term in
which he was elected or appointed.
§ 2-4. Vacancies. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
Any person appointed by the Township Committee to fill a vacancy in
any elective office shall hold office only until January 1, and any person
appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of Assessor shall hold office only
until July 1, after the general election next succeeding his appointment,
and at that election some fit person shall be elected to fill the unexpired
term. If a vacancy occurs at so short a period of time before the next
general election that the office cannot be filled at the election, the Township
Committee may fill the vacancy in the same manner as though it had
occurred immediately after the election, and the vacancy shall then be filled
at the next subsequent general election for the unexpired term.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:15

ARTICLE III
Appointive Officers
§ 2-5. Enumeration; residency requirement. [Amended 12-27-2005
by Ord. No. O-05-48; 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-3]
In addition to the officers to be elected, the Township Committee may
appoint and employ a Municipal Administrator, Township Attorney,
Township Engineer, Township Building Inspector, Township Physician,
Township Treasurer, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector, Township Clerk and such
other officers as it shall require provided new officers shall first be created
by ordinance. The Township Clerk shall hold office for three years, subject
to any right of tenure prescribed by the laws of New Jersey.
§ 2-6. Commencement of term. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
All appointive officers, except where otherwise provided by law, shall hold
office until January 1 next following the appointment, except the Municipal
Administrator.
§ 2-7. Vacancies.
Where a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, the Township Committee
shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term, except in the case where the
Township Committee shall grant a leave of absence to join any branch of the
Armed Forces of the United States. No officer shall hold over in his office
after the expiration of the term for which he has been appointed.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Township Committee
§ 2-8. Legislative power.
All legislative power of the Township shall be exercised by the Township
Committee pursuant to law.
§ 2-9. Organization; election of Mayor.
The Township Committee shall organize annually on the first day of January,
or during the first seven days of January, at which time it will elect from
among its members a Chairman who shall be known as "Mayor" and a Vice
Chairman who, in the absence or disability of the Chairman, shall have
the powers and duties of the Chairman and shall be known as the "Acting
Mayor." The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Township Committee
and perform such other duties as the Township Committee may prescribe.
In the absence of the Mayor or Acting Mayor, the Committee shall elect a
temporary presiding officer.
§ 2-10. Powers of Mayor.
The Mayor shall have the power to make proclamations concerning holidays
and events of interest to the Township. He may from time to time appoint
citizens' committees to inquire into matters that are of interest to the
Township, and he shall have such other appointive powers as are conferred
upon him by law. He shall have and exercise the ceremonial power of the
Township and he shall exercise every other power usually exercised by
Township Mayors and conferred upon him by law.
§ 2-11. Township Committee meetings.
A. Regular meetings. The Township Committee shall meet annually on the
first day of January or during the first seven days of January in any year,
and such other meetings or adjourned meetings at such time and place
as it may direct by resolution. All regular meetings shall be held within
the Township.
B. Special meetings. A special meeting may be called at any time upon
request of a majority of the members of the Township Committee. The
request for a special meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting,
and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting other than
that specified. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with the Clerk
and served upon each Committee member, as hereinafter provided, at
least 24 hours prior to the time for which the meeting is called. The
Police Department shall cooperate with the Clerk in effectuating service
of notices. Upon waiver of notice by all members of the Township
Committee, a special meeting may be held without prior notice
notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection.
§ 2-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-12
1:19
§ 2-12. Open public meetings; rules of procedure.
All regular and special meetings of the Township Committee shall be open
to the public. The rules of procedure to be followed for the conduct of
business of the Committee shall be provided by resolution. Where not
otherwise provided, Roberts Rules of Order, revised, shall govern, and the
Township Attorney shall be parliamentarian ex officio.2
§ 2-13. Quorum.
A majority of the whole number of members of the Township Committee
shall constitute a quorum, and no ordinance shall be adopted by the
Township Committee without the affirmative vote of a majority of the
quorum of the Committee. If a quorum is not present one hour after the
appointed time for any meeting, those members present may declare the
meeting adjourned.
§ 2-14. Voting; ordinances.
The vote upon every resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call and
the yeas and nays shall be entered in the minutes. All ordinances shall be
introduced, considered, published, reconsidered and enacted in the manner
provided by general law.
§ 2-15. Consent agenda.
A. Items of business, excluding ordinances and as otherwise provided by
law, which the Township Committee, at a pre-meeting conference or
workshop, has determined to be routine and which do not require
discussion shall be included under a single section of the agenda known
as the "consent agenda." Such items may be adopted or approved, as
the case may be, upon motion and approval thereof by vote of a simple
majority of the Township Committee.
B. The "consent agenda" section of the meeting agenda shall be preceded
by an explanatory note substantially set forth as follows:
"All matters listed under item "Consent Agenda" are considered
routine by the Township Committee and will be enacted by one motion
in the form listed below. There will be no separate discussion of these
items. If discussion is desired of any item, that item will be considered
separately."
2. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-4.6, Township Committee Conferences, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48.
§ 2-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-15
1:20
ARTICLE V
Department of the Township Clerk
§ 2-16. Township Clerk. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-53]
The Director of the Department of the Township Clerk will be the Township
Clerk. The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Township Committee. He/
she shall attend and keep the minutes of all meetings of the Committee.
The minutes shall be signed by the Clerk, after approval by the Township
Committee.
§ 2-17. Ordinances and resolutions. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-48]
The Clerk shall record all ordinances of a permanent character in books to
be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance he shall also record and
certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance
so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who shall attest
that it was fully adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed the
recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record of the ordinance. Any
omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to sign or certify shall not impair or
affect the validity of any ordinance which has been duly adopted.
§ 2-18. Custodian of records.
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and
documents of the Township, except those committed by ordinance or by
statute to any other office or transferred thereto by the Township
Committee. He shall, on request and the payment of the fees prescribed
therefor by resolution of the Township Committee for the use of the
Township, furnish a certified copy of any such paper in his custody under
the corporate seal of the Township.4
§ 2-19. Corporate Seal.
The Clerk shall cause the corporate Seal of the Township to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Township Committee or when necessary to exemplify any document on
record in his office, or to certify any act or paper which from the records in
his office shall appear to have been a public act of the Township or a public
document. He shall not affix the Seal or cause or permit it to be affixed
to any other instrument, writing or other paper unless required by law or
ordinance.
3. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also revised the title of this Art. V from "Township Clerk" to
"Department of the Township Clerk."
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 249, Pubic Records, Access to.
§ 2-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20
1:21
§ 2-20. Compilation of administrative rules and regulations; filing
with Clerk required.
The Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of all such rules and
regulations which shall be available for public inspection in his office during
business hours. No rule or general regulation made by any department,
officer, agency or authority of the Township, except such as relates to the
organization or internal management of the municipal government or part
thereof, shall take effect until it is filed with the Clerk.
§ 2-21. Oaths.
The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths in all matters
concerning Township business.
§ 2-22. Notice to officers.
The Township Clerk shall, within five days after the Township Committee
has appointed or elected any officer, whether to fill a vacancy or otherwise,
cause to be delivered to or left at the place of abode of the person so elected
or appointed a written notice of his election or appointment, and within
the same time shall file a certified copy of the record of the election or
appointment with the Clerk of the county.
§ 2-23. Other powers and duties.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance, and subject to the supervision and direction of the Township
Committee, the Clerk shall:
§ 2-24. Deputy Township Clerk.
The Township Committee may appoint a Deputy Township Clerk. The
Deputy Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the
Clerk during such times and specific periods as the Clerk shall be absent,
on vacation or on leave of absence granted by the Township Committee.
A. Perform all the functions required of municipal Clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance.
B. Administer the provisions of Township ordinances with reference to the
licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are required
by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
C. Have such other different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him by the
Township Committee.5
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding the supervision of Human Resources
personnel, which was added 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-26 and immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-11.
§ 2-20 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-24
1:22
He shall assist the Clerk in the performance of his duties as the Township
Committee may from time to time prescribe. The Deputy Township Clerk
shall serve for a term of one year.
§ 2-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:23

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Organization
§ 2-25. Department, boards and commissions.
There shall be the following departments, offices, boards and commissions
in the Township of Freehold:
A. Departments.
(1) Department of Finance/Chief Financial Officer. [Amended
11-10-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-21]
(2) Department of Public Works and Automotive Services. [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(3) Department of Administration.
(4) Department of the Township Clerk. [Added 4-13-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-56]
(5) Department of Purchasing. [Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-5]
(6) Department of Police.
(7) Fire Department.
(8) Department of Code Enforcement.
(9) Department of Justice.
(10) Department of Health.
(11) Department of Parks and Recreation.
(12) Department of Shade Tree.
(13) Department of Public Utilities.
(14) Department of Engineering. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-1]
(15) Department of Information Technology.
(16) Department of Planning. [Added 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-1]
(17) Department of Human Resources. [Added 4-23-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-11]
6. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(4) through (15) as
Subsection A(6) through (17). Subsequently, Ord. No. O-10-26, adopted 11-23-2010,
repealed former Subsection A(17), Department of Human Resources, added 2-24-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-1.
§ 2-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-25
1:25
§ 2-26. Powers and duties of department heads.
The head of a department, subject to the code and the approval or direction
of the Township Committee or the responsible authority thereof, shall:
(18) Department of Zoning and Housing Enforcement. [Added
11-10-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-21]
B. Separate offices not under departments. [Amended 11-10-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-21]
(1) Township Attorney.
(2) Township Physician.
C. Boards and commissions. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48; 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-21; 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
(1) Planning Board.
(2) Board of Health.
(3) Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners.
(4) Shade Tree Commission.
(5) Fire Prevention Bureau.
(6) Transportation Board.
(7) Environmental Commission.
(8) Municipal Communications Committee.
(9) Lake Topanemus Commission.
(10) Historic Preservation Commission.
(11) Insurance Advisory Commission.
(12) Senior Citizens Advisory Committee.
(13) Street Name Review Committee.
(14) Industrial Committee.
(15) Municipal Alliance Committee.
(16) Human Relations Council.
(17) Youth Guidance Council.
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of this department.
B. Direct and supervise subordinate officers and employees of the
department and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
§ 2-25 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-26
1:26
§ 2-27. Reimbursement of expenses for authorized travel.
All elective and appointive officers and all employees who are authorized
to use their personal vehicles for official travel on behalf of the Township
may submit a claim for reimbursement of such expenses at a mileage rate
established by Internal Revenue Service for automobile reimbursement.
C. Approve or disapprove bills and claims chargeable to departmental
appropriations.
D. Maintain records of work performance and unit costs thereof as may be
approved or required by the Township Committee or its agent.
E. Provide information and reports on the work of the department as may
from time to time be required by the Township Committee.
F. Exercise other or different powers of administrative supervision and
direction which the Township Committee delegates to him.
§ 2-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-27
1:27

ARTICLE VII
Department of Finance; Chief Financial Officer
§ 2-28. Establishment.
The financial business of the Township shall be committed to a Department
of Finance.
§ 2-29. Director of Finance/Chief Financial Officer.
A. Establishment of position. There is hereby established the position of
Director of Finance (Director), who shall also serve as Chief Financial
Officer (CFO) of the Township of Freehold.
B. Duties. The Director/CFO shall perform his/her duties and obligations
of said position in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., as amended. The Director/CFO shall be
responsible for the Division of the Treasury, the Division of Tax
Collection, the Division of Tax Assessments, and the Division of
Information Services and shall perform such other duties as assigned
by the Township Administrator. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
C. Requirements. The Director/CFO shall be a certified municipal finance
officer having successfully fulfilled the requirements as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.2, as amended. No person shall be appointed or
reappointed as the Chief Financial Officer unless he/she holds a
municipal finance officer certificate issued pursuant to law or unless on
or before February 22, 1989, such individual has been granted tenure
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8. The Director/CFO must also possess a
four-year college degree (B.S. or equivalent) from a college of
recognized standing, with major course of study in financial or business
administration, accounting, economics, or a related financial major.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
D. Term. The Director/CFO shall continue to hold such office during good
behavior and efficiency, and shall not be removed therefrom except for
just cause and then only after a public hearing upon a written complaint
setting forth the charge or charges against him, or upon expiration or
revocation of certification by the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services.
E. Vacancies. Upon the just cause removal by the Township Committee,
upon the expiration or revocation of certification as set forth in
Subsection D above or upon the death, resignation or other vacancy
created in the office, the Township Committee shall appoint a successor
Chief Financial Officer, which individual shall satisfy all requirements
as set forth in Subsection C above.
F. Tenure. The Director/CFO who has served in that position for a period
of not less than five consecutive years, who is a holder of a municipal
§ 2-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:29
§ 2-30. Division of the Treasury.
finance officer certificate shall be granted tenure upon filing with the
Clerk of the Township and with the Division of Local Government
Service in the Department of Community Affairs a notification
evidencing his/her compliance.
A. Township Treasurer. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a
Division of the Treasury, the head of which shall be the Township
Treasurer. The Collector, the Director/CFO or any other suitable person
may be appointed Treasurer by the Township Committee. The
Treasurer shall serve for a term of one year. [Amended 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-48]
B. Powers and duties of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall have, perform
and exercise all the functions, powers and duties provided by general
law and Township ordinances. He shall keep and maintain books and
records of all financial transactions of the Township in accordance with
the standards and requirements of the Division of Local Finance in the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey. He shall
have custody of all public moneys of the Township and shall make
monthly reports to the Township Committee of all receipts,
expenditures, commitments and unexpended appropriations. Within 60
days after the end of each fiscal year he shall, under penalties
prescribed by law, make to the Township Committee and file with the
Township Clerk a detailed statement of the amount of bonds issued and
outstanding and a full and detailed account of his receipts and
disbursements for the preceding fiscal year. The statement shall be in
writing and verified by his oath, and may be prepared with the advice,
assistance and consultation of the Township auditor. All moneys
received from any source by or on behalf of the Township or any
department, board, office or agency thereof, except as otherwise
provided by Township ordinance, shall be paid to the Treasurer who
shall, within 48 hours after their receipt, deposit them in the authorized
public depository of the Township to the credit of the proper account.
C. Self-Insurance Fund for Group Health Benefits.
(1) There is hereby established a trust fund to be known as "The Self-
Insurance Fund for Group Health Benefits" (hereafter "the fund")
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-1 et seq. and regulations established by
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
(2) The Township Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall remain and
bear responsibility for the fund in the same manner and to the same
extent as other public funds under his/her care. All interest earned
on the fund shall accrue to the fund's principal.
(3) The Township Administrator shall annually estimate the probable
maximum exposure of the fund during the coming year. He/she
shall make this estimate on such factors as contributory and non-
§ 2-29 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-30
1:30
§ 2-31. Division of Tax Collection.
contributory self-funded or partially self-funded health benefits to
Township employees, their dependents, retirees or both in
accordance with rules and regulations of the Director of the
Division of Local Government Services in the Department of
Community Affairs.
(4) The Township Administrator shall include as part of the
recommended annual operating budget for the coming year, an
amount, in his/her opinion, over and above the current balance in
the fund needed to adequately and responsibly account for the
costs associated with the above estimate as to Fund exposure for
the coming year.
(5) The Township Administrator shall fix reasonable rates of premium
for all insurance carried by the insurance fund to be applied to the
various covered persons and dependent categories, and shall effect
all insurance in the insurance fund or with any insurance company
or companies authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
(6) The Township Committee of the Township of Freehold shall
appropriate such funds as are necessary to accomplish the
purposes for which the Freehold Township Self-Insurance Fund for
Group Health Benefits is established.
(7) The Township Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall collect and
incorporate in the fund employee and retiree contributions for
health benefits which are made pursuant to applicable Township
ordinances and contracts or in accordance with Chapter 78, P.L.
2011.
(8) This subsection shall become effective 20 days after final passage
and publication according to law.
A. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax
Collection, the head of which shall be the Tax Collector.
B. The Tax Collector shall possess all the powers and duties established by
law. He shall enter in suitable books to be kept for that purpose the
sums received by him each day for taxes, with the names of the persons
on whose account the same have been paid; shall keep a record and
account of the finances of the Township; and shall, within 60 days after
the end of the fiscal year, or when otherwise required by the Township
Committee, make and furnish a report thereof, with a detailed and true
statement of all moneys received by him and disbursed therefrom and
for what purposes, from the commencement of his official year to the
date of his report, or for such period as the Township Committee may
require, and a list of delinquent taxpayers for the previous year. He
shall file the report, with two copies of the statement and list of
delinquents, with the Clerk within the time hereinabove specified or
§ 2-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31
1:31
§ 2-32. Division of Tax Assessments. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-48]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax
Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax Assessor. The Tax Assessor
shall:
§ 2-33. Tax Search Officer.
The Tax Search Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
He shall furnish reports and certificates relating to property taxes and
assessments in the Township.
when otherwise required by the Township Committee. He shall as
necessary and as directed, arrange for sales of real estate for
delinquent taxes.
A. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a municipal assessor.
B. Make assessments for benefits for local improvement and for that
purpose have and exercise the powers and duties of a board of
assessment for local improvement as provided by law.
C. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted.
D. Supply the Engineer with necessary data for proper maintaining of a
current Tax Map of the Township as a public record and cause to be
recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character of the real
property assessed, employing for that purpose the facilities of other
departments as provided by the code.
E. Report to the Township Committee as to equalization proceedings and
other matters involving the County Tax Board and make
recommendations as to action to be taken in that regard.
§ 2-31 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-33
1:32
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Works and Automotive Services
§ 2-34. Establishment; Divisions.7
There shall be a Department of Public Works and Automotive Services,
the head of which shall be the Director. The Department shall include the
Division of Streets and the Division of Public Property.
§ 2-35. Director.
§ 2-36. Duties of Department.
The Department of Public Works and Automotive Services through its
director shall have charge of construction, operation and maintenance of
all public buildings, grounds, streets, utilities and public works within the
Township.
§ 2-37. Duties of Director.
The Director of Public Works and Automotive Services shall:
A. Appointment. The Director of Public Works and Automotive Services
shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Township Committee to hold
office at the pleasure of the Township Committee. Any vacancy shall be
filled by appointment of the Township Committee.
B. Qualifications of Director. The Director shall hold a bachelor of science
degree in civil engineering, with a minimum of five years' experience
and training to perform the duties of his office. He shall have secured
and be the holder of a valid professional engineers and land surveyors
license issued by the State of New Jersey.
C. Absence or disability. During the absence or disability of the Director of
Public Works and Automotive Services, the Township Committee may
appoint an officer or regular employee of the Township to perform his
duties. Absence or disability shall be limited to three months, after
which time the absence or disability may be deemed a vacancy.
D. Removal. The Director of Public Works and Automotive Services may be
removed by a two-thirds vote of the Township Committee. The
resolution of removal shall become effective three months after its
adoption by the Township Committee. The Township Committee may
provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect, provided that
the Township Committee shall cause to be paid to the Director any
unpaid balance of his salary and his salary for the next three calendar
months following adoption of the resolution.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37
1:33
§ 2-38. Division of Streets.
Within the Department of Public Works and Automotive Services there shall
be a Division of Streets in which there shall be a Road Supervisor. Under the
direction and supervision of the Road Supervisor, who shall be designated
as head, the Division shall:
A. Submit to the Township Administrator his recommendations for
budgetary appropriations for the ensuing year for the Divisions of
Streets and Public Property.
B. Set up and maintain adequate inventory and control thereof of all
materials and supplies required for the maintenance and repair of all
public works and facilities under his supervision.
C. Submit to the Township Committee a monthly report of all work
performed, services rendered and inspections made during the
previous month by the respective Divisions.
D. Recommend for approval the expenditure of all funds by voucher
chargeable against the public works budget.
E. Receive and investigate all complaints from residents and taxpayers of
the Township relating to the operations under his jurisdiction, take
appropriate action thereon and report results to the Township
Committee.
F. Attend Township Committee meetings as directed by the Committee.
A. Maintain and repair all Township streets, bridges, culverts and drains.
B. Construct and reconstruct streets, roads, bridges, culverts and drains;
treat road surfaces and resurface streets and roads according to such
standards and schedules as directed or approved by the Township
Engineer.
C. Maintain all Township streets in a clean and safe condition, free of
obstructions and hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.
D. Provide, operate, maintain or supervise facilities for the collection and
disposal of refuse and garbage at such times and in such manner as
may be authorized by Township ordinance.
E. Study problems of street traffic congestion and control and
streetlighting, and recommend to the Township Engineer appropriate
plans for street improvement and use to satisfy traffic requirements.
F. Install, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and markers and
check for streetlight outages.
§ 2-37 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-39
1:34
§ 2-39. Division of Public Property.
Within the Department of Public Works and Automotive Services there shall
be a Division of Public Property. The Division shall:
§ 2-40. Rules and regulations.
The Township may by resolution make rules and regulations necessary for
the proper regulation of the Department of Public Works and Automotive
Services, and these shall be known as the "Rules and Regulations Governing
the Department of Public Works and Automotive Services" and shall be
binding on each member of the Department.
A. Operate, maintain and repair Township-owned buildings and properties
and provide custodial and janitorial services therefor.
B. Trim, plant, care for and preserve public parks, greens, grounds and
trees in the public way.
C. Maintain and repair playing fields and playgrounds and recreational
areas and facilities.
D. Control the care, use and disposition of motor vehicles owned by the
Township.
§ 2-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-40
1:35

ARTICLE IX
Department of Engineering8
§ 2-41. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Engineering in which there shall be a
Township Engineer.
§ 2-42. Appointment and term of Engineer. [Amended 4-26-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-10]
The Township Engineer shall be appointed by the Township Committee for
a term not exceeding three years from January 1 of the year in which he is
appointed and shall receive such compensation as may be agreed upon as
determined by the Township Committee. The Township Engineer shall be a
duly licensed professional engineer in the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-43. Duties of Engineer.
The Engineer shall perform the duties prescribed by general law and
ordinance. He shall:
A. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs, specifications, reports,
investigations and cost estimates for all public works improvements
undertaken by the Township, either by public contract or contract or
force account, and further supervise the Planning Department.
[Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-1]
B. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to all public works facilities owned and operated
by the Township.
C. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to the
Planning Board and to other Township departments as needed.
D. Review proposed sketch plats, minor, preliminary and final subdivision
maps for conformity with the municipal subdivision ordinances and
other land use requirements, and advise the Planning Board as to such
matters in his capacity as Planning Board Engineer.
E. Serve as Planning Board Engineer and attend all regular meetings as
notified by the Secretary of the Planning Board.
F. Inspect and approve all installations made in accordance with the
requirements of the Planning Board prior to the acceptance of any
street or subdivision or the release of any security related to a
subdivision approval. The Planning Board shall not act on any site plan
or subdivision application unless and until the findings and
8. Editor's Note: The name of this Department, formerly “Department of Engineering and
Planning,” was amended 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-21.
§ 2-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-43
1:37
recommendations of the Division of Engineering have been submitted
to the Board and made a part of its public record.
G. Maintain the Tax Maps of the Township pursuant to law.
H. Upon the termination of his service with the Township, surrender all
papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of his engineering duties.
§ 2-43 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-43
1:38
ARTICLE X
Department of Public Utilities.
§ 2-44. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Public Utilities of the Township comprising
the Department of Water and Sewers.
§ 2-45. Superintendent.
§ 2-46. Terminology.
Wherever, within the Code of the Township of Freehold, the terminology
"Department of Water" or "Department of Sewers" appears, it shall mean
Department of Water and Sewers. Wherever, within the Code of the
Township of Freehold, the terminology "Superintendent of Water
Department" or "Superintendent of Sewer Department" appears, it shall
mean Superintendent of Utilities.
A. Superintendent. The Superintendent of Utilities shall be the head of the
Department of Public Utilities.
B. Duties. The Superintendent of Utilities shall be responsible for
enforcing on behalf of the Township Committee the provisions of
Chapter 270, Sewers, and Chapter 351, Water.
§ 2-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-46
1:39

ARTICLE XI
Department of Administration
§ 2-47. Municipal Administrator.
The Director of the Department of Administration shall be the Municipal
Administrator. The Municipal Administrator shall be appointed by a majority
vote of the Township Committee to hold office at the pleasure of the
Township Committee. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the
Township Committee.
§ 2-48. Terms of employment. [Amended 10-22-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-33]
The following terms of employment shall apply to the position of Municipal
Administrator:
A. Exclusive employment. The employee shall denote full-time
employment to his/her position as Municipal Administrator and shall
hold no other employment unless specifically permitted by formal
action of the Township Committee.
B. Compensation. The employee's annual salary shall be as set by
resolution of the Township Committee.
C. Vacation days. The employee shall be entitled to vacation days set forth
in chapter § 47-11A(1), plus five days for a total of 17 vacation days for
each year of employment in years one through five. Vacation days shall,
on an annual basis, be used or forfeited by December 31 of each
calendar year or upon termination, as applicable, except that a
maximum of five unused vacation days may be carried over at the end of
each year but must be used by April 30 of the next year, otherwise any
of those five carryover vacation days not used will expire.
D. Sick leave. The employee shall be entitled to 15 days annual paid sick
leave, which shall accumulate from year to year if unused to a maximum
of 90 sick days. Upon termination or retirement, all sick days
accumulated shall expire, and there shall be no payment for same.
E. Automobile. The Township of Freehold provides neither a car nor a car
allowance to the Municipal Administrator.
F. Other benefits. The Township shall provide only usual fringe benefits
available to all department head employees.
G. Dues and expenses. The employee shall represent the Township at such
service clubs and community organizations as shall be approved by the
governing body. All such related dues and expenses shall be henceforth
paid by the employee.
§ 2-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-48
1:41
§ 2-49. Removal of Administrator.
The Municipal Administrator or Assistant Administrator may be removed
by a two-thirds vote of the members of the Township Committee eligible
to vote, but in no circumstance by fewer than three affirmative votes. The
resolution of removal shall become effective three months after its adoption
by the Township Committee. The Township Committee may provide that
the resolution shall have immediate effect, provided that the Township
Committee shall cause to be paid to the Administrator any unpaid balance
of his/her salary and his/her salary for the next three calendar months
following adoption of the resolution. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing,
no advance notice nor prospective salary payment shall be required for
removal for good cause as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43, made applicable by
reference herein.
§ 2-50. Qualifications and residency requirement for Administrator.
[Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-3]
The Municipal Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his/her
executive and administrative abilities and qualifications with special regard
to education, training and experience in governmental affairs. He/She shall
make his/her permanent residence in the Township or within a five-mile
radius of the Township Municipal Complex, within six months of the date
of his/her appointment, and shall during his/her employment continue to
maintain his/her residence within the above-described area. Should he/
she cease to adhere to the residency requirements, his/her office may be
deemed vacated upon action of the Township Committee declaring such
vacancy.
§ 2-51. Powers and duties of Administrator.
The Municipal Administrator shall:
H. Personnel Manual. The Township's Personnel Manual has been given to
the employee. It does not represent a contract. Its terms may be
changed from time to time, unilaterally, by the Township.
I. Conventions. The Employee shall be required to pay all expenses of
professional conventions which are attended.
J. Longevity. Compensation for longevity shall not apply.
K. Absence or disability. During the absence or disability of the Municipal
Administrator, the Municipal Administrator of the Township shall
designate the Township employee to perform the duties of the
Municipal Administrator, unless otherwise directed by the Township
Committee. If such designation is not made by the Township
Administrator, the Township Committee shall make the designation.
Absence or disability shall be limited to three months, after which time
the absence or disability may be deemed a vacancy.
§ 2-48 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-51
1:42
A. Be the chief administrative officer of the Township and shall be
responsible to the Township Committee as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the business affairs of the Township. His
duties and responsibilities shall relate to the general management of all
Township business, except those duties and responsibilities conferred
upon other Township officials by state statute, other applicable laws,
rules and regulations promulgated by state and county agencies,
judicial authority or ordinances of the Township. Except for the purpose
of inquiry, the Township Committee and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Municipal Administrator, and
neither the Township Committee nor any member thereof shall give
orders to any subordinates of the Municipal Administrator either
publicly or privately.
B. Supervise and direct the business activities of all departments
including the employment and replacement of personnel as may be
required in all departments. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord.No.
O-10-5]
C. Serve as the personnel officer of the Township and as such hire and
promote employees of the Township subsequent to satisfactory
completion of the probationary period and advance employees to the
next step, and when he deems it necessary or advisable for the
betterment of the Township, suspend or discharge employees, provided
that persons covered by the Department of Personnel provisions of the
state or other applicable statutes shall be promoted, hired, suspended
or discharged only in accordance with such provisions. The Municipal
Administrator shall report at the next regular meeting of the Township
Committee any action taken by authority of this subsection.
D. Prepare and submit to the Township Committee before the close of the
fiscal year, or at such time as the Township Committee shall determine,
a proposed budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
message. In preparing the proposed budget, the Municipal
Administrator, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain from the
head of each department, agency, board or officer, estimates of
revenues and expenditures and other supporting data as he requests.
The Municipal Administrator shall review the estimates and may revise
them before submitting the proposed budget to the Township
Committee.
E. Be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption by
the Township Committee and the implementation of the work programs
contained in the budget.
F. Execute and enforce the laws of the state and ordinances and
resolutions of the Township as the Township Committee may prescribe.
G. Attend all meetings of the Township Committee and other committees
as directed, with a right to take part in the discussion and receive
§ 2-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-51
1:43
notice of all regular and special meetings of the Township Committee
and all advisory committees.
H. Prepare the workshop agenda for each meeting of the Township
Committee and supply facts pertinent thereto and deliver same to
Township Committee on the evening preceding workshop.
I. Keep the Township Committee informed as to the conduct of Township
affairs, submit periodic reports, either in writing or orally, on the
condition of the Township finances and such other reports, either in
writing or orally, as the Township Committee shall request, and make
such recommendations to the Township Committee as he deems
necessary and advisable for the welfare of the Township.
J. Submit to the Township Committee, as soon as possible after the close
of the fiscal year, a complete written report on the administrative
activities of the Township for the preceding year.
K. See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and privileges
granted by the Township are complied with.
L. Recommend the employment of experts and consultants to perform
work and render advice in connection with the operation of the
dedicated utilities or work projects in the Township subject to approval
by the Township Committee.
M. Attend to the letting of contracts, in due form of law, and supervise the
performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar as such
duties are expressly imposed upon some other Township officer or
official by statute.
N. See that all money owed the Township is promptly paid, and that proper
proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all Township
claims.
O. Review and recommend all bills and vouchers for payment prior to final
approval by the Township Committee.
P. Receive copies of all general and official correspondence addressed to
the Township and refer same to the appropriate officer or department
for disposition and reply.
Q. Receive all complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township.
He or an officer designated by him shall investigate and dispose of the
complaints and the Municipal Administrator shall keep a written record
of each complaint and when and what action was taken in response
thereto and provide the Township Committee with a copy when
requested to do so.
R. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs and costs of municipal services.
§ 2-51 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-51
1:44
§ 2-51.1. Public Information Office. [Added 4-13-2010 by Ord.No.
O-10-5]
The Public Information Office shall be responsible for communicating with
the public concerning Township business, and other assignments and duties
as assigned by the Township Committee or Department of Administration.
S. At the request of the Township Committee, study and analyze the duties
and responsibilities of any elected or appointed official and department
of the Township, submitting his report relating thereto to the Township
Committee for such further action as the Township Committee may
deem advisable.
T. Keep the Township Committee informed as to federal aid projects and
state aid projects and any other aid programs for which the Township
may qualify.
U. Assign duties and responsibilities to designated department heads as
deemed appropriate. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-29]
V. Make, adopt and amend rules and regulations for the use of Townshipowned
buildings, subject to approval by the Township Committee,
posting of same in subject buildings and availability of copies in the
Township Clerk's office. [Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
W. Authorize the payment of bills on behalf of the Township Committee
relating to the payment of claims for health insurance through the
Township’s Self-Insurance Program. Such payments shall be ratified on
the Bills List immediately following the Administrator’s authorization.
[Added 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-29]
§ 2-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-51.1
1:45

ARTICLE XI(A)
Department of Purchasing9
§ 2-52. Purchasing. [Amended 7-8-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-16]
§ 2-53. Emergency purchasing.
The Municipal Administrator or Mayor is hereby authorized to make
emergency purchases of goods and/or services in the event an emergency
affecting public health, safety and welfare exists and requires immediate
delivery of the goods or performance of the services. Any emergency
purchase is subject to the following:
A. The Director of the Department of Purchasing will be the Purchasing
Agent. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord.No. O-10-510]
B. The qualified Purchasing Agent shall act as the purchasing agent of the
Township with authority as its contracting agent to prepare public
advertising for bids and to receive bids for the purchase of materials
and supplies on behalf of the Township in accordance with the
provisions of the governing statutes and sound purchasing practices
and make awards of contracts in the name of the Township for the
various agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the
Township. Purchases in excess of the existing public contract law limit
shall be made according to the statutes and shall require approval of
the Township Committee. At least three quotations as to the cost or
price, whenever practicable, shall be solicited from manufacturers,
firms or dealers when the cost of the items purchased exceed the quote
threshold. The contract shall be made with and awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder when the kind and quality of the items are equal, or
considering other criteria where authorized by the Local Public
Contracts Law. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord.No. O-10-5]
C. The Municipal Administrator shall keep an account of all purchases and
shall, from time to time, or when directed by the Township Committee
make a full written report. He shall also issue rules and regulations
governing the requisition and purchase of all municipal supplies and
equipment consistent with the provisions of this section. For the
purposes of this section, during the absence, disqualification or
disability of the Municipal Administrator, the Assistant Municipal
Administrator shall act in his place and stead.
A. Written requisition must be filed with the Municipal Administrator or
Mayor by the department head wherein the emergency has occurred,
together with a certified statement as to the nature of the emergency
and the factors which compel immediate action.
9. Editor’s Note: This Art. XIA, Department of Purchasing, was created 4-13-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-5, which ordinance also included §§ 2-52 and 2-53 in said article.
10.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections A and B as
Subsections B and C.
§ 2-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-53
1:47
B. The Municipal Administrator or Mayor shall review the requisition and
certification and determine if a sufficient emergency exists to invoke
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6 and that the matter cannot await the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body. If so satisfied,
the Municipal Administrator or Mayor is authorized to contract on
behalf of the Township for the emergency purchase, provided sufficient
budgetary appropriation is available after consultation with the
Township Chief Financial Officer or Treasurer, who shall orally certify
as to the availability of funds.
C. The Township Chief Financial Officer or Treasurer, as soon as
practicable after giving the oral certification to the Municipal
Administrator or Mayor, shall file a written certification of availability of
funds with the office of the Municipal Administrator.
D. If time allows, before undertaking the emergency purchase hereunder,
the Municipal Administrator or Mayor shall consult with the governing
body, by any means available, to apprise it of the proposed course of
action. Immediately after contracting for the emergency purchase, the
Township Administrator shall provide a written memorandum to each
member of the governing body, explaining the circumstances and action
taken.
E. Notwithstanding the procedure set forth above, in all cases where the
emergency purchase would require the expenditure in excess of
$100,000, the Municipal Administrator or Mayor shall not commit the
municipality to contract until the members of the governing body have
been individually polled by any means available and at least three
members thereof shall indicate agreement that the emergency
purchase is necessary.
§ 2-53 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-53
1:48
ARTICLE XII
Department of Police
§ 2-54. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Police in the Township established in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 51, Police Department, of the
Code of the Township of Freehold.
§ 2-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-54
1:49

ARTICLE XIII
Fire Department
§ 2-55. Establishment.
There shall be a Fire Department of the Township composed of two
volunteer fire companies established in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 26, Fire Department, of Code of the Township of Freehold.
§ 2-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-55
1:51

ARTICLE XIV
Department of Code Enforcement
§ 2-56. Code Administrator.
The head of the Department of Code Enforcement shall be the Code
Administrator. He shall be elected by the Township Committee to serve for
a term of three years. Prior to his election, he shall be qualified by training
and experience for his duties.
§ 2-56.1. Duties of Code Administrator.
The Code Administrator shall:
§ 2-56.2. Duties of Department.
The Department of Code Enforcement shall be responsible for the
enforcement of all laws, ordinances, codes, rules, uniform state
construction code and all regulations relating to building of structures,
their location, construction, maintenance and such other ordinances as
designated by the Township Committee.
§ 2-56.3. Division of Construction.
Within the Department of Code Enforcement, there shall be a Division of
Construction. The head of which shall be the Construction Official who shall
be appointed for a term of four years. The Construction Official shall:
A. Enforce the codes of the Township and have all of the powers, functions
and duties prescribed by general law and by these ordinances for
Building Inspector.
B. Keep a record of proceedings in a permit book and a complaint book, all
of which shall be subject to inspection. He shall report regularly to the
Township Committee at its direction the number of permits issued, the
estimated costs of such work and the fees received and paid by him to
the Treasurer.
C. Issue certificates of occupancy.
D. Have all the powers and duties prescribed by the Township Committee
by ordinance and/or resolution.
A. Have, perform and discharge all of the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a construction official.
B. Enforce all of the rules and regulations relative to the State Uniform
Construction Code.
C. Act as enforcing agent for the State Uniform Construction Code.
D. Perform such other actions that may be mandated by virtue of Chapters
115, 182, 190, 245 and 257 of the Code of the Township of Freehold.
§ 2-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-56.3
1:53

ARTICLE XIVA
Department of Zoning and Housing Enforcement
[Added 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-2111]
§ 2-57. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Department of Zoning and Housing
Enforcement.
§ 2-57.1. Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall be the department head.
§ 2-57.2. Duties.
The Zoning Officer, besides performing the duties set out in the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., shall cause the Department of
Zoning and Housing Enforcement and its personnel to:
§ 2-58. through § 2-59. (Reserved)
A. Review all development applications, including but not limited to major
and minor subdivisions, site plans and use and bulk variances.
B. Support, through review and investigation, the enforcement of the
Township's Land Use Ordinances and related codes and ordinances, as
time and resources allow.
C. Review applications for and issue, as appropriate, required occupancy
permits for new as well as existing tenant/owner occupancy.
D. Support, through review and investigation, the enforcement of the
Township's Property Maintenance Codes and Ordinances for all
properties located within the Township, as time and resources allow.
E. Inspect and certify Housing Code compliance for all residential rental
properties when there is a change of occupancy.
F. Investigate overcrowding in residential units and, as time and
resources allow, initiate enforcement action to gain compliance.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 2-57 through
2-59 as §§ 2-56.1 through 2-56.3, respectively.
§ 2-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58
1:55

ARTICLE XV
Township Attorney
§ 2-60. Appointment.
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Township Committee. He
shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the
Township. The Attorney shall receive a retainer and in addition shall be paid
his reasonable fees and charges.
§ 2-61. Powers and duties.
The Attorney shall give all legal counsel and advice required by the
Township Committee or any member thereof and shall in general serve as
the legal advisor to the Township Committee on all matters of Township
business. He shall represent the Township in all judicial and administrative
proceedings in which the Township or any of its officers or agencies not
separately represented may be a party or have an interest, in furtherance
of his general powers and duties, but without limiting them, the Attorney
shall:
A. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township.
B. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township.
C. With the approval of the Township Committee compromise or settle
litigation in which the Township is involved.
D. Render written opinions upon questions of law submitted to him by the
Township Committee or any member thereof with respect to their
official powers and duties.
E. Supervise and direct the work of any additional attorneys, prosecutors
and professional assistants the Township Committee may authorize for
the Township.
F. Upon the termination of his service with the Township, surrender all
papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of his duties as Township Attorney.
§ 2-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-61
1:57

ARTICLE XVI
Department of Information Technology
§ 2-62. Duties.
Responsibilities of the Department of Information Technology include the
management of the metropolitan area network, telephone and door access
systems, implementation and maintenance of all technologically related
systems, providing support to all users and making recommendations
regarding the purchasing and upgrading of all hardware and software.
§ 2-63. Director.
The head of the Department of Information Technology shall be the Director
of Information Technology. The Director shall report to the Township
Administrator. The Director shall be appointed in accordance with the New
Jersey Department of Personnel policies and procedures.
§ 2-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-63
1:59

ARTICLE XVII
Office of Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator
§ 2-64. Establishment; terms; powers and duties.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator, who shall have such qualifications as provided by a job
description approved by the Township Committee and such further
qualifications as required by any applicable federal or state law, and who
shall be appointed by a simple majority of the Township Committee for
a term contingent upon receipt of federal and state funds and who shall
exercise the following powers and duties:
A. Be responsible for the planning, organization and direction of varied
emergency management operations within the Township, coordinating
the activities of local municipal departments with the Township and
providing them with necessary guidance and advice for the
development of emergency management programs.
B. Coordinate the activities of the Township emergency management staff
and provide definitive information concerning emergency management
programs and policies.
C. Prepare budgets, statistical reports, evaluations and other reports as
may be required.
D. Conduct studies and make changes in the existing organization and
operation to assure a continuity between all divisions of the Township
emergency management unit.
E. Establish the Township emergency operating center.
F. Develop and conduct drills and exercises for the Township organization
and practice operations for the municipality in cooperation with the
county and state emergency management organizations.
G. Confer with municipal officials for the development of mutual aid
programs, for the planning and organization of emergency
management programs and the establishment of a municipal
emergency management unit, provide advice and guidance on
emergency management programs and policies, and review plans for
conformity with state and county programs.
H. Coordinate and organize municipal emergency management plans for
the Township as well as the utilization of municipal resources to assure
their most effective use.
I. Plan and develop training programs for the Township staff and assist in
the planning and review of the municipal training program for
conformity with county and state criteria.
J. In emergency situations, coordinate the alerting and mobilization of the
municipal emergency management organizations and assist in the
§ 2-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-64
1:61
processing of requests for emergency aid and the dispatching of aid to
the points of greatest need.
K. Attend schools, seminars and meetings which enhance the overall
emergency management structure of the Township.
L. Act as chief of staff for the Mayor and Township Committee during
emergency situations and as may be provided in statute.
§ 2-64 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-64
1:62
ARTICLE XVIII
Local Historian
§ 2-65. Establishment.
There is hereby established the position of Local Historian within the
Township of Freehold.
§ 2-66. Appointment; compensation; term.
The local historian shall be appointed by the Township Committee from
among the residents of the Township. The local historian shall serve without
compensation and at the pleasure of the Township Committee. The local
historian shall serve until such time as his/her successor has been
appointed.
§ 2-67. Duties and responsibilities.
The Local Historian shall have the following duties and responsibilities.
A. To carry out an historical program, including but not restricted to
collecting, preserving and making available materials relating to the
history of the Township. The Historian shall store such materials in such
manner as to insure their preservation, and shall notify the State
Archivist, New Jersey Historical Commission, County Local Historian
and Township Committee of any materials which should be acquired for
preservation. Upon leaving the position, the Local Historian shall turn
over all materials and records and reports into the possession of the
successor, if then appointed, or to the Township Committee until a
successor shall be appointed.
B. To make an annual report to the Township Committee stating all the
work performed and accomplished during that year. The Local
Historian shall transmit a copy of such report to the New Jersey
Historical Commission.
C. To research and recommend updating the Township history, and may
recommend appropriate additional historical materials for publication;
D. To assist the Historic Preservation Commission, as well as advise the
Township Committee, concerning the acquisition, administration use
and disposition of any landmark, or historic site, including such places
in his/her jurisdiction included on the New Jersey Register of Historic
Places. Such advice may be furnished to the Historic Sites Section,
Department of Environmental Protection.
E. To assist in projects of commemoration, including the erection of
monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
§ 2-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-67
1:63

ARTICLE XIX
Office of Relocation Assistance
§ 2-68. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby created and established the Office of Relocation Assistance.
The purpose of said office shall be to assist and provide fair and equitable
treatment to individuals and/or their families with relocation in the event
that same is required or deemed necessary in order to satisfy health and
safety concerns or other emergency.
§ 2-69. Director.
The Office of Relocation Assistance shall be operated and managed by the
Director of Relocation Assistance who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. The Director of Relocation Assistance shall serve in such
capacity until such time as a successor Director has been appointed by the
Township Committee.
§ 2-70. Organization; powers, duties and responsibilities.
A. The Director of Relocation Assistance shall be under the immediate
supervision of the Township Administrator and shall have all the powers
to perform all of the obligations that a municipality must perform
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey and any agreements
between the municipality and the appropriate county board including
but not limited to the Monmouth County Board of Social Services.
B. The duties and responsibilities of the Director shall include but not be
limited to:
(1) Determining the needs of any individual or family that must be
relocated and to provide assistance in minimizing the hardships to
such displaced persons;
(2) Assist relocated persons to secure decent, safe and sanitary
dwelling units at costs and expenses which are within the relocated
individual's means;
(3) Assist in providing any displaced person or family a reasonable
time from the date of displacement within which to apply for
relocation assistance payments; and
(4) To the greatest extent practical, coordinate all relocation activities
with the appropriate state or county agencies, including but not
limited to the Monmouth County Board of Social Services.
C. A municipality may pay relocation assistance to any individual or family
that must be relocated as a result of a health and safety concern,
damage by fire or other emergency or for any reason as set forth in the
statutes and regulations incorporated by reference herein. Payments
may be made by the municipality in accordance with the appropriate
§ 2-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-70
1:65
§ 2-71. Applicability of state statutes and regulations.
There is hereby incorporated by reference the appropriate New Jersey
statutes and regulations pertaining to relocation assistance. More
particularly, the Director of the Office of Relocation Assistance shall have all
powers, duties, responsibilities and authority as set forth in the following:
N.J.S.A. 20:4-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 52:31B-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2A-18-61.1 et seq.,
N.J.A.C. 5:11-1 et seq.
§ 2-72. Issuance of summonses.
In addition to the above, nothing in the within section shall prevent or shall
be interpreted to preclude the municipality from issuing the appropriate
summons to an owner-landlord of any structure whereby a relocation of
an individual or family was necessary or appropriate, and where there
has been an illegal occupancy, zoning or housing code violation, or other
violation of any New Jersey state law, regulation or municipal ordinance.
Violations of this section shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
law(s) and/or pursuant to the relocation assistance fund which may be
established in accordance therewith.
§ 2-70 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-72
1:66
ARTICLE XX
Affordable Housing Liaison
[Added 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-13]
§ 2-73. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of Freehold Township's responsibility to assist in
the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.
§ 2-74. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for Freehold Township to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for Freehold Township.
§ 2-75. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for Freehold
Township.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Freehold
Township, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6) which may be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as Freehold Township's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Freehold Township's
fair share plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 2-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-75
1:67
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in Freehold Township.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, Freehold Township may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of Freehold Township,
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection C above. If Freehold Township contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing
program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing
plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent.
E. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of the
appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison. Only the five required responsibilities outlined in Subsection C.
above will be handled by Freehold Township's Municipal Housing
Liaison. All other duties will be delegated to an approved administrative
agent.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of Freehold Township and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
§ 2-75 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-75
1:68
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of Freehold Township when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate County's register of deeds or County
Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
§ 2-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-75
1:69
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 2-75 FREEHOLD CODE § 2-75
1:70
Chapter 6
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
Water — See Ch. 351.
Water resource protection — See Ch. 355.
§ 2-75 AUTHORITIES § 2-75
6:71

ARTICLE I
Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority Agreement
[Adopted by Ord. No. 74-14 (§ 2-27 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-81-71]
§ 6-1. Findings.
§ 6-2. Agreement.
The Township of Freehold in the County of Monmouth shall enter into an
agreement with the Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority and the
Borough of Freehold and the Township of Howell in the Authority Phase I
Project area, providing for and relating to the treatment and disposal on the
terms and conditions set forth in an agreement entitled "Proposed Phase
I Regional Facilities Interim Plan," and the Mayor shall be authorized and
directed on behalf of the Township Committee to execute such contract
under the corporate Seal of the municipality which shall be affixed and
attested by the Clerk, and to deliver the same.
A. The Township of Freehold, Borough of Freehold, Borough of
Farmingdale, Township of Howell and Township of Wall have by parallel
ordinances heretofore duly adopted and published, created a public
body corporate and politic under the name and style of the "Manasquan
River Regional Sewerage Authority," hereinafter sometimes called the
authority, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented.
B. For the purpose and relief of the waters in or bordering upon the state
of pollution arising from causes within the area of the municipalities
and the relief of waters in, bordering or entering said area from
pollution or threatened pollution and the consequent improvement of
conditions affecting the public health, and to provide for a collective
approach solving the sewerage and pollution problems of the area of
said municipalities, the Authority has undertaken the construction or
acquisition of new and existing sewerage system in the Borough of
Freehold, Township of Freehold and the Township of Howell.
C. The authority and the municipalities desire to go forward with the
Phase I Project to provide sewerage treatments and facilities in the
Township of Howell, Township of Freehold and Borough of Freehold as
set forth in a Map prepared by Elson T. Killam Associates, Inc., dated
May, 1974, described as "Proposed Phase I, Regional Facilities Interim
Plan."
D. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq., an agreement with the authority
for the treatment and disposal of sewage from and arising in the
Township of Freehold has been submitted to the Township Committee
for consideration and approval.
§ 6-1 AUTHORITIES § 6-3
6:73
§ 6-3. Public record.
Three copies of the agreement are on file in the office of the Township Clerk
and are available for public inspection, and the terms and conditions thereof
are hereby approved and specifically agreed to.
§ 6-4. Addendum to service agreement.
A. The Township of Freehold (the "Township") and the Manasquan River
Regional Sewerage Authority (the "Authority") have heretofore entered
into a service agreement pursuant to an ordinance of the Township
finally adopted on July 23, 1979, as amended August 27, 1979, and April
14, 1980; and the Township and the Authority agree that because the
wastewater of the Township will be collected and conveyed by the
Authority to the Ocean County Utilities Authority for treatment, an
addendum to the service agreement is necessary.
B. The addendum to the service agreement between the Township and the
Authority is hereby adopted and authorized to be executed by the Clerk
of the Township and incorporated as part of the service agreement. A
copy of the service agreement and addendum is on file with the
Township Clerk and is available for public inspection.
C. The service agreement, as revised by this addendum, remains in full
force and effect and is binding on the Township and the Authority.
§ 6-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 6-4
6:74
ARTICLE II
Western Monmouth Utilities Authority Agreement
[Adopted by Ord. No. 74-22 (§ 2-26 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 6-5. Confirmation of agreement.
That certain agreement heretofore entered into by the Township of
Freehold with the Western Monmouth Utilities Authority, an authority
created in the Township of Manalapan and Marlboro, in the County of
Monmouth, pursuant to the conditions of the Municipal Utilities Authorities
Law N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq., on file in the office of the Township Clerk
and heretofore executed by the Mayor and Township Clerk on behalf of
the Township and the Chairman and Secretary of the Western Monmouth
Utilities Authority on behalf of the Authority, be and the same is hereby
confirmed and ratified in all respects.
§ 6-6. Incorporation of agreement by reference.
The agreement, executed and delivered on May 23, 1974, as between the
Township and the Authority is hereby incorporated herein by reference as
though set forth at length.
§ 6-5 AUTHORITIES § 6-6
6:75
Chapter 10
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 2.
Board of Health — See Ch. 34.
Personnel — See Ch. 47.
§ 6-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 6-6
6:76
ARTICLE I
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 12-12-1962 (§ 2-21 of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. O-81-24]
§ 10-1. Establishment.
A Shade Tree Commission is established for the purpose of regulating,
planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery
upon and in the streets, highways, public places, parks and parkways
of the Township, except state highways unless the State Department of
Transportation assents thereto, and except county highways, parks and
parkways if a County Shade Tree Commission is operative, unless the
county Shade Tree Commission gives assent thereto. The Commission
members shall be residents of the Township and serve without
compensation except as hereinafter provided.
§ 10-2. Appointment of members and alternate members; terms;
vacancies. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-25]
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Mayor for a term of five years, except that those first appointed
shall be on a staggered basis; provided further that the initial
appointment of the sixth person shall be for a term of five years and the
seventh member shall be for a term of four years, retroactive to January
1 of the year of appointment. All appointments, except those to fill
vacancies, shall be effective January 1 next succeeding the
appointment. Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation
or removal of any Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term
by the Mayor.
B. Appointment of alternate members; terms; vacancies.
(1) The Mayor may appoint up to two alternate members to the Shade
Tree Commission. Alternate members shall be designated at the
time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The
length of the term of the alternate members shall be for a term of
five years. However, the terms shall be staggered so that they do
not both expire in the same year, but rather shall expire in two
consecutive years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired
term only.
(2) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which the alternate has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing, if
he requests one, be removed by the Mayor for cause.
(3) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of the Commission. A vote
§ 10-1 AUTHORITIES § 10-2
6:77
§ 10-3. Officers. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
In January of each year, the Commission shall organize by the election of
one of its members as Chairperson, and the appointment of a Secretary, who
need not be a member.
§ 10-4. Powers and duties.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the power to:
§ 10-5. Annual appropriations.
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
A. Promulgate such ordinances and written rules and regulations as may
be necessary, pursuant to statute, and for the proper interpretation,
administration and enforcement of this article, provided that the
ordinances and regulations do not conflict with this article and conform
to the general standards.
B. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located, or
which may hereafter be planted, in any public highway, park or
parkway, except such as are excluded pursuant to § 10-1, including the
planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
C. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
D. Move or require the removal of any tree, or part thereof, dangerous to
public safety.
E. Care for and control such parks and parkways; encourage
arboriculture; make, alter, amend and repeal, in the manner prescribed
for the passage, alteration, amendment and repeal of ordinances by the
Township Committee, any and all ordinances necessary or proper for
carrying out the provisions hereof.
F. Administer treatment to or remove any tree situated upon private
property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the Township
and enter upon private property for that purpose, with the consent of
the owner, provided the suspected condition is first confirmed by
certificate issued by or on behalf of the New Jersey Department of
Agriculture.
A. During the month of October in each year, the Shade Tree Commission
shall certify to the Township Committee the estimated sum necessary
for the proper conduct of its work during the ensuing fiscal year, which
§ 10-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-5
6:78
§ 10-6. Contractor maintenance guaranties.
Whenever the Shade Tree Commission shall accept any bid from any
contractor to perform services for and on behalf of the Shade Tree
Commission, a condition of that bid shall be the posting of a maintenance
guaranty upon completion of the services, which maintenance guaranty
shall be in a sum equal to 20% of the amount of the contract price. Said
guaranty shall be in the form of cash, certified check, letter of credit or
bond as approved to form and sufficiency by the Municipal Attorney. The
maintenance guaranty shall be posted upon completion of the work and
before final release of any performance guaranties which may have been
posted and shall be expressly conditioned upon the maintenance by the
contractor of all such work for a period of one year and particularly shall
guarantee the remedy of any defects in such work which occur or become
evident during said period.
shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of the
following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made:
(1) Payment of wages and salaries of employees.
(2) Expenses of Commission members in discharging official duties,
including expenses incident to attendance at professional
meetings.
(3) Purchase of trees and shrubbery.
(4) Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of
services for the prudent promotion of the work.
B. The Township Committee shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for the purposes.
§ 10-5 AUTHORITIES § 10-6
6:79

ARTICLE II
Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners
[Adopted 1-23-1967 (§ 2-20 of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. O-98-3]
§ 10-7. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq., there is hereby created a Board of Parks
and Recreation Commissioners of the Township of Freehold.
§ 10-8. Membership; terms; vacancies; attendance.
A. Appointment of members; term; vacancies. The Board shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Mayor who shall be designated
"Commissioners" and who shall be residents of the Township. All
appointments shall be for a term of five years staggered so that the
term of at least one Commissioner and not more than two
Commissioners shall expire in each year. All vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. Commissioners shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualify, and they shall receive no
compensation for their services.
B. Appointment of alternate members; term; vacancies.
(1) The Township Committee may appoint up to two alternate
members to the Board. Alternate members shall be designated at
the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
The length of the terms of the alternate members shall be for a
term of five years. However, the terms shall be staggered so that
they do not both expire in the same year, but rather shall expire in
two consecutive years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term shall be filled by the Township Committee for the
unexpired term only.
(2) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which the alternate has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if
he requests one, be removed by the Township Committee for cause.
(3) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of the Board. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
C. Attendance. Any regular or alternate member who attends less than 2/3
of the meetings for any calendar year may be discharged from the
Board by resolution of the Township Committee, and, in this event, a
successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term.
§ 10-7 AUTHORITIES § 10-9
6:81
§ 10-9. Election of officers; meetings.
§ 10-10. Powers and duties.13
A. In January of each year, the members of the Board shall annually elect
from their own number a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. They may
appoint a secretary and employ such other assistants as they may deem
necessary within the limits of budget appropriations.12
B. The Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners shall meet regularly
at least once each month in connection with the performance of its
duties and for the consideration of matters affecting public parks in the
Township. It shall adopt rules and regulations for the purpose of
facilitating the work of the department and for the purpose of
regulating the conduct of the meetings of the Board.
A. From time to time the Commissioners shall formulate plans for the
development and improvement of the public park and playground lands
now or hereafter owned by the Township and formulate rules and
regulations for the public use of park and playground lands and
improvement thereof. All recommendations of the Commissioners
involving the expenditure of moneys shall be submitted to the Township
Committee prior to the introduction and formal consideration of the
annual budget.
B. The Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners shall have the
powers conferred upon it by N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 to 40:12-15, inclusive.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 10-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-10
6:82
ARTICLE III
Environmental Commission
[Adopted 11-8-1971 (§ 2-22 of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. 74-1]
§ 10-11. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Environmental Commission of the Township,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 10-12. Membership; terms; vacancies.
A. Appointment. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor, at least one of whom shall also be a member of the Township
Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents of the Township.
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as
Chairperson and the presiding officer of the Commission.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(2) In addition to the regular members, there shall be two alternate
members to the Environmental Commission, also to be appointed
by the Mayor. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two
years except that the terms of the alternate members first
appointed shall be two years for Alternate Number 1 and one year
for Alternate Number 2 so that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year. At the time of the
appointment, the Mayor shall designate the individual being
appointed as Alternate Number 1 or Alternate Number 2. An
alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or the
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate Number 1 shall vote first.
B. Term. Terms of office of the members of the Commission shall be for
one, two or three years, to be designated by the Mayor in making his
appointments, so that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members
will expire each year and their successors shall be appointed for terms
of three years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors. Members of the Commission may be removed in
accordance with the ethics ordinance of the Township.
C. Vacancies. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as the original appointment.
§ 10-11 AUTHORITIES § 10-13
6:83
§ 10-13. Powers. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
The Environmental Commission shall have power to conduct research into
the use and possible use of the open land areas of the municipality and
may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for
its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to
obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may from time to
time recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for inclusion in
the Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 10-14. Acquisition of property. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
governing body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the Township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of
its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of,
or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the municipality.
§ 10-15. Records.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Township Committee.
§ 10-13 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-15
6:84
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)14
§ 10-16. (Reserved)
§ 10-17. (Reserved)
§ 10-18. (Reserved)
§ 10-19. (Reserved)
14.Former Art. IV, Board of Assistance, adopted 10-16-1972 (§ 2-18 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended, was repealed 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-10.
§ 10-16 AUTHORITIES § 10-19
6:85

ARTICLE V
Transportation Board
[Adopted by Ord. No. 73-3 (§ 2-30 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-94-58]
§ 10-20. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Transportation Board consisting of nine
members, all of whom shall be residents of the Township.
§ 10-21. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies.
§ 10-22. Powers.
The Transportation Board shall have the following powers:
A. The Transportation Board shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. The members of the board shall serve without
compensation. In January of each year, the members of the Board shall
designate one of their number to serve as Chairperson and the
presiding officer. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
B. Terms of office of the members of the Board shall be for one, two or
three years to be designated by the Township Committee in making its
appointments so that the terms of 1/3 of the members shall expire each
year and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years
and until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
Members of the Transportation Board shall comply with the provisions
of the Code of Ethics (§ 47-22 of Chapter 47, Personnel).
C. A vacancy on the Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment.
A. To act as the coordinating agency of the Township on commuter and
public transportation matters and as a liaison between local commuter
and public transportation needs and regional, state, and federal
agencies administering to those needs.
B. To recommend to the Township Committee certain transportation needs
of the citizens of the Township by means of reports obtained from
research, studies, and compiled data.
C. To recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for inclusion
in the Township Master Plan relating to commuter and public
transportation.
§ 10-20 AUTHORITIES § 10-22
6:87

ARTICLE VI
Lake Topanemus Commission
[Adopted by Ord. No. 78-10 (§ 2-32 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-90-9]
§ 10-23. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Commission to be known as the Lake
Topanemus Commission.
§ 10-24. Organization. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-47;
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-16-19]
The Commission shall consist of eight Commissioners; four resident voters
from the Borough of Freehold and four resident voters from the Township
of Freehold. A Chairperson shall not vote except in the case of a tie. In
January of each year, the Chairperson shall be appointed for a period of
one year. The terms of office of the members of the Commission from each
respective municipality first appointed shall be one, two and three years.
Thereafter, the term of each member shall be three years. All members
of the Commission shall be appointed by the governing body of their
respective municipality according to law, which appointment shall
commence January 1 and continue thereafter for the proper tenure. There
shall be no prohibition against any member of either governing body serving
as a Commissioner. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation. Each Commissioner may be removed or suspended from
office as provided by ordinance of the municipality from which he shall be
appointed.
§ 10-25. Powers.
A. The Commission shall have the power to sue and be sued, claim or
defend in any court, use a common seal and have such other corporate
powers as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this
article except as specifically modified. The Commission shall have
control and shall maintain Lake Topanemus as a park area and
recreational site for the benefit of the residents of the Township of
Freehold and of the Borough of Freehold. The Commission is authorized
to prepare rules and regulations for the use and maintenance of the
property, which rules and regulations shall be available upon request by
any resident of either municipality, and further pertinent excerpts of
said rules and regulations may be posted conspicuously at the
entrances to the park.
B. After appointment, the Commission shall organize as soon as
practicable and shall appoint a Secretary and Treasurer who need not
be members of the Commission. The Secretary shall keep correct
minutes of the meetings and transactions of the Commission and shall
perform such other duties as may be required. The Treasurer shall give
bond for the faithful performance of his duties in such amount as the
§ 10-23 AUTHORITIES § 10-25
6:89
§ 10-26. Finances. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48;
2-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-3]
The Commission shall have no authority or power to borrow any monies
either permanent or temporary and it shall be limited in its expenditures
in an amount not to exceed by 5% the preceding annual budget, without
prior written approval of the two municipalities. The Township and the
borough obligate themselves to appropriate equal contributions annually
to be determined by the Township Committee and Borough Council as
municipal contributions to meet all expenditures of the Commission during
the year of operation. In lieu of the Borough Council making a contribution,
it will provide in-kind services in an amount equal to the agreed upon
contribution.15
§ 10-27. Dissolution.
The Commission created herein may be dissolved by parallel ordinances
duly adopted by each municipality within any single year on condition
that the Commission by resolution consents to such dissolution, and the
Commission has no debts or obligations outstanding.
Commission shall prescribe. The offices of Secretary and Treasurer may
be held by the same person. The respective governing bodies of the two
municipalities shall, by resolution, appoint a Joint Municipal Auditor
who shall determine the allocation of costs and revenues between the
two municipalities and shall certify those costs and revenues to the two
municipalities.
C. The Commission shall have the power and authority to hire and fire and
fix the salaries of any employees. The Commission may appoint such
other agents and employees as may be deemed necessary to carry into
effect the provisions of this article. No action of the Commission shall
be binding unless taken at a public meeting at which at least two of the
members, including the Chairperson, from each municipality are
present.
15.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-32.5, Advisory Panel, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48.
§ 10-25 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-27
6:90
ARTICLE VII
Senior Citizens Advisory Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-82-2 (§ 2-36 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 10-28. Establishment.
There is established a committee to be known as the "Senior Citizen
Advisory Committee of the Township of Freehold."
§ 10-29. Organization. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
The Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by the Township
Committee; all of whom shall be residents of the Township. One member
shall be a member of the Township Committee. The remaining six members
shall be from the public at large. The Township Committee member shall
serve a term concurrent with his term of office as a member of the Township
Committee. The terms of office of the remaining members of the Committee
shall be for three years. Initially, the members shall be appointed for one,
two or three years to be designated by the Township Committee when it
makes its appointments so that the terms of two members shall expire each
year and their successor shall be appointed for terms of three years until the
appointment and qualification of their successors. All Committee members
shall serve without compensation. In January of each year, the members of
the Committee shall designate one of their number to serve as Chairperson
and as presiding officer.
§ 10-30. Powers and duties.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall have the following powers:
A. To conduct research, make studies, compile data and make reports
concerning the needs of senior citizens of the Township.
B. To recommend to the Township Committee and such other appropriate
agencies and/or boards programs for the benefit and assistance of
senior citizens.
C. To act as the coordinating agency of the Township on matters of aging
and as a liaison between local, regional, state and federal agencies
administering those matters.
D. To provide representation of local, county and state meetings or
hearings concerning the aged.
E. To perform and investigate such other senior citizen matters as may be
deemed for the benefit of the Township.
§ 10-28 AUTHORITIES § 10-30
6:91

ARTICLE VIII
Street Name Review Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-82-3 (§ 2-37 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. 86-1]
§ 10-31. Establishment.
There is hereby established a committee to be known as the "Street Name
Review Committee of the Township of Freehold."
§ 10-32. Organization.16
The Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by the Township
Committee. All of them shall be residents of the Township. Two members
shall be members in good standing of a Township Volunteer Fire
Department; one from each Fire District who shall be recommended to the
Township Committee by the Board of Fire Commissioners of each district.
One member shall be a police officer of the Township of Freehold to be
recommended to the Township Committee by the Chief of Police. Two
members shall be members of the Planning Board to be recommended
to the Township Committee by the Chairperson of the Planning Board.
Two members shall be from the general public. The terms of office of all
members except the public members shall be for one year. Public members
shall serve for a period of three years. The initial term of the public
members shall commence upon appointment and shall be staggered so
that one member's term expires on January 1 following the appointment
and one member's term expires one year from January 1 following the
appointment. Thereafter, subsequent appointments shall be for two year
periods. Any vacancy occurring shall be filled by the Township Committee
for the unexpired term. All Committee members shall serve without
compensation. In January of each year, the members of the Committee shall
designate one of their numbers to serve as Chairperson and the presiding
officer.
§ 10-33. Power and duties.
The purpose of the Street Name Review Committee is to assist the Township
Committee and the Planning Board in naming streets, existing and
proposed. In doing so, the Committee shall study and review existing streets
as well as all applications pending and all applications submitted to the
Planning Board for the creation of new streets. The Committee shall provide
the Township Committee and/or the Planning Board, as the case may be,
with written reports recommending proposed names or changes in same.
The Street Name Review Committee shall be guided in its responsibilities
according to the following standards and considerations:
A. The historic significance of the area where the street is located.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 10-31 AUTHORITIES § 10-33
6:93
B. The confusion engendered by similar sounding or looking names.
C. Ease and convenience to the traveling public.
D. The ability of emergency vehicles to locate an address with maximum
promptness.
§ 10-33 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-33
6:94
ARTICLE IX
Municipal Cable TV Advisory Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-83-27 (§ 2-39 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-94-48]
§ 10-34. Membership; terms.17
There is hereby established a Municipal Cable TV Advisory Committee
consisting of five members which shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall serve without compensation. The Township Committee
shall designate a member of the Township Committee as the liaison to the
Cable TV Advisory Committee. The five members shall be residents of the
Township and shall serve for a three-year term; however, each member
shall initially serve only until December 31 of the year of their initial
appointment. Thereafter, the Township Committee shall stagger the terms
of the members. Therefore, two members shall be appointed for one year,
two members for two years and one member for three years. Subsequently,
each appointment of the five general members shall be for a three-year
term. In January of each year, the members of the Committee shall select
one of its members to serve as Chairperson and presiding officer for one
year.
§ 10-35. Code of Ethics.
Members of the Municipal Cable TV Advisory Committee shall comply with
the Code of Ethics (§ 47-22 of Chapter 47, Personnel).
§ 10-36. Vacancies.
A vacancy on the Municipal Cable TV Advisory Committee occurring other
than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointment.
§ 10-37. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Cable TV Advisory Committee shall have the following
powers and duties:
A. To conduct research, make studies, compile data, and conduct and
evaluate citizen surveys with the goal of improving cable television and
enrichment of the Township.
B. To recommend to the TV-71 management advisory council plans and/or
programs for inclusion for cable television generation throughout the
Township.18
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 10-34 AUTHORITIES § 10-37
6:95
C. To keep apace with the developments in cable television and to suggest
guidelines which will make cable television provide maximum
advantages to the Township and its citizenry.
D. To monitor cable television programming offered to the residents of the
Township and, in conjunction therewith, to make suggestions for
revisions to that programming in order to benefit such residents.
E. To assist the Township Committee in negotiations with refranchising of
the local cable company.
F. To keep abreast of state and federal cable legislation and lobby the
legislature for favorable cable legislation.
§ 10-37 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-37
6:96
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)19
§ 10-38. through § 10-40. (Reserved)
19.Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Historical Committee, adopted by Ord. No. 87-38 (§ 2-42 of
the Revised General Ordinances), as amended, was repealed 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-23.
§ 10-38 AUTHORITIES § 10-38
6:97

ARTICLE XI
Municipal Alliance to Prevent Substance Abuse Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-90-1 (§ 2-43 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-99-35; amended in its
entirety 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-25]
§ 10-41. Findings and purpose.
The Township Committee finds and declares as follows: N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-9
authorizes the establishment of a Municipal Alliance to Prevent Substance
Abuse Committee as a means for implementing policies to reduce substance
abuse. Such a committee shall identify substance prevention activities,
education and community needs. Furthermore, the Municipal Alliance to
Prevent Substance Abuse Committee also shall implement related programs
and, upon compliance with various guidelines, become eligible to receive
state funds to assist the programs developed by the Municipal Alliance to
Prevent Substance Abuse Committee.
§ 10-42. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established a committee to be known as the
"Freehold Municipal Alliance Committee to Prevent Substance Abuse."
§ 10-43. Organization; membership; terms.
A. Organization. The Committee shall consist of a minimum of 16
members and a maximum of 20 members appointed by the Mayor and
Township Committee, a minimum of 50% of whom shall be residents of
the Township of Freehold. Annually the Mayor shall appoint one
member of the Municipal Alliance to Prevent Substance Abuse
Committee to serve as Chairperson until December 31 of that year or
until a successor shall have been appointed by the Mayor, whichever is
later.
B. Membership classes. The membership shall consist of the following six
classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor or a member of the Township Committee.
(2) Class II: the Chief of Police or designee. [Amended 10-9-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-13]
(3) Class III: The President of the Freehold Township Board of
Education or Freehold Regional High School District Board of
Education.
(4) Class IV: The Superintendent of Schools of the Freehold Township
Board of Education or Freehold Regional High School District
Board of Education.
(5) Class V: a student assistance coordinator.
§ 10-41 AUTHORITIES § 10-43
6:99
§ 10-44. Powers and duties.
The functions of the Municipal Alliance to Prevent Substance Abuse
Committee shall include, but not be limited to:
(6) Class VI: representatives from each of the following groups:
(a) A representative of the parent-teacher association.
(b) A representative of the local bargaining unit for teachers.
(c) A representative from Western Monmouth Chamber of
Commerce.
(d) A representative of a local religious group.
(e) Private citizens.
(f) A high school student.
(g) A senior citizen.
(h) CentraState Medical Center staff member.
C. Term; appointment and removal. The term of the members composing
Class I shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of his or her
respective term of office, whichever occurs first. The term of a Class II,
III, IV or V member shall be for two years or terminate at the
completion of their respective term of office or tenure, whichever
occurs first. The terms of all Class VI members first appointed under
this section shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the
first three years after their appointment, provided that the initial Class
VI term of no member shall exceed three years. Thereafter, the Class VI
term of each such member shall be for three years, except as provided
above.
D. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the
designated term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided,
for the unexpired term. No member of the Committee shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Any member other than a
Class I member, after a public hearing if he or she requests one, may be
removed by the Township Committee for cause.
A. Creating a network of community leaders, private citizens and
representatives from public and private human service agencies who
are dedicated to a comprehensive and coordinated effort to promote
and support substance abuse prevention and education programs and
activities with an emphasis on youth.
B. Conducting a community needs assessment relevant to substance
abuse at least once every three years.
§ 10-43 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-44
6:100
C. Identifying existing efforts and services acting to reduce substance
abuse and coordinating projects within the municipality to avoid
fragmentation and duplication.
D. Developing municipal level programs that address the results of the
community needs assessment.
E. Participating in regionally developed programs that accomplish the
mission of the local Committee.
F. Assisting the municipality in acquiring funds for alliance programs.
G. Developing a subcommittee specifically tasked for fund-raising.
H. Assisting the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse and the
County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse/
Alliance Steering Subcommittee by providing municipal data, reports or
other information that promotes the county annual alliance plan.
§ 10-44 AUTHORITIES § 10-44
6:101

ARTICLE XII
Human Relations Council
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-93-06 (§ 2-44 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-02-27]
§ 10-45. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Human Relations Council (hereafter
"Council") within the Township of Freehold which shall foster through
community efforts or otherwise, good will, cooperation and conciliation
among the groups and elements of the inhabitants of the community.
§ 10-46. Membership; terms.
§ 10-47. Officers. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
The officers of the Council shall consist of a Chairperson appointed by the
Mayor, a Vice Chairperson appointed by the Mayor and a Secretary selected
by the Council. Each officer will serve for one year.
A. The Human Relations Council shall consist of 13 members appointed by
the Mayor and shall serve without compensation. Membership shall be
made up from the following categories: [Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-1]
(1) Mayor or designee from Township Committee: one member.
(2) Law enforcement: one member.
(3) Professional counselor: one member.
(4) Clergy: two members.
(5) Educator: two members.
(6) Business community: one member.
(7) Minorities: three members.
(8) Members at large: two.
B. The members shall serve three-year terms; however, each member shall
initially serve until December 31 of the year of their initial appointment.
Thereafter, the term of the Mayor or designee from the Township
Committee shall expire each December 31. The Mayor shall stagger the
terms of the remaining eight members so that the terms of two
members shall be for one year; the terms of three members shall be for
two years and the terms of three members shall be for three years.
Subsequently, each appointment of the eight general members shall be
for three-year terms.
§ 10-45 AUTHORITIES § 10-48
6:103
§ 10-48. Meetings.
The council shall meet at least quarterly on date or dates to be designated
by it during the months of January, April, July and September. Special
meetings may be called at the discretion of the Chairperson or the Mayor
with not less than seven days' notice in writing to all Council members.
§ 10-49. Vacancy.
A vacancy on the Human Relations Council occurring other than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment of
the Mayor.
§ 10-50. Powers and duties.
The Human Relations Council shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To foster and promote good will, cooperation and conciliation among all
inhabitants of Freehold Township, including mediation of cultural
problems and incidents of bias.
B. To conduct forums that will allow groups or individuals to share cultural
problems; to review stereotyping or bias incidents that may occur.
C. To cooperate with other units of government or agencies concerned
with purposes similar to that of the Council.
D. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Township Committee for
the development of policies, procedures and programs that will aid in
the prevention and elimination of all types of discrimination based upon
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, sexual
orientation or gender identity. [Amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-14]
E. To make an annual report to the Mayor and Township Committee of its
activities.
§ 10-48 FREEHOLD CODE § 10-50
6:104
ARTICLE XIII
Youth Guidance Council
[Adopted 7-29-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-17]
§ 10-51. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-20 et seq., and the New Jersey Attorney General
Guidelines for Stationhouse Adjustment of Juvenile Delinquency Offenses
("Guidelines"), there is hereby created a Youth Guidance Council ("Council")
of the Township of Freehold.
§ 10-52. Membership; terms; vacancies; attendance.
§ 10-53. Powers and duties.
A. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies. The Council shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Township Committee who shall be
residents of the Township, except as noted below. One member of the
Council shall be a member of the Township Committee who shall be
appointed annually. One member of the Council shall be a member of
the Police Department of the Township, need not be a resident of the
Township and shall be appointed for a three-year term. Five members of
the Council shall be members at large. All appointments shall be for a
term of three years, staggered so that the term of two Council members
(other than the Township Committee member) shall expire in each year.
All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Council
members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualify,
and they shall receive no compensation for their services.
B. Attendance. Any Council member who attends less than 2/3 of the
meetings for any calendar year shall be discharged from the Council by
resolution of the Township Committee, and, in this event, a successor
shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term.
A. The Youth Guidance Council shall constitute the governmental agency
providing an alternative method that law enforcement agencies may
use to handle first-time juvenile offenders who have committed minor
juvenile delinquency offenses within the Township.
B. In carrying out its duties, the Council shall strictly adhere to the
Guidelines as may, from time to time, be amended. Further, the Council
shall implement the provisions of Chapter 224, Parental Responsibility,
of the Code of the Township of Freehold, to the extent not contrary to
the provisions of the Guidelines.
§ 10-51 AUTHORITIES § 10-53
6:105
Chapter 11
TRAFFIC
Chapter 11
TRAFFIC
11-1. Words and phrases.
11-2. Official time standard.
11-3. Authorization for closing of any
street.
11-4. Parking.
11-5. Limiting the use of streets to a
certain class of vehicles.
11-6. Overnight parking prohibited.
11-7. Through streets, yield
intersections and stop
intersections.
11-8. Penalty.
11-9. Speed limits.
11-10. No-passing zones.
11-11. No U turns.
11-12. One-way streets.
11-13. Freehold Raceway Mall traffic
regulations.
11-14. Lane use reservations.
11-15. Michael J. Tighe Park traffic
regulations.
11-16. Mid-block crosswalk.
11-17. Raintree Condominium
Association traffic regulations.
11-18. Parking within designated lines.
11-19. Loading zones.
11-20. Jackson Mills Road Park traffic
regulations.
11-21. Opatut Park traffic regulations.
Schedule I: Parking Prohibited
at All Times on Certain Streets
Schedule II: Stopping or
Standing of Motor Vehicles
Prohibited on Certain Streets
Schedule IIA: Stopping or
Standing of Motor Vehicles
Prohibited During Certain Hours
on School Days
Schedule III: Parking Prohibited
Certain Hours on School Days
Schedule IIIA: Parking
Prohibited During Certain Hours
Except Saturdays, Sundays and
Public Holidays
Schedule IIIB: Parking by
Permit Only on Designated
Streets
Schedule IV: Limiting the Use of
Streets to a Certain Class of
Vehicles
Schedule IVA: Limiting the Use
of Streets During Certain Hours
to a Certain Class of Vehicles
Schedule V: Through Streets
Schedule VI: Yield Intersections
Schedule VII: Stop Intersections
Schedule VIII: Speed Limits
Schedule IX: No Passing Zones
Schedule X: No U-Turns
Schedule XA: No Left Turns
Schedule XB: No Turn on Red
Schedule XC: No Right Turns
Schedule XI: One-Way Streets
Schedule XII: Lane Use
Reservations
11:1 04 - 01 - 2013
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Township Committee of the Township of Freehold 4-26-1994
by Ord. No. O-94-17; approved by the Department of Transportation 7-8-1994.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking -- See Ch. 177.
Parking lots and drives -- See Ch. 228.
Abandoned vehicles -- See Ch. 341.
Unlicensed vehicles -- See Ch. 347.
11-1. Words and phrases.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein. In addition, the word "Bus" shall mean and include the
following: "omnibus," "school bus" and "School Vehicle Type I" as defined by Title 39,
Revised Statutes of New Jersey. (“Bus” does not include "School Vehicle Type II.")
11-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either Eastern standard time
or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the Township.
11-3. Authorization for closing of any street.
a. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, disability or inability to act, the Mayor of the
municipality, is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or
portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any
day or days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the
public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and/or the Mayor and in accordance
with Subsection a above, shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of such
closing on any street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance
thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a period greater than 48
consecutive hours shall not become effective unless and until it has been submitted to and
approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
11:2 04 - 01 - 2013
11-15 TRAFFIC 11-15
11-4. Parking.
11-4.1. Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit
on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
11-4.2. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. No person shall park a vehicle at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule I
attached to and made a part of this chapter. [Amended by Ord. No. O-94-17;
Ord. No. O-95-06; Ord. No. O-96-19; Ord. No. O-97-07]
11-4.3. Stopping or standing of motor vehicles prohibited on certain streets. No person
shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time at the locations described in Schedule II
attached to and made a part of this chapter. No stopping or standing signs shall be
installed in accordance with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. [Amended by Ord.
No. O-94-17; Ord. No. O-98-19; Ord. No. O-00-19; Ord. No. O-01-35; Ord.
No. O-02-5]
11-4.3A. Stopping or standing of motor vehicles prohibited during certain hours on school
days. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the hours specified on school
days at the locations described in Schedule IIA attached to and made a part of
this chapter. No stopping or standing signs shall be installed in accordance with
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. [Amended by Ord. No. O-95-11]
11-4.4. Parking prohibited during certain hours on school days. No person shall park a
vehicle between the hours specified on school days, upon any of the streets or
11:2.1 04 - 01 - 2013
11-15 TRAFFIC 11-15
parts of streets described in Schedule III attached to and made a part of this
chapter. [Amended by Ord. No. O-01-35]
11-4.4A. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. No person shall park a
vehicle between the hours specified on any day, except Saturdays, Sundays and
public holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
IIIA attached to and made a part of this chapter. [Amended by Ord. No. O-95-
12]
11-4.5. Parking at Lake Topanemus regulation. No person shall park a vehicle on Pond
Road (extension of Monument Street), beginning at the intersection of Water
Works Road thence south along Pond Road, for a distance of 2,500 feet to the
intersection of Standpipe Road from May 1 to October 1 between 10:00 a.m. and
5:30 p.m. during Eastern daylight saving time and between 10:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. during Eastern standard time.
11-4.6. Long-term parking restrictions.
a. Long-term parking prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended a vehicle on a long term basis in any parking lot, public, quasi-public, or private
within the Township of Freehold, unless:
1. That person is an employee or independent contractor for the property owner or other
person in control or possession of the property.
2. The vehicle displays a valid parking permit pursuant to Chapter 228 of the Code of the
Township of Freehold and is parked within that area of the parking lot designated for
permit parking.
3. The vehicle is disabled making it impossible or impractical to move and the owner or
driver makes good faith efforts to have it removed as soon as possible giving
consideration to the surrounding circumstances.
4. Other emergency exists requiring abandonment of the vehicle for more than six hours,
providing the owner or driver makes good faith efforts to remove it as soon as possible
giving consideration to the surrounding circumstances.
5. The owner or driver of the vehicle has the permission of the property owner or other
person in control or possession of the property and is not parked within that area of the
parking lot designated for permit parking.
b. Definition. As used herein, "on a long-term basis" shall be deemed to be six hours or more.
c. Rebuttable presumption. A rebuttable presumption shall arise that a vehicle was parked or
left unattended on a long term basis if:
1. The vehicle is parked in the same place six hours or more within a twenty-four-hour
period of having first been observed; and/or
11:3 04 - 01 - 2013
11-15 TRAFFIC 11-15
2. The driver of the vehicle is observed to board a means of public transportation.
d. Penalties. Anyone found in violation of Subsection 11-4.6 shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Township of
Freehold. Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the rights and remedies conferred
by N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6 and 39:4-56.7.
11-4.7. Parking prohibited on snow-covered streets. [Amended by Ord. No. O-96-06]
a. No person shall park a vehicle on, or leave a parked vehicle on, any snow- and/or icecovered street within the Township. Snow- and/or ice-covered as used herein shall
mean that the snow and ice, in any combination, shall have accumulated on the paved
portion of the street to form a continuous cover, except where such cover may have
been disturbed by the passage of vehicles, pedestrians or drifting of snow caused by
wind.
b. No parking signs advising the public of the restrictions set forth in Subsection a above
shall be posted on all major highways which provide access to the Township. If any
such highways are under the jurisdiction of another governmental entity which shall not
permit the erection of such signs, the Township shall be relieved of this posting
requirement. Nothing herein shall be deemed to abrogate the presumption that each
person knows the various laws which apply in this jurisdiction. Failure of compliance
with this subsection shall not provide a defense for charged violations of this
subsection.
c. Any person convicted of a violation of Subsection a above shall be liable to a fine of
not more than $500 for each offense. In addition, any vehicle left parked in violation of
Subsection a above shall be liable to be towed upon order of a Township, county, or
state law enforcement officer and the owner thereof shall be liable for the cost of
towing and any storage charges accruing.
11-4.8. Permit parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 99-16; Ord. No. O-01-05; Ord. No. O01-12; Ord. No. O-01-21]
11-4.8.1. Parking by permit only on designated streets. No vehicle shall be parked in the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IIIB between the hours specified
in the schedule on days when school is in session unless:
a. A vehicle is owned and operated on a regular basis by a resident of that
street; and
b. The vehicle has displayed on its left rear window, in such a manner as to be
closely examined by an officer or person enforcing the parking restrictions,
a residential parking permit issued pursuant to Subsection 11-4.8.2; or
c. The vehicle falls under one of the following exceptions:
11:4 04 - 01 - 2013
1. Contractors, service and delivery vehicles bearing the name and
address of a commercial business may park without a permit during
the time they are rendering service to a resident within a permit
parking area.
2. Emergency and municipal vehicles and public service, telephone
and other public utility vehicles may park within the permit parking
area during the time that they are rendering service or repairs within
the permit parking area.
11-4.8.2. Residential parking permit. [Amended by Ord. No. O-99-16; Ord. No. O-01-
05]
a. Each household located on those streets or portions of streets set forth in
Schedule IIIB shall receive two parking permits from the Township
Clerk's office. Application for additional parking permits shall be made
in writing on the forms provided by the Township Clerk. Permits shall be
issued only under the following terms and conditions:
1. To persons who are residents on said streets or portions thereof
upon which the parking is restricted by this section.
2. Permits shall be valid for one year.
3. A maximum number of permits for each household shall be
determined based on one permit for each vehicle owned or
principally operated by household residents.
4. All vehicles for which permits are issued must be fully operational
and registered with the Division of Motor Vehicles.
b. There shall be no fee charged for residential parking permits hereunder.
11-4.8.3. Use of parking permits. [Amended by Ord. No. O-01-05]
a. A parking permit shall not authorize the standing or parking of any vehicle in such
places and during such times when the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is
prohibited and shall not excuse the observance of any traffic regulation.
b. Whenever the holder of a residential parking permit no longer fulfills the applicable
provisions of this subsection, the holder shall notify the Township Clerk, who may then
direct the holder to surrender the parking permit.
c. A parking permit shall be valid only in the area identified in Schedule IIIB for which it
is issued.
d. It shall be a violation of this subsection for the holder of a parking permit to fail to
surrender the permit when directed to do so.
11:5 04 - 01 - 2013
e. It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person to represent in any fashion that a
vehicle is entitled to a parking permit authorized by this subsection when it is not so
entitled. The display of a parking permit on a vehicle not entitled to such a parking
permit shall constitute such a representation.
f. It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person to duplicate, or attempt to
duplicate, by any means, a parking permit authorized by this subsection. It also shall be
a violation of this subsection for any person to display on any vehicle such a duplicate
parking permit.
g. The Township Clerk may revoke the residential parking permit of any person found to
be in violation of this subsection and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall
surrender such permit to the Township Clerk. Failure to surrender a revoked residential
parking permit when requested to do so shall constitute a separate violation of this
subsection.
11-5. Limiting the use of streets to a certain class of vehicles.
Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials. [Amended by Ord. No. O-01-26]
11-5.1. Limiting the use of streets during certain hours to a certain class of vehicles.
Non-single-unit trucks, known as tractor trailer "articulated" vehicles, are hereby
excluded during the hours specified on the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IVA attached to and made a part of this chapter. [Amended by Ord.
No. O-02-45]
11-6. Overnight parking prohibited. [Amended by Ord. No. O-00-12]
No person shall park a truck (except a pickup truck or sports utility vehicle not in excess of
8,000 pounds, gross vehicle weight) commercial vehicle, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, pole
trailer, equipment, tractor or bus on any street in the Township between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
11-7. Through streets, yield intersections and stop intersections.
11-7.1. Through streets. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule V attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
[Amended by Ord. No. O-94-46; Ord. No. O-95-04; Ord. No. O-98-12; Ord. No. O-98-21;
Ord. No. O-0O-28; Ord. No. O-01-4; Ord. No. O-01-22; Ord. No. O-02-18]
11:6 04 - 01 - 2013
11-7.2. Yield intersections. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
intersections described in Schedule VI attached to and made a part of this chapter
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
11-7.3. Stop intersections. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
intersections described in Schedule VII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed
as provided therein. [Amended by Ord. No. O-95-04; Ord. No. O-96-25; Ord.
No. O-98-12; Ord. No. O-98-21; Ord. No. O-0O-28; Ord. No. No. O-01-11;
Ord. No. O-02-18]
11-8. Penalty. [Amended 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-16]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any person convicted of a
violation of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty.
11-9. Speed limits. [Amended by Ord. No. O-94-13; Ord. No. O-94-60; Ord. No. O-95-
04; Ord. No. O-96-03; Ord. No. O-99-24; Ord. No. O-00-37; Ord. No. O-01-3;
Ord. No. O-02-41]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter shall have the speed limit designated in such schedule.
11-10. No-passing zones. [Amended by Ord. No. O-96-09]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-86, the streets described in Schedule IX attached to
and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as no-passing zones. No-passing-zone
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
11-11. No U turns.
The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite
direction (a maneuver commonly known as a "U-turn") at any of the locations as described in
Schedule X.
11-11.1. No left turns. No person shall make a left turn at the locations described in
Schedule XA. [Amended by Ord. No. O-99-27; Ord. No. O-01-25; Ord. No.
O-02-25]
11-11.2. No turn on red. No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at the
locations described in Schedule XB. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-29]
11-11.3. No right turns. No person shall make a right turn at the locations described in
Schedule XC. [Added 7-25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-30]
11:7 04 - 01 - 2013
11-12. One-way streets. [Amended by Ord. No. O-01-38]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
11-13. Freehold Raceway Mall traffic regulations. [Amended by Ord. No. O-98-14; Ord.
No. O-99-15]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish certain specific traffic regulations in
certain areas of the Freehold Raceway Mall. In addition to the specific traffic regulations
set forth in this section, by request of the property owner pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the
Township Committee has adopted a resolution authorizing the enforcement of Subtitle 1,
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey. Application of traffic
regulations to certain areas of the Freehold Raceway Mall is deemed to be in the best
interests and to promote the safety of those persons working at or visiting the mall as well
as residents who live in the vicinity of the property.
b. Traffic regulations. The following traffic regulations shall apply and be enforced in the
areas designated below:
1. Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Road MPH Limits
(a) Winner's Circle 25 Entire length
(b) Raceway Mall Drive 25 Entire length
(c) Cardigan Bay Lane 25 Entire length
(d) Trotters Way 30 Entire length
2. No stopping or standing. No stopping or standing along both sides of the roadways
listed below:
Road Limits
(a) Winner's Circle Entire length
(b) Raceway Mall Drive Entire length
(c) Cardigan Bay Lane Entire length
(d) Trotters Way Entire length
3. Through streets. The following streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each and every street intersecting the
through street.
11:8 04 - 01 - 2013
Road Limits
(a) Winner's Circle Entire length
(b) Trotters Way Entire length
4. Truck prohibition. No trucks over four tons registered gross weight shall be permitted
on Cardigan Bay Lane, entire length
5. Tow-away of vehicles. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass
area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
6. Traffic signals. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following
locations:
(a) Intersection of Ring Road (known as "Winner's Circle") and the U.S. Route 9
Access Road (known as "Raceway Mall Drive") [Department of Transportation
Plan designated LTS 3053].
(b) Intersection of Ring Road (known as "Winner's Circle") and County Route 537
Access Road (known as "Trotters Way").
(c) Intersection of Stable Drive and County Route 537 Access Road (known as
"Trotters Way").
The traffic signal installations shall be in accordance with the provision of an act
concerning motor vehicles and traffic regulations, Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes; shall conform to the design and shall be maintained in
operation, as authorized by the Department of Transportation.
7. Turn prohibited. No person shall make a turn at the location listed and in the manner
described below:
Name of Road
Turn
Prohibited Location
Winner's Circle and the
driveway 790 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Trotters Way
Left From northbound on Winner's
Circle to westbound into the
driveway 790 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Trotters Way
8. Loading zones. No motor vehicle shall park, stop or stand within a designated loading
zone except a commercially registered motor vehicle which is being actively loaded or
unloaded. Observation, which need not be continuous and uninterrupted, of a
commercially registered vehicle parking in a loading zone for a period of more than
two hours without active loading or unloading activity taking place during any such
observation shall give rise to a presumption that there has been a violation of this
11:9 04 - 01 - 2013
subsection. Such observation is neither required for there to exist probable cause for
issuance of a summons hereunder nor a prerequisite prior to issuing a summons
hereunder. The parking, stopping or standing of any noncommercially registered motor
vehicle for any period of time in a designated loading zone shall give rise to a
presumption that this subsection has been violated. Violation of any portion of this
subsection shall subject the person so convicted or pleading guilty to such fines or
penalties as set forth in § 1-3. Motor vehicles found in violation of this provision may
be ordered towed at the owner’s or operator’s expense. [Added 5-23-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-15]
c. Signage. All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the property owner/applicant. The installations shall be inspected by the Township
Police Department to insure that they meet state and federal specifications, and all signing
shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
d. Penalty. The penalty for any person convicted of having violated any portion of this
section, shall be as prescribed by New Jersey state statutes and/or the New Jersey
Administrative Code. In the event no such penalty applies, the penalty provisions of
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Township of Freehold shall be
applicable.
11-14. Lane use reservations. [Amended by Ord. No. O-94-61]
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and traffic at said
intersections shall move as indicated in Schedule XII.
11-15. Michael J. Tighe Park traffic regulations. [Amended by Ord. No. O-96-07; Ord.
No. O-01-32; Ord. No. O-01-45; 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-24]
a. General parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Remembrance Road Both All Entire length
3. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site
plan1
 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in
the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
1Editor's Note: The site plan referred to throughout this section is on file in the Clerk’s office.
11:10 04 - 01 - 2013
11-15 TRAFFIC 11-15
b. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section such as
police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be properly identified and the reserved
parking spaces must be shown on the attached site plan.
c. One-way streets. The following described lots or parts of lots are hereby designated as one
way in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Lot 1 Counterclockwise Entire length
Lot 2 Counterclockwise Entire length
Lot 5 Counterclockwise Entire length
d. Speed limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be 15 miles per
hour.
2. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Roadway M.P.H. Limits
Remembrance Road 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the above
designated speed limits authorized by the Department of Transportation.
e. Tow away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian
walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
f. No-passing zones. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated
as "no passing":
Name of Street Location
Remembrance Road Entire length
g. Mid-block crosswalks. The following described locations are hereby designated as mid-block
crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Remembrance Road Located 613 feet in an easterly direction as measured from the
easterly curbline of Georgia Road
Remembrance Road Located 702 feet in an easterly direction as measured from the
easterly curbline of Georgia Road
11:11 02 - 01 - 2011
Name of Street Location
Remembrance Road Located 47 feet in a southeasterly direction as measured from the
southeasterly curbline entrance to Parking Lot 2
Remembrance Road Located 89 feet in a northwesterly direction as measured from the
northwesterly limit of the timber bridge deck
Remembrance Road Located 170 feet in a southeasterly direction as measured from the
southwesterly limit of the timber bridge deck
Remembrance Road Located 513 feet in a southeasterly direction as measured from the
southwesterly limit of the timber bridge deck
h. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. A stop sign shall be installed as provided below:
Parking Lot 2 at its intersection with Remembrance Road
11-16. Mid-block crosswalk. [Added 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-16]
The following location is hereby established as a mid-block crosswalk:
Name of Street Limits
East Freehold Road Beginning at a point 281 feet west of the center line of
Emerald Court and extending to a point 10 feet westerly
therefrom
Nomoco Road [Added 12-27-
2005 by Ord. No. O-05-43]
Beginning at a point 2,670 feet west of the westerly edge of
Pittenger Pond Road to a point 10 feet westerly therefrom
Schanck Road [Added 11-9-
2010 by Ord. No. O-10-28]
Beginning at a point 600 feet easterly from the easterly
curbline of Stillwells Corner Road and extending 16 feet
easterly therefrom
11-17. Raintree Condominium Association traffic regulations. [Added 8-23-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-24]
11-17.1. Filing of written consent. Raintree Condominium Association has filed a written
consent with the Township of Freehold that provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to certain areas in the
Raintree Condominium Association in the Township of Freehold, County of
Monmouth.
11-17.2 Speed limits.
a. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the entire length of Raintree Road shall
be twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the abovedesignated speed limits authorized by the Department of Transportation.
11:12 04 - 01 - 2013
11-21 TRAFFIC 11-21
11-17.3 Through street. The following street is hereby designated as a through street.
Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
[Added 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-312
]
Name of Street Limits
Raintree Road Entire length
11-17.4. Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon either side of
the entire length of Raintree Road.
11-17.5. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, any grass area, pedestrian walkway,
or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
11-17.6. Signs. All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials required by the
Township or the Department of Transportation shall be installed and paid for by
the property owner/applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Subsequent to the initial installation of said
signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials, the owner/applicant shall be
responsible for the repair, maintenance and restoration of same at no cost or
expense to the Township.
11-17.7. Pavement markings. Any pavement markings required by the Township or the
Department of Transportation shall be installed and paid for by the property
owner/applicant. All pavement markings shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Subsequent to the initial installation of
pavement markings, the owner/applicant shall be responsible for the repair,
maintenance and restoration of same at no cost or expense to the Township.
11-17.8. Penalty. The penalty for any person convicted of having violated any portion of
this section shall be as prescribed by the New Jersey State Statutes and/or the
New Jersey Administrative Code. In the event no such penalty applies, the
penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, of the Code of the Township of
Freehold shall apply.
2
 Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections 11-17.3 through 11-
17.7 as Subsections 11-17.4 through 11-17.8, respectively.
11:12.1 02 - 01 - 2011
11-21 FREEHOLD CODE 11-21
11-18. Parking within designated lines. [Added 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-16]
Within any area of the Township where hard surface motor vehicle parking (“parking lot”) is
open to the public in which lines are painted or otherwise visible (“designated lines”) indicating
individual parking spaces or stalls (“parking spaces”), motor vehicles shall, at all times, park
within and not on or across such designated lines. When a motor vehicle’s size, or by reason of
its towing of an appropriately licensed trailer or vehicle (“oversized vehicle”), renders it
impossible for that oversized vehicle to fit within the designated lines of a single parking space,
such oversized vehicle shall be parked in such a manner as to occupy only as many parking
spaces as is required to park the oversized vehicle safely. No motor vehicle (including
oversized vehicles) shall be parked outside of the designated parking area such as in travel lanes
or other areas of the parking lot not having designated lines to create parking spaces. Motor
vehicles parked outside of such designated parking area shall be subject to being towed at the
owner’s or operator’s expense and/or such fines and penalties as set forth in § 1-3.
11-19. Loading zones. [Added 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-16]
No motor vehicle shall park, stop or stand within a designated loading zone except a
commercially registered motor vehicle which is being actively loaded or unloaded.
Observation, which need not be continuous and uninterrupted, of a commercially registered
vehicle parking in a loading zone for a period of more than two hours without active loading or
unloading activity taking place during any such observation shall give rise to a presumption that
there has been a violation of this section. Such observation is neither required for there to exist
probable cause for issuance of a summons hereunder nor a prerequisite prior to issuing a
summons hereunder. The parking, stopping or standing of any noncommercially registered
motor vehicle for any period of time in a designated loading zone shall give rise to a
presumption that this section has been violated. Violation of any portion of this section shall
subject the person so convicted or pleading guilty to such fines or penalties as set forth in § 1-3.
Motor vehicles found in violation of this provision may be ordered towed at the owner’s or
operator’s expense.
11-20. Jackson Mills Road Park traffic regulations. [Added 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-
24]
a. General parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle anytime upon either side of any road or parts of
roads described as follows
(a) Beginning at the westerly pavement line of Jackson Mills Road and measuring
in a westerly direction 350 feet to the easterly curbline of Parking Lot 2.
(b) Beginning at the westerly curbline of Parking Lot 2 and measuring in a
westerly direction 490 feet to the easterly curbline of Parking Lot 3.
11:12.2 02 - 01 - 2011
11-21 TRAFFIC 11-21
(c) Beginning at the southerly pavement line of the main entrance road from
Jackson Mills Road and measuring in a southerly direction 77 feet to the
northerly curbline of Parking Lot 1.
b. Mid-block crosswalks. The following described locations are hereby designated as midblock crosswalks:
1. In Parking Lot 2 located 201 feet westerly from the easterly curbline of Parking Lot 2
with the main access road.
2. On the main access road located 136 feet westerly from the westerly curbline of
Parking Lot 2.
11-21. Opatut Park traffic regulations. [Added 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-24]
a. General parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle anytime upon either side of any road or parts of
roads described as follows:
(a) The easterly entrance road from East Freehold Road to Parking Lot 3 more
particularly described as beginning at the southerly curbline of East Freehold
Road and measuring in a southerly direction a distance of 1,044 feet to the
westerly curbline of Parking Lot 3.
(b) The westerly connector road between Parking Lot 1 and Parking Lot 2, more
particularly described as beginning at the easterly curbline of Parking Lot 1 and
measuring in a northeasterly direction 271 feet to the southerly curbline of
Parking Lot 2.
b. Mid-block crosswalks. The following described locations are hereby designated as midblock crosswalks.
1. On the easterly entrance road from East Freehold Road located 949 feet southerly as
measured from the southerly curbline of East Freehold Road.
2. On the easterly entrance road from East Freehold Road located between Parking Lot 3
and Parking Lot 4, 21 feet easterly as measured from the easterly curbline of Parking
Lot 3.
3. On the westerly connector road between Parking Lot 1 and Parking Lot 2, 23 feet
easterly as measured from the easterly curbline of Parking Lot 1.
11:12.3 02 - 01 - 2011
11-21 TRAFFIC 11-21
SCHEDULE I
PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-4.2, no person shall park a vehicle at any
time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
East Freehold Road North From the center line of Harvest Lane 225 feet west to the
common property line of Block 7, Lot 3 and Block 7.01,
Lot 1
East Freehold Road North From the center line of Harvest Lane 230 feet east to the
common property line of Block 7.01, Lots 9 and 10
Ginesi Drive [Added 8-
6-2013 by Ord. No. O13-29]
Both Entire length
Gully Road South Starting at the intersection of Gully Road and Wemrock
Road extending westward 2,500 feet
Janet Rhea Road Both Entire length
Jerseyville Avenue Both Beginning at the intersection of State Highway 33, thence
west along both sides of Jerseyville Avenue to the point
where such road intersects with the boundary line dividing
the Borough of Freehold from the Township of Freehold
Kentucky Way (easterly
section) [Added 6-23-
2009 by Ord. No. O09-20]
Both From the southerly curbline of Route 537 extending 255
feet southerly along the center line
Kentucky Way
(westerly section)
[Added 6-23-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-20]
Both From the southerly curbline of Route 537 extending 290
feet southerly
Kozloski Road Both Southerly curbline of State Highway 33 to a point 200 feet
southerly
Kozloski Road Both Northerly curbline of State Highway 33 to a point 200 feet
northerly
Schibanoff Road Both From Route 9 extending westward to its terminus
Stonehurst Boulevard Both Beginning at the intersection of Schanck Road, thence
south along both sides of Stonehurst Boulevard until and at
that point where such road intersects with Windsor Drive,
in the Township of Freehold
Stonehurst Boulevard North From the westernmost leg of the school parking lot to the
easterly curbline of Derby Drive
11:13 01 - 01 - 2014
11-21 FREEHOLD CODE 11-21
Name of Street Sides Location
Thoreau Drive [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
No. O-03-30]
West From Freneau Boulevard extending southerly to Kozloski
Road
Three Brooks Road North Beginning at the intersection of U.S. Route 9 (northbound
lane) and Three Brooks Road, thence easterly along the
north side of Three Brooks Road to a point 375 feet
Three Brooks Road South Beginning at the intersection of U.S. Route 9 (northbound
lane), thence east along the south side of Three Brooks
Road to a point 475 feet
Willowbrook Road North A distance of 300 feet east from the intersection of the
curbline extensions of Willowbrook Road and Route 79
Willowbrook Road South A distance of 243 feet east from the intersection of the
curbline extensions of Willowbrook Road and Route 79
Windsor Terrace North From the westerly curbline of Stonehurst Boulevard to a
point 620 feet west
Windsor Terrace South From the westerly curbline of Stonehurst Boulevard to a
point 630 feet west
11:14 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. II TRAFFIC Sch. II
SCHEDULE II
STOPPING OR STANDING OF MOTOR
VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 11-4.3, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Castronova Way [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-29]
Both From West Main Street (County Route 537) to
Gibson Place
County Route 537 Both From Walling Road, Hunt Road westerly to a point
150 feet west of the westerly curbline of Tyson
Lane
East Freehold Road Both From the easterly curbline of N.J. Route 79, east
along East Freehold Road to a point 100 feet
therefrom
East Freehold Road
[Amended 7-24-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-18]
Both From the westerly curbline of N.J. Route 79, west
along East Freehold Road to a point 1,380 feet
therefrom
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
[Amended 9-26-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-12]
South Beginning at the easternmost driveway of the
Freehold Township High School and extending
east 1,640 feet
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
South Beginning at the westernmost exit of the Freehold
Township High School and extending westerly to a
point 1,300 feet therefrom
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
South Beginning at the easternmost driveway of the
Freehold Township High School and extending
200 feet west
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
[Amended 9-26-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-12]
South Beginning at the westernmost driveway of the
Freehold Township High School and extending
200 feet east
Elton Adelphia Road Both Extending from New Jersey U.S. Route 9 to a point
300 feet west of Jacksons Mill Road
Freehold-Smithburg Road
(County Route 537)
Both Beginning at the eastern curbline of Sentinel Road
and extending east to the boundary line dividing
the Borough of Freehold from the Township of
Freehold
Jacksons Mill Road Both Extending from a point 200 feet north of Elton
11:15 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. II FREEHOLD CODE Sch. II
Name of Street Sides Location
Adelphia Road to a point 200 feet south from Elton
Adelphia Road
Stillwells Corner Road West From the south curbline of County Route 537 to
the north curbline of Sycamore Avenue
Stillwells Corner Road
[Added 11-9-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-28]
East From the south curbline of County Route 537 to a
point 1,175 feet south
Stillwells Corner Road Southwest Beginning at a point on the south-westerly curbline
of Stillwells Corner Road, said point being 416 feet
northwesterly from the intersection of the extended
northwesterly curbline of Double Creek Parkway
with the extended southwesterly curbline of
Stillwells Corner Road and measuring a distance of
167 feet northwesterly to a point along said
southwesterly curbline of Stillwells Corner Road
Wemrock Road Both Beginning at a point 200 feet south of the southerly
curbline of State Highway 33 to a point 200 feet
north of the northerly curbline of State Highway 33
Wemrock Road Both From the north curbline of County Route 537 to a
point 495 feet north
11:16 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. IIA TRAFFIC Sch. IIA
SCHEDULE IIA
STOPPING OR STANDING OF MOTOR VEHICLES
PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON SCHOOL DAYS
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-4.3A, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle during the hours specified on school days upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Time Location
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
North 7:30 a.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
From Woodstock Place to easterly-most
driveway of Freehold Township High School
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
[Repealed 9-26-2017
by Ord. No. O-17-12]
Old Post Road
[Added 9-26-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-12]
Both 7:30 a.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
Beginning at Elton Adelphia Road and
extending 150 feet north towards Coachman
Drive
Sycamore Avenue
[Added 11-29-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-28]
Both 7:30 a.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
From the curbline of Stillwells Corner Road
extending 125 feet southwesterly
Woodstock Place
[Added 9-26-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-12]
Both 7:30 a.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
Beginning at Elton Adelphia Road and
extending 150 feet north towards Heritage
Drive
11:17 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. III TRAFFIC Sch. III
SCHEDULE III
PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON SCHOOL DAYS
[Amended 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-173
]
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-4.4, no person shall stop a vehicle between
the hours specified on school days only on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Time Location
Burlington Road [Added
11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-28]
North 8:00 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
and 2:30
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From the westerly curbline of Rock Oak Road
1,100 feet westerly to the easterly driveway of
Joseph J. Catena School
Burlington Road [Added
11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-28]
South 8:00 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
and 2:30
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From the westerly property line of Joseph
J.Catena School to Rock Oak Road
Derby Drive [Added 11-
9-2010 by Ord. No. O10-28]
East 8:30 a.m.
and 3:00
p.m. to 9:30
a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Stonehurst Boulevard to Ascot Drive
Derby Drive [Added 11-
9-2010 by Ord. No. O10-28]
West 8:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
and 3:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Surrey Court to Stonehurst Boulevard
Stonehurst Boulevard
[Added 11-9-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-28]
North 8:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
and 3:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From the easterly Boulevard property line of
Laura Donovan School 380 feet westerly to
the westerly driveway of Laura Donovan
School
Stonehurst Boulevard
[Added 11-9-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-28]
North 8:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
and 3:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Derby Drive to the Boulevard easterly
curb line of Buckingham Way
Stonehurst Boulevard
[Added 11-9-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-28]
South 8:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
and 3:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Buckingham Way Boulevard to the
easterly property line of Freehold Township
Stonehurst Park, Lot 6, Block 71.13
3 Editor's Note: This ordinance eliminated the parking restrictions in Schedule III in their entirety.
11:19 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. IIIA TRAFFIC Sch. IIIA
SCHEDULE IIIA
PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS
EXCEPT SATURDAYS, SUNDAYS AND PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-4.4A, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified except on Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays on the following
streets:
Name of Street Side Time Location
Andorra Terrace Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From Three Brooks Road to intersection at
Hibernia Way
Bar Harbor Road East 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From Elton Adelphia Road to Koster Drive
Bar Harbor Road West 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From Elton Adelphia Road to Juniper Drive
Bradley Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.
weekdays
Entire length
Concord Drive Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From East Freehold Road to intersection with
Congress Court
Continental Court Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
Entire length
Dundee Terrace Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
Entire length
East Freehold Road Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From Pond Road to Nathan Hale Drive
Kings Way Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From Three Blocks Road 800 feet east
Lighthouse Drive Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From East Freehold Road to Continental Court
Lutea Terrace Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
11:21 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. IIIA FREEHOLD CODE Sch. IIIA
Name of Street Side Time Location
weekdays
Three Brooks Road Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
From the rear property line of Lot 90.04 to Bar
Harbor Road
Virginiana Terrace Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
weekdays
Entire length
11:22 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. IIIB TRAFFIC Sch. IIIB
SCHEDULE IIIB
PARKING BY PERMIT ONLY ON DESIGNATED STREETS
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-4.8, Parking by permit only on designated
streets, no vehicle shall be parked in the streets or parts of streets between the hours specified
below and on days when school is in session, except with a parking permit:
Name of Street Side Time Location
Avon Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Buck Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Buckingham Way Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From Elton Adelphia Road to Yorke Drive
Cambridge Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From Buckingham Way to Yorke Drive
Cambridge Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From its intersection with Buckingham Way in
a northeasterly direction to its terminus at the
cul-de-sac
Coachman Drive
North
Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Coachman Drive
South
Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Coventry Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Doe Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Fawn Court Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Hampton Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From Coventry Drive to Stonehurst Boulevard
Heritage Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Lancaster Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From Cambridge Road to Yorke Drive
Musket Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
11:23 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. IIIB FREEHOLD CODE Sch. IIIB
Name of Street Side Time Location
Newcastle Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Old Post Road
[Amended 9-26-2017
by Ord. No. O-17-
12]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
On school days; beginning 150 feet north of
Elton Adelphia Road and extending remaining
length to Stonehurst Boulevard
Patriot Way Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Portage Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Woodstock Place
[Amended 7-24-2007
by Ord. No. O-07-
17; repealed 9-26-
2017 by Ord. No. O17-12
Woodstock Place
[Added 9-26-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-12]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
On school days; beginning 150 feet north of
Elton Adelphia Road and extending remaining
length to Heritage Drive
11:24 03 - 01 - 2018
Sch. IV TRAFFIC Sch. IV
SCHEDULE IV
LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO A CERTAIN CLASS OF VEHICLES
[Amended 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-20]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11-5, trucks weighing over four tons, except when
picking up delivering materials, are hereby excluded from the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Edwards Road Entire length
Longview Avenue Entire length
Thompson Grove Road From its intersection with County Route 537 to its intersection with
County Route 524
Three Brooks Road From its intersection with US Highway Route 9 to a point 65 feet
west from the center line of Meridian Drive
Willowbrook Road Entire length
11:25 12 - 15 - 2008
Sch. IVA TRAFFIC Sch. IVA
SCHEDULE IVA
LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS DURING
CERTAIN HOURS TO A CERTAIN CLASS OF VEHICLES
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-5.1, Limiting the use of streets during
certain hours to a certain class of vehicles, non-single-unit trucks, known as tractor trailer
"articulated" vehicles, are hereby excluded during the hours specified from the following
streets:
Name of Street Hours Location
Three Brooks Road
[Amended 12-18-2012
by Ord. No. O-12-25]
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Entire length
11:27 04 - 01 - 2013
Sch. V TRAFFIC Sch. V
SCHEDULE V
THROUGH STREETS
[Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-2; 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-17]
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-7.1, the following described streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right
side of each street intersecting the through streets:
Bar Harbor Road:
Between Elton Adelphia Road (County Route 524) and Three Brooks Road.
Bennington Road:
Between Randolph Road and Monmouth County Route 537.
Bernice Drive:
From its easterly intersection with County Route 537 to its westerly intersection with
County Route 537.
Buckingham Way:
Between Elton Adelphia Road (County Route 524) and Stonehurst Boulevard.
Burlington Road:
Between Kozloski Road (County Route 55) and the Freehold Township-Colts Neck
Township Corporate Line.
Center Street:
Between Kozloski Road (County Route 55) and the Freehold Township-Freehold Borough
Corporate Line.
Double Creek Parkway:
Between Stillwells Corner Road and Iron Bridge Road.
East Freehold Road:
a. Between Pond Road and N.J. Route 79.
b. Between Kozloski Road (County Route 55) and Dutch Lane Road (County Route 46).
c. Between Dutch Lane Road (County Route 46) and Colts Neck Road (County Route
537).
Ely Harmony Road:
a. Between Mount Holly Road (County Route 537) and Siloam Road (County Route 527).
b. Between Siloam Road (County Route 527) and the Freehold Township-Jackson
Township Corporate Line.
Georgia Road:
a. Between Elton Adelphia Road (County Route 524) and the main entrance to Turkey
Swamp Park.
11:29 02 - 01 - 2011
Sch. V FREEHOLD CODE Sch. V
b. Between Jackson Mills Road (County Route 23) and the Freehold Township-Howell
Township Corporate Line.
Glenbrook Road:
Between Walling Road and Randolph Road.
Gully Road:
Between Wemrock Road and the Freehold Township-Manalapan Township Corporate
Line.
Harrison Drive:
From County Route 537 to County Route 537.
Helen Avenue:
Between South Street (N.J. Route 79) and U.S. Route 9.
Hunt Road:
Between Colts Neck Township-Freehold Township Corporate Line and Burlington Road.
Iron Bridge Road:
Between West Main Street (County Route 537) and Elton Adelphia Road (County Route
524).
Kentucky Way:
From County Route 537 to County Route 537.
Longview Avenue:
Between Colts Neck Road (County Route 537) and Burlington Road.
Old Mill Road:
Between Robertsville Road and the Freehold Township-Marlboro Township Corporate
Line.
Overbrook Drive:
Between County Route 537 and Randolph Road.
Patten Street:
Between Helen Avenue and Moreau Avenue.
Pittenger Avenue:
Between Helen Avenue and Moreau Avenue.
Pond Road:
Between East Freehold-Craig Road and the Freehold Borough Corporate Line.
Randolph Road:
Between Colts Neck Road (County Route 537) and Dutch Lane Road (County Route 46).
Robertsville Road:
11:30 02 - 01 - 2011
Sch. V TRAFFIC Sch. V
a. Between the Freehold Township-Freehold Borough Corporate Line and East Freehold
Road.
b. Between East Freehold Road and the Freehold Township-Marlboro Township
Corporate Line.
Schanck Road:
Between Stillwells Corner Road and U.S. Route 9.
Silvers Road:
Between East Freehold Road and the Freehold Township-Marlboro Township Corporate
Line.
Stillwells Corner Road:
Between Freehold-Smithburg Road (County Route 537) and Elton Adelphia Road (County
Route 524).
Stone Hill Road:
Between Jackson Mills Road (County Route 23) and Georgia Road.
Stonehurst Boulevard:
Between Stillwells Corner Road and Schanck Road.
Strickland Road:
Between Jackson Mills Road (County Route 23) and the Freehold Township-Howell
Township Corporate Line.
Three Brooks Road:
Between U.S. Route 9 and Halls Mill Road.
Waterworks Road:
a. Between East Freehold Road and Pond Road.
b. Between Pond Road and the Freehold Township-Freehold Borough Corporate Line.
Wemrock Road:
Between West Main Street (County Route 537) and State Highway 33.
Willowbrook Road:
Between N.J. Route 79 and Halls Mill Road.
Wilson Avenue:
Between Colts Neck Road (County Route 537) and Dutch Lane Road (County Route 46).
Woodcrest Drive:
Between Stillwells Corner Road and Indian Hill Road.
11:31 02 - 01 - 2011
Sch. VI TRAFFIC Sch. VI
SCHEDULE VI
YIELD INTERSECTIONS
[Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-2]
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-7.2, the following described intersections
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs having 36 inches in length shall be
installed as provided therein:
Double Creek Parkway:
A YIELD sign shall be installed on the southerly exit ramp at its intersection with Stillwells
Corner Road.
11:33 07 - 01 - 2010
Sch. VII TRAFFIC Sch. VII
SCHEDULE VII
STOP INTERSECTIONS
[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-29]
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-7.3, the following described intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Braun Place:
A STOP shall be installed on the near right side of Braun Place at its intersection with
Hance Boulevard.
Brookwood Drive:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Brookwood Drive at its
intersections with Glendale Drive.
Cannon Road:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Cannon Road at its intersections
with Ryan Boulevard.
Castronova Way (See Gibson below.)
Coventry Drive:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Coventry Drive at its
intersections with New Castle Road.
Crossing Lane:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Crossing Lane at its
intersection with Tricentennial Drive.
Derby Drive:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Derby Drive at its intersection with
Plymouth Drive.
Empress Court:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Empress Court at its intersections
with Castle Drive.
Gibson Place:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Gibson Place at its intersection with
Castronova Way.
Harvard Oval:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Harvard Oval at its intersections
with Yale Drive.
Majestic Drive:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Majestic Drive at its intersection
with Hance Boulevard.
11:35 07 - 01 - 2010
Sch. XA FREEHOLD CODE Sch. XA
Midland Avenue:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Midland Avenue at its intersections
with Ryan Boulevard.
Mulberry Lane:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Mulberry Lane at its intersections
with Fern Avenue.
Nottingham Way:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Nottingham Way at its intersection
with Sherwood Drive.
Partridge Avenue
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Partridge Avenue at its intersections
with Wellington Road.
Patten Street:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Patten Street at its intersection with
Moreau Avenue.
Pittenger Avenue:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Pittenger Avenue at its intersection
with Moreau Avenue.
Pittenger Pond Road:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Pittenger Pond Road at its
intersection with Nomoco Road.
Roosevelt Street:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Roosevelt Street at its intersections
with Harding Road.
Royal Road:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Royal Road at its intersections with
Empress Court.
Rutgers Way:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Rutgers Way at its intersections
with Harvard Oval.
Scarlet Drive:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Scarlet Drive at its intersection with
Pin Oak Road.
Spotted Oak Drive:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Spotted Oak Drive at its
intersection with Pin Oak Road.
Thoreau Drive:
11:36 07 - 01 - 2010
Sch. VII TRAFFIC Sch. VII
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Thoreau Drive at its intersection with
Freneau Boulevard.
Village Lane:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Village Lane at its intersections with
Wyndham Way.
Winchester Drive:
a. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Winchester Drive at its
intersections with Ascot Drive.
b. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Winchester Drive at its
intersections with Derby Drive.
c. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Winchester Drive at its
intersections with Hampton Drive.
Woodcrest Drive:
A STOP sign shall be installed on the near right side of Woodcrest Drive at its intersection
with Indian Hill Road.
Yale Drive:
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Yale Drive at its intersections with
Wellesley Way.
Yorke Drive:
a. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Yorke Drive at its intersections
with Cambridge Way.
b. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right sides of Yorke Drive at its intersections
with Lancaster Road.
11:36.1 07 - 01 - 2010
Sch. VIII TRAFFIC Sch. VIII
SCHEDULE VIII
SPEED LIMITS
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11-9, speed limits on Township roads shall be as
follows:
Name of Street Direction Speed Location
Bergerville Road Both 35 m.p.h. Between Jacksons Mill Road and the
Township of Freehold – Howell
Township Corporate Line, entire length
Buckingham Way Both 35 m.p.h. Stonehurst Boulevard to Elton Adelphia
Road (County Route 524), entire length
Burlington Road Both 35 m.p.h. Between Kozloski Road and the Colts
Neck Township – Freehold Township
line
Double Creek
Parkway [Added 8-
10-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-17]
Both 25 m.p.h. Entire length
East Freehold Road
[Amended 12-28-
2004 by Ord. No. O04-41]
Both a. 35 m.p.h. From Monmouth County Route 79 to
U.S. Highway 9
b. 40 m.p.h. From Kozloski Road Extension Route
55 to Monmouth County Route 537.
Ely Harmony Road Both 40 m.p.h. From Mount Holly-Freehold Road
(County Route 537) to Jacksons Mill
Road
Georgia Road Both 35 m.p.h. A distance of 3400 feet along Georgia
Road extending in the southerly
direction from its intersection with
Elton-Adelphia Road (County Route
524)
Halls Mill Road Both a. 35 m.p.h. Between Elton Adelphia Road and 300
feet north of Three Brooks Road
b. 45 m.p.h. Between 300 feet north and Three
Brooks Road and Willowbrook Road
Hunt Road Both 35 m.p.h. Entire length
Iron Bridge Road Both 35 m.p.h. Entire length
Jerseyville Avenue Both 35 m.p.h. Jerseyville Avenue westward from State
Highway 33 to corporate limits of
Freehold Borough
Nomoco Road Both 40 m.p.h. Entire length
11:37 02 - 01 - 2011
Sch. VIII FREEHOLD CODE Sch. VIII
Name of Street Direction Speed Location
[Added 8-10-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-17]
Old Mill Road Both 30 m.p.h. Entire length in Freehold Township
Pittenger Pond Road Both 30 m.p.h. Between Nomoco Road and the
Freehold Township-Jackson Township
corporate line
Pond Road Both 40 m.p.h. Entire length
Schibanoff Road Both 20 m.p.h. Entire length
Silvers Road [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-30]
Both 25 m.p.h. Entire length
Stillwells Corner
Road
Both a.
b.
35 m.p.h.
25 m.p.h.
Entire length, except for in the Clifton
T. Barkalow School zone and West
Freehold School zone, during recess or
while children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing hours
Stone Hill Road Both 35 m.p.h. Between Georgia Road and Jacksons
Mill Road (County Route 23)
Stonehurst Boulevard Both a.
b.
35 m.p.h.
25 m.p.h.
Entire length, except for in the Laura
Donovan School zone, during recess or
while children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing hours
Strickland Road Both 35 m.p.h. Between Jacksons Mill-Freehold Road
(County Route 23) and U.S. Route 9
Waterworks Road Both 25 m.p.h. Between East Freehold Road and Pond
Road
Wemrock Road
[Added 8-10-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-17]
Both 35 m.p.h. From Monmouth County Route 537 to
Gully Road
11:38 01 - 01 - 2012
Sch. IX TRAFFIC Sch. IX
SCHEDULE IX
NO PASSING ZONES
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11-10, no passing zones on Township roads shall
be as follows:
Name of Street Sides Location
East Freehold Road Both From U.S. Route 9 to N.J. Route 79 inclusive
Ely Harmony Road Both From County Route 537 to the Freehold Township-Jackson
Township corporate line
Georgia Road Both From County Route 524 south to Manasquan River Bridge
Hendrickson Road Both From County Route 527 to Ely Harmony Road inclusive
Iron Bridge Road Both From County Route 537 to County Route 524 inclusive
Jacksons Mill Road Both From County Route 524 to Strickland Road
Nomoco Road Both From Georgia Road to Ely Harmony Road inclusive
Pond Road Both From Holmes Terrace to Edwards Lane inclusive
Stillwells Corner Road Both Entire length
Stone Hill Road Both Entire length
Thompson Grove Road Both From County Route 537 to County Route 524 inclusive
Three Brooks Road Both From U.S. Route 9 to Halls Mill Road
11:39 01 - 01 - 2012
Sch. X TRAFFIC Sch. X
SCHEDULE X
NO U-TURNS
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11-11, No U-turns, such maneuver is prohibited at
the following location:
Name of Street Direction Location
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
Both Beginning at the easternmost exit of Freehold Township
High School and extending in a westerly direction to the
westernmost exit of Freehold Township High School
11:41 01 - 01 - 2012
Sch. XA TRAFFIC Sch. XA
SCHEDULE XA
NO LEFT TURNS
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-11.1, No left turns, no person shall make a
left turn at the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Derby Drive [Added 8-10-
2010 by Ord. No. O-10-20]
From southbound on Derby Drive to eastbound into the Laura
Donovan school parking lot located approximately 425 feet
south from the centerline of Derby Drive with the centerline of
Surrey Court on school days between the hours of 8:30 a.m.
through 9:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. through 4:00 p.m.
Elton-Adelphia Road Exiting from the Halls Mill Road extension to be constructed
by Hovbilt, Inc. as part of the Adelphia Greens site plan
Elton-Adelphia Road Entering from Elton Adelphia Road onto the Halls Mill Road
extension to be constructed by Hovbilt, Inc. as part of the
Adelphia Greens site plan
Elton-Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
[Added 10-25-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-26]
Entering from westbound Elton-Adelphia Road into the mixed
use development driveway to be constructed approximately
200 feet east of the intersection with Jackson Mills Road
Elton-Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
[Added 10-25-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-26]
Exiting from the mixed use development driveway to be
constructed approximately 200 feet east of the intersection
with Jackson Mills Road onto westbound Elton-Adelphia Road
Gibson Place [Added 12-16-
2003 by Ord. No. O-03-29]
Southbound on Gibson Place to eastbound on West Main
Street (County Route 537)
Halls Mill Road and the
Freehold Business and
Technology Park [Added 7-
25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-
30]
From eastbound on southernmost driveway located at 265
Willow Brook Road to northbound onto Halls Mill Road
Halls Mill Road and the
Freehold Business and
Technology Park [Added 7-
25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-
30]
From northbound on Halls Mill Road to westbound into the
southernmost driveway located at 265 Willow Brook Road
Halls Mill Road and the
Freehold Business and
Technology Park [Added 7-
25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-
30]
From eastbound on northernmost driveway located at 501
Halls Mill Road to northbound onto Halls Mill Road
11:43 01 - 01 - 2012
Sch. VIII FREEHOLD CODE Sch. VIII
Name of Street Location
Halls Mill Road and the
Freehold Business and
Technology Park [Added 7-
25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-
30]
From northbound on Halls Mill Road to westbound into the
northernmost driveway located at 501 Halls Mills Road
Halls Mill Road and Halls
Mills Park, LLC [Added 11-
25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-
28]
From southbound on Halls Mill Road to eastbound into the
driveway located at 125 Halls Mill Road
Halls Mill Road and Halls
Mills Park, LLC [Added 11-
25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-
28]
From westbound on the driveway located at 125 Halls Mill
Road to southbound onto Halls Mill Road
Halls Mill Road and Paragon
Freehold Land, LLC,
driveway (Block 72.11, Lots
1.05 & 1.06) [Added 5-20-
2008 by Ord. No. O-08-5]
From northbound on Halls Mill Road to westbound into the
driveway located along the west side of Halls Mill Road, 375
feet south of the center line of Willow Brook Road
Halls Mill Road and Paragon
Freehold Land, LLC,
driveway (Block 72.11, Lots
1.05 & 1.06) [Added 5-20-
2008 by Ord. No. O-08-5]
From eastbound on the driveway located along the west side of
Halls Mill Road, 375 feet south of the center line of Willow
Brook Road, to northbound onto Halls Mill Road
Jackson Mills Road
(County Route 23)
[Added 10-25-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-26]
Entering from southbound Jackson Mills Road into the mixed
use development driveway to be constructed approximately
450 feet south of the intersection with Elton-Adelphia Road
Jackson Mills Road
(County Route 23)
[Added 10-25-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-26]
Exiting from the mixed use development driveway to be
constructed approximately 450 feet south of the intersection
with Elton-Adelphia Road onto southbound Jackson Mills
Road
Monmouth County Route 55 From County Route 55 (Kozloski Road) southbound onto
Thoreau Drive
Monmouth County Route 55 From Thoreau Drive onto County Route 55 (Kozloski Road)
Monmouth County Route 55 From County Route 55 (Kozloski Road) southbound into the
two driveway entrances to the Poets Corner Shopping Center
Monmouth County Route 537 Exiting from Mount's Corner onto Monmouth County Route
537
West Main Street (County
Route 537) [Added 12-16-
2003 by Ord. No. O-03-29]
Eastbound on West Main Street (County Route 537) to
Freehold Office Park westerly drive
11:44 01 - 01 - 2012
Sch. XA TRAFFIC Sch. XA
Name of Street Location
West Main Street (County
Route 537) [Added 12-16-
2003 by Ord. No. O-03-29]
Southbound on Freehold Office Park westerly driveway to
eastbound on West Main Street (County Route 537)
11:44.1 01 - 01 - 2012
Sch. XA TRAFFIC Sch. XA
SCHEDULE XB
NO TURN ON RED
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11-11.2, No turn on red, no person shall make a
right turn on the red signal at the following location:
Intersection Movement
Wemrock Road/Hutchinson
Drive/Weeping Willow Lane
[Added 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-28]
Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m., all directions
West Main Street (County Route
537) and Castronova Way [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-29]
Southbound on Castronova Way to Westbound on West
Main Street (County Route 537)
11:45 02 - 01 - 2008
Sch. XA TRAFFIC Sch. XA
SCHEDULE XC
NO RIGHT TURNS
[Added 7-25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-30]
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-11.3, No right turns, no person shall make a
right turn at the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Halls Mill Road and the Freehold
Business and Technology Park
From southbound on Halls Mill Road to westbound into
the southernmost driveway located at 265 Willow Brook
Road
11:47 02 - 01 - 2008
Sch. XI TRAFFIC Sch. XI
SCHEDULE XI
ONE-WAY STREETS
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11-12, the following streets are designated as one
way in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Location
Euretta Avenue East From Pittenger Avenue to State Highway Route 79
Janet Rhea Road North From N.J. Route 33 to Bradley Drive
11:49 02 - 01 - 2008
Sch. XII TRAFFIC Sch. XII
SCHEDULE XII
LANE USE RESERVATIONS
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11-14, the lane locations described are designated
as lane use reservations and traffic at the following intersections shall move as indicated below:
Intersection Movement
Castronova Way [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-29]
Eastbound left lane of West Main Street (County Route 537)
reserved for left turns only
Stillwells Corner Road and
Schanck Road
a. Northbound and southbound left lanes of Stillwells Corner
Road approaching the intersection are reserved for left turns
only
b. Northbound and southbound right lanes of Stillwells Corner
Road approaching the intersection are reserved for right
turns and through traffic
c. Westbound right lane of Schanck Road is reserved for right
turn only
d. Westbound left lane of Schanck Road is reserved for left
turn and through traffic
Stillwells Corner Road and
Elton Adelphia Road
(County Route 524)
a. Southbound right lane of Stillwells Corner Road is reserved
for right turn only
b. Southbound left lane of Stillwells Corner Road is reserved
for left turn and through traffic
Wemrock Road and Gully
Road [Added 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-14]
Southbound center lane of Wemrock Road reserved for through
traffic only
Wemrock Road and Gully
Road [Added 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-14]
Southbound left lane of Wemrock Road reserved for left turns
only
Wemrock Road and Gully
Road [Added 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-14]
Southbound right lane of Wemrock Road reserved for right turns
only
11:51 02 - 01 - 2008

Chapter 17
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 17-1. Presentation of bill of demand.
Any person claiming payment from the Township shall present a detailed
bill of demand to the Municipal Administrator duly certified, or in the
alternative supported by an affidavit of the claimant. It shall be the duty of
the Municipal Administrator to determine that the signature of the officer
or employee who has been designated by the Township Committee to certify
that the materials have been received by or the services rendered to the
Township, appears on every claim.
§ 17-2. Approval or rejection of claim by Township Committee.
Claims shall be considered by the Township Committee, which shall approve
the same, except that the Committee may reject any claim presented to
it stating the reason for rejection. Any disapproval shall be referred back
to the Municipal Administrator with such instructions as the Township
Committee may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 17-3. Recording of claims and action.
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes indicating that the Township Committee has by formal
action approved, disapproved or rejected the claim. The schedule or list
shall be made available to every member of the Township Committee at
least three days before the claims are subject to formal action. After
approval, claims shall be listed in a book or record to be assigned as
"Claims Approved by the Township Committee on __________." This list shall
be amplified by appropriate detail in the minutes to permit ready inspection.
§ 17-4. Issuance of checks by Treasurer; recording.
The Township Clerk shall certify the resolution that all claims have been
approved and shall turn it over to the Treasurer, who shall issue the
necessary checks. Checks shall be signed by the Mayor and the Treasurer.
After preparing the checks for payment of claims, the Treasurer shall record
them in proper books of account and mail or otherwise distribute them to
the claimants.
Chapter 21
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 10-53 FREEHOLD CODE § 21-1
11:106
§ 21-1. Establishment; location; powers.
There shall be a Municipal Court in the Township pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., to be known as the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Freehold, Monmouth County." The Municipal Court shall have
a seal bearing the impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held
at the public library or such other place as the Township Committee shall
designate from time to time, and shall exercise all the functions, powers,
duties and jurisdiction conferred upon municipal courts by law.
§ 21-2. Municipal Judge.
§ 21-3. Municipal Court Administrator.
There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the Municipal Administrator and who shall perform the
functions and duties prescribed for him/her by law, the rules of court
applicable to Municipal Courts, and by the Municipal Judge. The Municipal
Court Administrator shall be entitled to the tenure rights afforded by
N.J.S.A. 2A:8-13.3. His/her duties shall include, but not be limited to:
A. There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court appointed by
the Township Committee. The Municipal Judge shall serve for a term of
three years from the date of appointment and until a successor shall be
appointed and qualifies.
B. The Municipal Judge shall have and possess the qualifications and shall
have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers and
jurisdiction conferred by law or ordinance. He need not be a resident of
the Township, but he shall be an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey. Whenever the Municipal Judge shall be unable to sit as such he
may designate any other judge of any Municipal Court (except a
nonattorney judge) or an attorney at law to sit for him temporarily and
hold the Municipal Court. Any such designation shall be made in writing
and shall be filed in the Court and any person so designated, while
sitting temporarily, shall possess all the powers of the Municipal Judge.
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to persons wishing to file criminal
complaints or wishing information in that regard; receiving complaints
and dispensing information relative to Court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
D. Attending Court; recording pleas, judgments and dispositions;
arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents; preparing and
issuing warrants and commitments.
§ 21-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 21-3
21:107
§ 21-4. Deputy Municipal Administrator.
The Municipal Administrator may appoint a Deputy Administrator of the
Municipal Court and such other clerks who shall perform the functions
assigned to him/her by the Municipal Judge and by the Municipal Court
Administrator.
§ 21-5. Municipal Court Prosecutor.
There shall be one or more Municipal Court Prosecutors appointed by the
Township Committee. When more than one Municipal Court Prosecutor
is appointed, one shall be designated as "Chief Municipal Prosecutor" by
the Township Committee. The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall serve for
a term of one year from the date of appointment until the successor shall
be appointed and qualified. The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be an
attorney at law of the State of New Jersey and shall provide all necessary
and desirable legal counsel and advice requested for the preparation and
prosecution of cases and perform such other duties as are provided for in
N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1 et seq.
§ 21-6. Municipal Court Public Defender.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds, recognizances, and security in lieu
thereof; making inquiry concerning their sufficiency and equity;
receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
F. Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issuing summonses
requiring Court appearances, maintaining and classifying records and
files.
G. Maintaining, forwarding, receiving and reporting such records, reports
and files as are required by the State Director of Motor Vehicles.
A. There shall be a Municipal Court Public Defender appointed by the
Township Committee. The Municipal Court Public Defender shall serve
for a term of one year from the date of appointment and until the
successor shall be appointed and qualifies. The Municipal Court Public
Defender shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey and
shall provide all necessary and desirable legal counsel and advice
required for the defense of cases in the Municipal Court of the
Township on behalf of those indigent defendants who are entitled by
law to appointment of counsel.
B. A person applying for representation by the Municipal Court Public
Defender shall be required to pay an application fee of $200. The
Municipal Court may waive the required application fee, in whole or in
part, if the Court determines, in its discretion upon a clear and
convincing showing by the applicant, that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation.
§ 21-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 21-7
21:108
§ 21-7. Fees for discovery.
The charge for production of discovery documents will be in compliance
with the fee schedule detailed in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.
Chapter 26
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Districts — See Ch. 30. Police Department — See Ch. 51.
§ 21-7 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 21-7
21:109

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 4-26-1971 (§§ 3-1 to 3-7 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-87-18]
§ 26-1. Recognition of fire companies as Fire Department.
The Township recognizes the Freehold Township Independent No. 1 and the
East Freehold Fire Companies, duly incorporated volunteer fire companies,
as agents and instrumentalities of the Township for prevention and control
of fire, and those companies are authorized to use the hydrants and facilities
of the Township in discharging their functions. For purposes of this article
they shall be referred to jointly as the "Fire Department."
§ 26-2. Enrollment in Firemen's Relief Association required.
Volunteer firemen in the Township shall be enrolled in the Firemen's Relief
Association.
§ 26-3. Officers and members.
Officers and members of the Department shall be chosen and admitted to
membership in accordance with the bylaws of the company which shall
govern the department generally. No person shall become a member of
the Fire Department of the Township or any unit thereof who is under the
age of 18 years. He must likewise be of good moral character. He shall be
physically fit to perform the duties of a fireman, as evidenced by a certificate
to that effect by a practicing physician of the State of New Jersey after
physical examination for that purpose. Officers of the Department shall be
subject to confirmation by the Township Committee prior to taking office.
§ 26-4. Duty requirements.
Every member of the Fire Department shall, in each and every year, perform
at least 60% of duty to be composed of actual attendance and duty at fires
and drills, and a record shall be kept on such attendance and duty by the
Chiefs of the two volunteer fire companies and reported to the municipal
officers annually.
§ 26-5. Administration.
The authority, control, guidance and all other administrative functions of the
Township Fire Department shall be assumed jointly by the Commissioners
of the Fire Districts created on May 11, 1970.
§ 26-6. Rules and regulations.
No rules or regulations shall take effect until a copy thereof has been
delivered to each member of the Department.
§ 26-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-7
21:111
§ 26-7. Exemption certificate.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-59 et seq., a fireman otherwise qualified who
has performed 60% of fire duty during each of seven years shall be entitled
to the issuance of an exempt fireman's certificate and all of the rights and
privileges thereto. Sufficiency of service shall be established by records
of the Department filed annually with the municipal officers. Such records
shall be verified by the chief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-59.20
20.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Incentives for Volunteer Emergency Service Members,
consisting of §§ 26-8 through 26-14, adopted by Ord. No. O-01-40 (§ 3-8 of the Revised
General Ordinances), as amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-9.
§ 26-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 26-7
21:112
Chapter 30
FIRE DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26. Fire prevention — See Ch. 162.
§ 30-1. Establishment.
There are established in the Township fire districts designated as Fire
District No. 1 and Fire District No. 2, the limits of each being more
particularly described in this chapter.
§ 30-2. Fire Commissioners.
§ 30-3. Fire District No. 1.
Fire District No. 1 of the Township is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the center of New Jersey State
Highway No. 9 and the eastern corporate limits of the Township of
Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of the Township of Howell; thence
a. In a westerly direction for a distance along the center of Highway
No. 9 to its intersection with the center of Monmouth County Route
No. 522, and continuing in a westerly direction for a distance along
the center of Route 522 to its intersection with the western corporate
limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of
the Township of Manalapan; thence
b. In a southerly direction for a distance along the western corporate
limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of
the Township of Manalapan, and continuing in a southerly direction
for a distance along the western corporate limits of the Township of
Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of the Township of Millstone,
to the intersection with the southern corporate limits of the Township
of Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of the Township of Jackson
in the County of Ocean; thence
A. The voters of the respective fire districts shall by ballot determine the
amount of money to be raised for the ensuing year, and elect in each of
the districts a Board of Fire Commissioners to consist of five persons.
B. The Boards of Fire Commissioners shall be responsible for the
administration of their respective fire districts pursuant to law.
§ 26-7 FIRE DISTRICTS § 30-3
30:113
c. In an easterly direction for a distance along the southern corporate
limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the Township of Jackson
to the intersection with the eastern corporate limits of the Township of
Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of the Township of Howell;
thence
d. In a northerly direction for a distance along the eastern corporate
limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the Township of Howell
to the point or place of beginning.
§ 30-4. Fire District No. 2.
Fire District No. 2 of the Township is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the center of New Jersey State
Highway No. 9 and the eastern corporate limits of the Township of
Freehold and adjacent to the corporate limits of the Township of Howell;
thence
a. In a westerly direction for a distance along the center of Highway No.
9 to its intersection with the center of Monmouth County Route No.
522, and continuing in a westerly direction for a distance along the
center of Route No. 522 to its intersection with the western corporate
limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of
the Township of Manalapan; thence
b. In a northerly direction for a distance along the western limits of the
Township of Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of the Township
of Manalapan to its intersection with the northern corporate limits
of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits of the
Township of Marlboro; thence
c. In an easterly direction for a distance along the northern corporate
limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the corporate limits
of the Township of Marlboro to its intersection with the eastern
corporate limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the corporate
limits of the Township of Colts Neck; thence
d. In a southerly direction for a distance along the eastern corporate
limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the Township of Colts
Neck, and continuing in a southerly direction for a distance along the
eastern corporate limits of the Township of Freehold adjacent to the
corporate limits of the Township of Howell to the point or place of
beginning.
Chapter 34
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 10.
Board of Health ordinances — See Part III of
the Code.
§ 30-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 30-4
34:114
§ 34-1. Establishment. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-7]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-10, the Township adopts the provisions of
Subdivision B of Article 1, Chapter 3, Title 26 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-3) of the
New Jersey statutes. There shall be a Board of Health of the Township of
Freehold consisting of seven members and two alternates.
§ 34-2. Appointment; term; vacancies. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-7]
§ 34-3. Powers and duties.
A. The members constituting the Board of Health shall be appointed by
resolution of the Township Committee for a term of three years. One of
the members may be, in the discretion of the Township Committee, the
municipal physician, who does not have to be a resident of the
Township. One of the members may be, in the discretion of the
Township Committee, a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey
who shall be a resident of the Township. One of the members may be, in
the discretion of the Township Committee, a school nurse of one of the
Township's schools, who does not have to be a resident of the Township.
One of the members shall be a member of the Township Committee
whose term on such Board shall be concurrent with his/her term on the
Township Committee. All other members constituting the Board of
Health shall be residents of the Township.
B. Two alternate members of the Board of Health may be appointed by
resolution of the Township Committee. Alternate members of the Board
of Health shall be residents of the Township. The alternate members
shall be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The initial
appointment for Alternate No. 1 shall be for two years, and the initial
appointment for Alternate No. 2 shall be for one year. All terms
thereafter shall be for two years.
C. If any vacancies occur among the members or alternates of the Board of
Health, they shall be filled by resolution of the Township Committee but
only for the unexpired portion of such terms.
D. All members and alternates of the Board shall serve without
compensation, except that the members and alternates of the Board
shall be reimbursed by the Township for expenses incurred while
performing any function as a member or alternate of the Board.
A. The Board of Health shall adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. In January of each year, it shall elect a Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary from among its members and create and fill
such other offices as it shall determine. It shall have the power and
authority to employ experts and a staff for enforcement and carrying
out its purposes, including a Sanitarian and other persons provided by
§ 30-4 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 34-3
34:115
Chapter 43
PAYROLL
law and to pay for their services and such other expenses as may be
necessary and proper, not exceeding in all the amount appropriated by
the Township for the use of the Board of Health.21
B. The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and by municipal ordinance. It shall be the duty of the
Board of Health to enforce all ordinances of the Township which relate
to public health or nuisances.
C. The Board of Health shall make all necessary rules and regulations for
the protection of the health of the inhabitants of the Township and to
guard against the spread of contagious diseases, and to prevent by
necessary rules the introduction of diseases, contagious or otherwise,
within the boundaries of the Township.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 34-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 34-3
43:116
ARTICLE I
Payroll Account
[Adopted 1-27-1969 (§ 2-7.3d of the Revised General Ordinances),
as amended through Ord. No. O-91-37; amended in its entirety
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 43-1. Establishment.
There shall be an account to be designated the “Township of Freehold
Payroll Account” and from time to time the Treasurer, on receipt of a
warrant or an amount due the Payroll Account, shall deposit it to the credit
of the Payroll Account for the payment of all salaries and wages and related
payroll taxes and deductions.
§ 43-2. Transfer of salary appropriation to Payroll Account.
The moneys appropriated or to be appropriated for such salaries and wages
and related payroll taxes and deductions, under the budget and in
accordance with the statutes and ordinances controlling the same, shall be
transferred from the applicable funds to the Payroll Account.
§ 43-3. Disbursement by check; errors and adjustments.
Disbursement from the Payroll Account may be made by payroll checks
signed by the Treasurer or Township Administrator and the Mayor or
Deputy Mayor upon preaudit by the Treasurer and approval by the
Township Committee of the entire payroll at the next succeeding meeting of
the Township Committee. In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the
Treasurer shall make proper correction and appropriate record thereof.
§ 43-1 PAYROLL § 43-3
43:117

ARTICLE II
Third-Party Payroll Disbursement
[Adopted 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-2]
§ 43-4. Purpose; definitions.
§ 43-5. Authorization.
§ 43-6. Local unit requirements.
A. The purpose and intent of these regulations is to abide by the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-20.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq.,
governing electronic disbursement controls for payroll purposes.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPROVAL OFFICER — Person(s) responsible for authorizing and
supervising the activities of the payroll service.
PAYROLL SERVICE — Third-party payroll service organization.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Freehold.
A. The Township is authorized to use a payroll service:
(1) To prepare the necessary payment documentation and execute
disbursements from the local unit's bank account on behalf of the
local unit;
(2) To prepare payment documentation, take possession of local unit
funds, and make such disbursements itself on behalf of a local unit;
or
(3) Any combination of Subsections A(1) and (2) above.
B. The following payroll service providers shall be required to comply with
these regulations:
(1) Payroll service providers who use their own customized
programming process to execute disbursements for the local unit;
(2) Payroll service providers who use a third-party processor to
execute disbursements for the local unit.
A. The appointment of a payroll service shall be pursuant to the Local
Public Contracts Law,22 and shall require the contractor to do the
following, not by way of limitation: data collection, agency report
preparation, calculation of withholding, direct deposit of payroll
disbursements, and/or local unit transfer of funds to contractor's
account for subsequent disbursement of payment.
22.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 43-4 PAYROLL § 43-6
43:119
§ 43-7. Payroll service requirements.
§ 43-8. Establishment of service.
Upon the adoption of these regulations, the Township Administrator, with
the assistance of the Chief Financial Officer and Township Attorney, as
necessary, is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract for
payroll service in accordance with all local public contracting laws and
N.J.A.C. 5:30-17. Appointment of the payroll service shall be by separate
resolution of the Township.
B. Any renewal or extension of a contract under these regulations shall be
by resolution.
C. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby appointed the approval officer and
is responsible for authorizing and supervising the activities of the
payroll service and shall further be charged with the reconciliation and
analysis of all general ledger accounts affected by the activities of the
disbursing organization.
D. If required by the contract between the Township and the payroll
service, the payroll service is permitted to hold Township funds pending
transmittal to a payee.
A. A payroll service must meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Report any irregularities that may indicate potential fraud,
noncompliance with appropriate laws, dishonesty or gross
incompetence on the part of the approval officer;
(2) Report circumstances that could jeopardize its ability to continue
operations or otherwise interrupt the services provided to the
Township.
B. A payroll service must meet the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5.
C. All contracts entered into pursuant to these regulations and the laws
authorizing same shall comply with the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:30-17.6.
§ 43-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 43-8
43:120
Chapter 47
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 2.
§ 47-1. Applicability of state personnel rules.
This chapter and all its provisions shall at all times be subject to the
Department of Personnel Rules of the State of New Jersey, which prescribe
basic minimum standards. To the extent that this chapter should at any time
and in any particular provide standards less liberal than those embodied in
the Department of Personnel Rules of the State of New Jersey, the latter
rules shall be deemed applicable. To the extent, however, that the provisions
of this chapter contain benefits or provisions more liberal than the minimum
requirements of the Department of Personnel Rules of the State of New
Jersey, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 47-2. General policies.
A. Declaration of policy. The Township Committee hereby declares the
following principles to constitute the personnel policy of the Township:
(1) The New Jersey State Department of Personnel Law and the
Department of Personnel Rules of the State of New Jersey, which
shall be applicable to municipalities in the state, provide the basic
framework for employment in the Township government.
(2) Employment in the Township government shall be based on merit
and fitness free of personal and political considerations.
(3) Just and equitable incentives and conditions shall be established
and maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the
operation of the Township government.
(4) Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified
and compensated on a uniform basis.
(5) Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions requiring
the application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic
tests and evaluations of knowledge and performance, carried out
through the Township's participation in the New Jersey state civil
service system.
(6) Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of this chapter, and by consideration of the rights
and interests of employees, consistent with the best interest of the
public and the Township.
§ 43-8 PAYROLL § 47-2
43:121
(7) Continuity of employment shall be subject to good behavior,
satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the performance of
work and availability of funds.
(8) In any case where either the eligibility for an employment benefit
or the amount of any employment benefit depends on longevity of
service to the Township, it shall be understood that it must be
continuous, uninterrupted service. [Added 4-24-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-5]
B. Power of appointment. All employees, police officers and department
heads of the Township shall be appointed and promoted by the
Administrator except where the power to appoint rests with other
Township boards or bodies as provided for herein or by general law or
ordinance.
C. Allocation of offices and positions to classified or unclassified service.
All offices and positions of the Township shall be and are hereby
allocated to the classified service or unclassified service.
(1) Unclassified service. The unclassified service shall include the
following:
(a) All elected officials and members of citizen boards and
committees.
(b) The Administrator, Clerk, Attorney, Engineer, Auditor, Building
Inspector and Treasurer.
(c) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to service
without compensation.
(d) Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional
service.
(e) All other offices or positions that are so classified by Rule 7(2)
of the Department of Personnel Rules of the State of New
Jersey.
(f) Tax Assessor. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-32]
(g) Executive Secretary. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
(h) Confidential aide. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-32]
(i) Director of Finance/Chief Financial Officer. [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-32]
(j) Deputy Municipal Clerk. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
(k) Director of Welfare. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
§ 47-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-2
43:122
§ 47-3. Position Classification Plan.
(l) Tax Collector/Tax Search Officer. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-32]
(m) Deputy Municipal Administrator. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-32]
(n) Purchasing Agent. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
(o) Research Scientist. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
(p) Municipal Court Director. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
(q) Public Information Officer. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
(r) Secretary, Board/Commission. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-32]
(s) Personnel Officer. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-32]
(t) Municipal department head. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-32]
(2) Classified service. The classified service shall include all other
positions in the Township service that are not specifically placed in
the unclassified service by the above provisions of this subsection,
or which are excluded from the classified service by Rule 7(2) of the
Department of Personnel Rules of the State of New Jersey.
A. Establishment. The Administrator shall make or cause to have made an
analysis of the duties and responsibilities of all full-time positions in the
Township, except his own position. He shall recommend in writing to
the Committee a Position Classification Plan. Within 30 days after the
adoption of a Position Classification Plan by resolution of the
Committee, the Administrator shall assign each position to an
appropriate class in accordance with the approved Position
Classification Plan of the Township Committee developed in
cooperation with the Merit Service Board of the State of New Jersey.
B. Basis of position classification. Each position shall be assigned or
allocated to an appropriate job classification on the basis of the kind
and level of its duties and responsibilities to the end that all positions in
the same classification shall be sufficiently alike to permit the use of a
single descriptive title, the same tests of competence and the same
salary range, thus carrying out the basic principle of classification
which is equal pay for equal work. A job classification may contain one
position or a number of positions. The Administrator shall from time to
§ 47-2 PAYROLL § 47-3
43:123
time review the job classification and submit a report to the Committee
setting forth his recommendations.
C. Change in classification plan.
(1) The classification plan may be amended from time to time by the
Township Committee. Such changes may result from the need for
creating new positions, changes in organization or changes in
assigned duties and responsibilities and will be effected in
cooperation with the Merit Service Board of the State of New
Jersey.
(2) The Administrator shall review all requests for creation of new
positions, the abolition or consolidation of present positions,
reclassification of positions to different job classes or the
reallocation of positions to new salary ranges.
(a) He shall study the current duties and responsibilities of the
position concerned and make recommendations in writing to
the Township Committee that the appropriate action necessary
to insure the correct classification and allocation of the
position be taken.
(3) Each department head shall report to the Administrator any
changes in his organization or assignment of duties and
responsibilities to a given employee which would result in changes
in the Position Classification Plan or in the classification of any of
the positions in his department.
(4) An employee may submit a request in writing to the Administrator
at any time for a review of the duties and responsibilities of his
position. Such a request shall be submitted through his department
head and shall include the employee's own description of his
current duties and responsibilities. The Administrator shall then
make an investigation of the position to determine its correct
allocation. He shall report his findings in writing to the Committee
and shall furnish a copy to the employee requesting the review and
to his department head.
(5) An employee may submit a request for a review of the duties and
responsibilities of his position directly to the Merit Service Board of
the State of New Jersey.
D. Abolishment of position. A position may be abolished or the number of
personnel reduced by the Administrator for reasons of economy or
because of reorganization within a department. A permanent employee
must receive written notice of such action 45 days prior to its effective
date. In the Police Department such events shall be governed by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq. Every effort shall be made by
the Administrator, in cooperation with the Merit Service Board of the
State of New Jersey, to reassign any affected permanent employee to
another position in the Township service for which the employee may be
§ 47-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-3
43:124
§ 47-4. Pay Plan.
qualified. If no such position is available immediately, the name of
the affected employee shall be kept on file, and he must be offered
employment should a vacancy occur in a position for which he is
qualified prior to taking applications for the vacancy. If an employee is
demoted because of economy or departmental reorganization, he shall
be placed in the new salary range in the same step he held in his prior
position before demotion.
A. Notice to employee of pay and salary range; basis for further increase.
After each class of position has been assigned to a salary range and the
pay plan and rules for its administration have been adopted by the
Committee, each employee shall be advised of his rate of pay and the
salary range to which his position title has been assigned. When an
employee attains the maximum rate of the salary range for his position,
he shall not receive further salary increases unless:
(1) His position is reclassified.
(2) He is promoted to another position having a higher salary range.
(3) His position's salary range is increased.
(4) A general salary increase is granted to all employees.
B. New appointments. A new employee shall be paid at the minimum of the
approved salary range for the position to which he is appointed. In
exceptional cases, the Administrator may recommend an appointment
at a rate above the minimum subject to the approval of the Township
Committee.
C. Demotions. An employee demoted for disciplinary reasons to a
classification having a lower salary range shall receive a salary as
specified by the Administrator but which shall not exceed the maximum
step of the new range.
D. Temporary appointments. When a vacancy is filled by a temporary
appointment the employee shall be paid at the minimum of the
approved salary range for the position. In exceptional cases the
Administrator may make an appointment at a rate above the minimum
but not in excess of one step below the maximum.
E. Reinstatements. When an employee is reinstated within two years
following a layoff to a position in the same classification, he shall enter
the position at the same salary in the salary range as he received in his
previous position. His service shall be considered continuous for the
purpose of promotion, seniority, layoff, and vacation except following a
dismissal.
F. Re-employment. When an employee is re-employed following a
resignation in good standing to a position in the same classification, he
§ 47-3 PAYROLL § 47-4
43:125
§ 47-5. Appointment.
shall enter the position at the minimum rate of the salary range for
the position. However, if his resignation has been of less than one year
duration, he shall enter the position at the same salary which he held at
the time of his resignation.
G. Transfer. If an employee transfers into another classification within the
Township, he shall not lose vacation or sick leave credits.
A. Basis for original appointment. Original appointments to vacancies in
the Township service shall be based on merit, fitness and ability, which
shall be determined by competitive examinations insofar as practicable,
and shall be in accordance with the Civil Service Rules of the State of
New Jersey.
B. Temporary appointments. In the absence of an appropriate list or for
the filling of temporary or seasonal positions, or temporarily in the case
of emergencies, vacancies may be filled by temporary appointments by
the Administrator. Such temporary appointments shall have a maximum
duration of two months and may be extended for a similar period.
C. Provisional appointments. Pending the establishment of an appropriate
eligible list, vacancies in permanent positions may be filled by
provisional appointments. Such appointments shall continue only until
an appropriate eligible list is established. Such provisional employees
must possess minimum qualifications established for the vacant
position.
D. Physical examination. Any job applicant may be required to submit to a
physical examination by the Township physician or a designated
alternate. Psychological or psychiatric examinations by a psychologist
or psychiatrist designated by the Township may also be required.
E. Probationary period.
(1) All employees appointed permanently to the classified service shall
serve a probationary period of 90 days. At the expiration of the
probationary period, the Administrator may discontinue the service
of any such employee if, in the appointing authority's opinion, the
employee is unwilling or unable to perform the duties of his
position in a satisfactory manner, or if the employee is of such
reputation and habits as not to merit continuance in the service of
the Township. In every case, the Administrator shall notify the
employee in writing of the discontinuance and the reasons for the
same, and shall forward a copy of the notice to the Department of
Civil Service of the State of New Jersey.
(2) A ninety-day probationary period shall also apply to an employee
promoted to a higher classification. Such probationary status shall
in no way affect the rights and status in the original or lower
classification.
§ 47-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-5
43:126
§ 47-6. Promotions.
(3) Each new police officer shall be required to satisfactorily complete
a basic police training program recognized by the New Jersey
Police Training Commission during the first year and prior to
receiving a permanent appointment. The ninety-day probationary
period does not commence for a police officer until he has
completed such recognized police training program.
F. Permanent status. Classified employees who satisfactorily complete
their probationary period shall have permanent employment status,
conditioned upon good behavior and satisfactory job performance. They
shall be subject to removal by the Administrator only for cause or for
reason of economy, after proper notice and the opportunity to be heard,
as set forth under the Department of Personnel Rules of the State of
New Jersey.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PROMOTION — An advancement in classification having:
(1) New duties of greater difficulty or responsibility.
(2) A salary range having greater maximum.
B. Effect of reclassification. When there is a major change in the duties or
responsibilities of a position resulting in its reallocation to a higher
classification, the position shall be considered vacant and subject to
filling under promotional procedures. The incumbent in the reclassified
position may be permitted to serve pending promotional procedures.
C. Permanent promotions.
(1) Vacancies shall be filled by utilizing competitive promotional
examinations, in accordance with the Department of Personnel
Rules of the State of New Jersey.
(2) Where the Administrator, after consultation with the New Jersey
Department of Personnel, finds that no employee is qualified for
promotion to the vacancy, he may order competitive examination,
open to candidates outside the Township's employ. In postexamination
selection, the Administrator shall give appropriate
consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record of past
performance and the length and quality of his service.
(3) Selection shall be made from the top three candidates, as
determined by the examination process of the Department of
Personnel of the State of New Jersey.
D. Provisional promotions. Pending the availability of a suitable eligibility
list, the Administrator may fill vacancies by a provisional promotion.
§ 47-5 PAYROLL § 47-7
43:127
§ 47-7. Separation from service.
A. Types of separation. Classified employees who have acquired
permanent employment status may be temporarily suspended from the
Township's employ by layoff or suspension, or permanently separated
by resignation or dismissal, subject at all times to the rules and
regulations of the Department of Personnel of the State of New Jersey.
B. Layoff. Whenever there is a lack of work or a lack of funds requiring a
reduction in the number of employees in a department of the Township
government, the required reductions shall be made in such job
classification or classifications as the Township may designate. As
determined by the Administrator, employees shall be laid off in the
inverse order of their length of service within each affected job class in
a particular department or division. All provisional employees shall be
laid off before probationary employees, and all probationary employees
shall be laid off before any permanent employees. Permanent (including
probationary) employees so affected shall be given a minimum of 45
days' notice. Provisional employees so affected shall be given a
minimum of two weeks' notice or two weeks' pay in lieu thereof.
C. Retirement. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Employees enrolled in the Public Employees Retirement System of
the State of New Jersey are subject to the requirements and
provisions of that plan.
(2) Employees are eligible to retire with full benefits at age 60, and
with reduced benefits at any age after 25 years of service.
(3) Police officers are eligible to retire with full benefits at age 55, and
with reduced benefits at any age after 25 years of service.
(4) Medical benefits.
(a) The Township will provide medical benefits upon eligibility for
retirement to any elected, full-time or tenured employee who
attained the status as an elected, full-time or tenured employee
on or before December 31, 2009, and who shall have attained
either of the following: [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-40; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-5]
[1] Twenty-five years of pensionable service and 25 years of
uninterrupted service to the Township and being 50 years
of age or older; or
[2] Twenty years of pensionable service and 20 years of
uninterrupted service to the Township and being 62 years
of age or older.
(b) Medical benefits will cover the employee and the employee's
spouse to the extent in effect at time of eligibility for such
retirement.
§ 47-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-7
43:128
§ 47-8. Compensation.
(c) In the event both spouses are eligible for benefits under this
subsection, the Township retains the discretion to determine
the coverage and plan to be provided. For example, the
Township may determine to provide a husband-and-wife plan to
provide coverage to both retirees, or it may determine to
provide a single coverage plan to each. [Added 7-25-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-29]
(d) When a retiree who qualifies for benefits under this subsection
becomes eligible for health care benefits coverage under any
federal plan, the benefit provided by the Township shall
become secondary coverage. [Added 7-25-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-29]
D. Resignation. An employee may resign from his position by tendering a
written resignation to his department director, who, in turn, shall
forward it to the Township Administrator. All resignations shall be
considered as binding but not as being a resignation in good standing.
Unless there are disciplinary charges pending against the employee,
the Township Administrator shall notify the employee of acceptance of
his resignation in good standing. An employee shall give a minimum of
two weeks' notice before the effective date of his resignation. Failure to
provide said notice may result in loss of vacation and/or sick credits
which may have accrued pursuant to this chapter and the civil service
rules and regulations.
E. Involuntary separation of full-time unclassified employees. In the event
of the involuntary separation of a full-time unclassified employee, the
employee shall receive 60 days' notice (including accumulated vacation
leave), or be compensated at the rate of one day's wages for each day
less than the 60 days for which notice is required to be given, except in
cases of disciplinary dismissal for cause.
A. Pay periods. The Township normally shall pay its employees on a
semimonthly payroll schedule, that is, twice per month or a total of 24
times annually. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
B. Computation of daily and hourly rates. As not all payroll periods consist
of the same number of days, the daily rate of pay of each employee
normally shall be 1/260th of his annual salary. The hourly rate shall
normally be computed by dividing the annual rate by 2080.23
C. Deductions for leave without pay. Deductions in salary for leave without
pay shall be computed on the basis of hourly rate.
D. Compensation for overtime.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 47-7 PAYROLL § 47-8
43:129
§ 47-9. Hours of work.
(1) Employees, including members of the Police Department, may be
compensated for overtime work when the compensation has been
recommended by the department head and payment authorized by
the Administrator. In all instances overtime compensation shall
commence only after the employee has worked the full 40 hours
during the workweek for which overtime compensation is sought.
Holidays and vacation days may be counted toward the 40 hours for
overtime but not sick days. Authorized overtime compensation
shall be computed at an hourly rate equal to 1 1/2 times the
equivalent hourly rate.
(2) When an employee works a prescribed workweek of less than 40
hours, overtime pay shall be computed at the normal equivalent
hourly rate up to 40 hours after which the time-and-one-half
provisions would take effect.
(3) For employees on specialized activities, working on a two-week,
eighty-hour basis, overtime pay of 1 1/2 times the normal hourly
equivalent shall take effect only after the employee has worked 80
hours in a pay period. Employees working a prescribed two-week
pay period of less than 80 hours shall be paid overtime on the basis
of their normal equivalent hourly rate up to 80 hours, after which
the time-and-one-half provision would take effect.
(4) Department heads are not eligible to receive overtime
compensation.
E. Salary increments. Salary increments may be granted to each employee
effective January 1 of each year or on their anniversary date of
employment with the Township until the employee's salary has reached
the maximum salary provided for his position title. No employee,
however, shall be granted an annual salary increment until his
department director has certified in writing to the Administrator that,
during the past year, the employee's performance and service were
such as to be deserving of an increase, setting forth the basis for such
conclusion. In the case of employees who will have served less than one
full year as of January 1, the salary increase, if any, to be effective at
that time shall be specified by the Administrator at the time of
employment.24
A. Regular workweek. The official workweek of the Township shall be a
five-day, forty-hour week. The Township Committee, however, may
reduce the hours of work required of employees in specific departments
to not less than 35 hours per week. Time periods designated for lunch
shall not be considered in determining hours worked. It is recognized
that the duties of certain employees require attendance at evening
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 47-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-9
43:130
§ 47-10. Holidays.
meetings, etc., and time spent at such meetings as part of the regular
duties of the employee shall not constitute overtime.
B. Emergency. A department head may require any officer or employee to
be in attendance for work whenever he shall determine that a public
exigency or emergency so requires.
C. Flex-time. Department heads may, with administrative review and
approval, institute a flex schedule policy, referred to as "flex-time." Flextime
policy and procedures are as follows:
(1) Each flex period shall be two weeks in length.
(2) With departmental approval, employees may begin work as early as
7:30 a.m. and work until as late as 5:30 p.m.
(3) All accumulated flex-time must be used during the next two-week
period.
(4) With administrative approval, department heads will determine the
department's employees eligible to participate in the flex-time
policy.
(5) Core-time is the time period during which all employees must be at
their work stations, 9:30 a.m. through 3:30 p.m., excluding lunch
and breaks.
(6) Department heads will be responsible to keep accurate records of
all employees' time. Copies of said schedule are to be submitted to
personnel at the end of each pay period.
(7) Accumulated flex-time hours are to be used in the minimum of twohour
time blocks.
D. Additional personal leave. Additional leave without pay may be granted
by the Department of Administration, upon the request of the employee,
for up to 10 days in a calendar year, in one-day increments.
A. Not applicable to Police Department. Due to the emergency nature of
the work of the Police Department and due to the fact that members
thereof do not receive normal holiday allowances because of the
peculiar nature of their employment, each member of the Police
Department shall be entitled to a maximum of 13 days of vacation leave
per year with pay in addition to the amount of vacation leave with pay
allowable provided for in the schedule set forth in § 47-11. The
Township Committee shall designate the actual number of paid holidays
annually and appropriate funds accordingly on a straight-time basis. It
is the intent of this subsection to compensate police officers for holidays
either by additional salary or by compensatory vacation leave. Police
officers with less than one year of service are entitled to the above on a
pro rata basis.
§ 47-9 PAYROLL § 47-10
43:131
§ 47-11. Vacations.
B. Paid holidays.
(1) The following official holidays with pay shall be observed by the
Township.
January 1, known as New Year's Day
January 15, known as the birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr.
February 12, known as Lincoln's birthday
The third Monday in February, known as Washington's birthday
Good Friday
The last Monday in May, known as Memorial Day
July 4, known as Independence Day
The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day
General Election Day
The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day.
The fourth Monday in October, known as Veteran's Day
The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day
The Friday after Thanksgiving Day
December 25, known as Christmas Day
(2) If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the following
Monday. In the event that a holiday falls on a Saturday, each
employee shall be entitled to a compensatory free day to be
scheduled by the Municipal Administrator. The Municipal
Administrator may permit an employee to work on a holiday at
straight time.
(3) The Township Administrator may designate certain Township
holidays as floating holidays. As such, all department/offices must
remain open to the public. Any employee who works on a floating
holiday shall be entitled to a compensatory free day scheduled by
the department head.
C. Compensation for working on holidays. Where it is necessary to
maintain service requiring an employee to work on an official holiday,
such employee shall be compensated by being permitted to take an
equal amount of time off with pay on a regular working day at a time
approved by the Municipal Administrator.
D. Not charged against vacation or sick leave. In the event that an official
holiday is observed during an employee's vacation, he shall be entitled
to an additional vacation day, and should an official holiday occur while
an employee is on sick leave, he shall not have that holiday charged
against his sick leave.
§ 47-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-11
43:132
A. Amount of vacation leave.
(1) All contractual employees who are permanent and full time,
whether classified or unclassified, shall be granted annual leave,
with pay, for vacation purposes pursuant to the prevailing
collective bargaining agreement between the employee’s
negotiating unit and the Township. All other permanent full-time
employees of the Township shall be granted annual leave, with pay,
for vacation purposes during each calendar year in accordance
with the following schedule based on length of employment as of
the anniversary date of the current year. [Amended 7-25-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-29; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-5 ]
Length of Uninterrupted
Employment
(years of service)
Vacation Leave
(working days)
Up to 1 1 for each month of service
1 to 5 12
6 to 10 15
11 to 15 16
16 to 20 19
21 and over 22
(2) In determining length of service for this purpose, only the most
recent consecutive years of service for each employee in all
capacities shall apply. Department heads shall be entitled to an
additional three working days of vacation during each year of
service over and above that to which their length of service would
normally entitle them. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-41]
B. Basis for vacation leave; accumulation.
(1) Vacation leave shall be considered to be on a calendar-year basis
and shall not accumulate following the twelve-month period within
which the employee is entitled to same. Failure to use vacation
leave during the year to which the employee is entitled to same
shall cause a forfeiture of such vacation leave.
(2) Full-time and permanent part-time employees shall not be eligible
for vacation leave until they have been so employed for six
consecutive months or more. Permanent part-time employees are
eligible for vacation leave on a pro rata basis. Temporary part-time
employees shall not be eligible for vacation leave. If any vacation
leave is to be given to full-time temporary employees, it shall be
negotiated at the time of employment. New probationary
employees shall be entitled to one working day of vacation leave for
each month of the first year up to a maximum of 10 working days.
§ 47-11 PAYROLL § 47-11
43:133
§ 47-12. Leaves of absence.
(3) Use of vacation leave during a time beyond the twelve-month
period within which the employee was entitled may be permitted,
but only upon and with the consent of the Administrator.
(4) Vacation leave subject to the approval of the department head and
the Administrator may be taken from time to time in units other
than full days.
(5) At the time of separation from service, an employee shall be
entitled to any full days vacation pay to which he is entitled during
the year of separation and have not previously used but earned.
(6) Employees shall not be paid for vacation leave earned and unused
except with the permission of the Administrator.
A. Sick leave.
(1) As used in this subsection, "sick leave" shall mean paid leave that
may be granted to each full-time classified and full-time
unclassified employee who through sickness or injury becomes
incapacitated to a degree that makes it impossible or highly
impractical for him to perform the duties of his position or who is
quarantined by a physician because he has been exposed to a
contagious disease. Part-time permanent employees are eligible for
sick leave on a prorated basis. Part-time and full-time temporary
employees are not eligible for sick leave.
(2) Full-time employees shall earn sick leave on the basis of 15 days of
sick leave per year. In the first year of employment, employees shall
be entitled to one day of sick leave for each month of employment.
(3) Sick leave can be accumulated without limit during each
employee's length of service.
(4) Accumulated sick leave may be used by an employee for personal
illness, illness in his immediate family (not to exceed five working
days in one calendar year without the approval of the Municipal
Administrator), quarantine restrictions, pregnancy or disabling
injuries. The term "immediate family" shall mean and refer only to
the employee's spouse, child, foster-child, parent, brother, sister,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, grandchild
or any member of the immediate household or so determined by a
collective bargaining agreement. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-48]
(5) When an employee is absent from work because of illness for more
than one day, his supervisor may require the employee to submit a
certificate from the employee's physician or the Township
Physician relating to his illness. In the case of illness of a chronic or
recurring nature causing an employee's periodic or repeated
§ 47-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-12
43:134
absence for one day or less, his department director may require
one medical certificate for every six-month period.
(6) An employee, who was hired and began employment prior to March
1, 2016, provided he is not a member of an organized bargaining
unit, and provided further that other employment agreements do
not provide otherwise, after 10 years of service shall be paid for 1/2
his/her accumulated sick leave upon retirement under the Public
Employee's Retirement System or the Police and Firemens'
Retirement System. The amount of sick leave paid hereunder shall
be limited as follows: [Amended 2-15-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-3;
12-18-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-36; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-1]
(a) Accrued compensation shall not exceed $15,000 and is not
available to any employee who resigns from service without
being entitled to retirement benefits.
(b) Those employees already vested in accrued sick leave
entitlements in excess of $15,000 as of the date of adoption of
this ordinance,25 will be limited to the amount of entitlement as
of that day, in an amount not to exceed $17,500. This accrued
compensation will be certified to the Township Committee and
the employee by the Township Administrator and will be
recorded in the employee's file pending retirement.
(c) No employee who was hired or who began employment on or
after March 1, 2016, shall receive any benefit under this
Subsection A(6) unless such benefit is preserved in a Collective
Negotiating Agreement.
B. Special leave.
(1) A full-time employee who is subpoenaed as a witness in a civil or
criminal case not involving him in his capacity as a Township
employee, or an employee who is called and serves on a jury, shall
be granted paid leave for that period of time in which he is officially
involved with the court in such capacity; however, he shall be
entitled to be paid only the difference between his salary and the
stipend paid for his services in such capacity.
(2) In the event that an employee wishes to observe a religious or
national holiday for which no regular holiday has been declared, he
may charge the time off to accumulated vacation leave, provided
that he gives proper notification to his supervisor.
C. Leave of absence as result of injury in line of duty.
(1) When a full-time employee is injured in the line of duty, the
Township Committee may pass a resolution giving the employee up
25.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. O-07-36.
§ 47-12 PAYROLL § 47-12
43:135
to one year's leave of absence with pay. When such action is taken,
the employee shall not be charged any sick leave time for time lost
due to such injury. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(2) Prior to the passage of the resolution referred to in Subsection A,
the employee shall agree in writing to reimburse the Township to
the extent of any temporary disability benefits under workman's
compensation he may receive as a result of the injury.
D. Absences of less than six months.
(1) Absences for periods of less than six months may be granted by the
Municipal Administrator without formal resolution as provided in
Subsection C(1) above. Such wage continuation is related to
uninterrupted length of service as outlined in the following
schedule of benefits: [Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-5]
Length of Uninterrupted
Service Weeks of Salary Continuation
Under 1 year 1
1 year to 2 years 3
2 years to 3 years 5
3 years to 5 years 7
5 years to 7 years 9
7 years to 9 years 11
9 years to 10 years 13
(2) For each additional year, three additional weeks up to a maximum
of one year at full pay.
(3) If an employee is unable to return to work and above supplemental
benefits are exhausted, he may nevertheless be eligible for
workers' compensation or other disability benefits.
E. Maternity leave. Maternity leave may be granted for a period of six
months, provided that the request for such leave is made in writing to
the Administrator no later than the end of the fourth month of
pregnancy. This leave may be extended for an additional six months
with the approval of the Administrator and the Township Committee.
Requests for maternity leave must be favorably endorsed by the
Department Director and approved by the Municipal Administrator
before becoming effective. Such leave, if granted, shall be without pay.
Under no circumstances shall an employee work beyond the sixth
month of pregnancy.
F. Military leave.
(1) All provisions of N.J.A.C. 4A:6-1.11 are adopted by reference herein
and are modified by Subsection F(2) and (3) below to provide
additional benefits to the extent allowed by law.
§ 47-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-12
43:136
(2) Any permanent employee, part-time or full-time, who is a member
of the National Guard, Naval Militia, Air National Guard, or a
reserve component of any of the Armed Forces of the United States
who is required to engage in field training, shall be granted a
military leave of absence with regular pay for the period of such
training as is authorized by law. The paid leave of absence shall be
in addition to his vacation. Permanent part-time employees shall
receive pay for such leave on a pro rated basis.
(3) When a full-time or part-time permanent employee has been called
to active duty or inducted into the military or naval forces of the
United States, he shall be granted an indefinite leave of absence
without pay for the duration of such active military service, except
for the first 12 months thereof, he shall receive payment for the
differential, if any, between the compensation he receives from the
military and the compensation he would have received from the
Township, provided that he does not voluntarily extend such
service. Each employee must be reinstated without loss of
privileges or seniority, provided that he reports for duty with the
Township within 60 days following his honorable discharge from
military service. He should notify the Township of his intent to
report for duty 30 days prior to his discharge from military service.
G. Leave without pay. Leave without pay may be granted to full-time and
part-time permanent employees and to full-time unclassified
employees. Normally, it shall be granted only when the employee has
used his accumulated sick and vacation leave in the case of illness, or
his vacation leave if leave without pay is requested for reasons other
than illness. Written request for leave without pay must be initiated by
the employee and approved by the Municipal Administrator upon
favorable recommendation of the department director. Such leave,
except for military leave without pay, shall not be approved for a period
of longer than three months at one time. The Township Committee may
extend such leave for an additional six months or any portion thereof.
H. Requests for leave. A request for any type of leave shall be made on a
form prescribed by the Township Committee. Such request, whenever
possible, shall be made far enough in advance to permit approval, and
at the same time, to permit coverage for the particular employment so
that municipal service shall not suffer. In the case of sick leave, the
employee shall notify his supervisor immediately if he is unable to
report for work.
I. Compensatory leave. In lieu of overtime compensation, any employee,
including police officers, may be granted leave with pay as
compensation for overtime work in accordance with the provisions of
§ 47-8D.
J. Personal leave. All full-time noncontractual Township employees shall
be granted two personal days during each calendar year in addition to
existing sick leave and vacation allotments. Personal days may be used
§ 47-12 PAYROLL § 47-12
43:137
§ 47-13. Political activity.
§ 47-14. Conflicts of interest.
for such purposes as religious holidays or events, personal birthdays,
etc. All personal days must be used during the calendar year earned.
K. Deferred Sick Leave Trust Fund. There is hereby established a trust
fund to be known as the "Deferred Sick Leave Trust Fund" (hereafter
the "fund") pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:3-15 and regulations established by
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
A. Policy. It shall be the policy of the Township to appoint all employees,
either classified or unclassified, without regard to political
considerations. For the purposes of this section, Township employees
are defined to include full-time, temporary, probationary, seasonal or
part-time personnel appointment by the Township receiving an annual
or hourly reimbursement for their services from the Township.
B. Certain political activities prohibited.
(1) Township employees shall not engage in any political activities
during working hours or on Township property.
(2) Township employees shall not seek or accept nomination, election
or appointment to any partisan municipal, county, state or federal
office without first obtaining a leave of absence.
(3) Township employees shall not make financial contributions for the
purpose of supporting the nomination or the election of any person
to public office or party position. No person shall invite, demand or
accept payment or contribution from Township employees for
campaign purposes.
(4) Township employees whose principal employment is in connection
with any activity financed in whole or in part by loans or grants
made by the United States or by any federal agency may also be
subject to the restrictions of the Federal Hatch Act. The Hatch Act
restrictions apply only to political activity which is partisan.
C. Rights preserved. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
Township employees from becoming or continuing to be members of
any political party, club or organization, provided that they do not serve
as officers of such party, club or organization; attending political
meetings; expressing their views on political matters outside of working
hours and off Township property; circulating petitions on public
questions; or voting with complete freedom in any election.
A. Conflicts of interest prohibited.
(1) No officer or employee elected or appointed in the Township shall
be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract with the
§ 47-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-14
43:138
§ 47-15. Outside employment.
§ 47-16. Departmental rules and regulations.
Township, or in the compensation for work done or for materials
or supplies furnished to the Township or to any contractor or
other person furnishing the same to the Township, nor shall he
participate in any profits of such contractor or other person or
receive any compensation, commission, gift or other reward for his
services except the fee or compensation prescribed pursuant to
law.
(2) No officer or employee elected or appointed in the Township shall
accept or solicit anything of value as consideration for or in
connection with the discharge of his official duties other than the
fee or compensation prescribed pursuant to law.
B. Violations. Any officer or employee who violates any provision of this
section or of any statute or ordinance relating to conflict of interest
shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal
from office therefor. Any officer or employee who shall knowingly
permit any provision of this section to be violated by any of his
subordinates shall also be guilty of misconduct in office and liable to
removal therefor.
A. Full-time employees, in either the classified or unclassified service,
shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside business
activities without the prior approval of the department head and the
Municipal Administrator. Applications for permission to accept outside
employment shall be made in writing to the department director who
shall forward the same to the Municipal Administrator with his
recommendation. The application shall set forth pertinent information
concerning the type of activity to be engaged in, the name and address
of the prospective employer, and the hours of such employment.
B. No application for permission to accept outside employment shall be
approved by the Municipal Administrator if, in his judgment, there is
any reasonable probability that such outside employment will interfere
with the employee's performance or compromise the employee's
position with the Township through a conflict of interest or if such
employment shall exceed 20 hours per week.
A. Subject to the approval of the Township Committee, the Administrator
may establish, amend and supplement rules and regulations for
governing the internal operations of any department and the conduct
and deportment of its personnel. Departmental rules and regulations
shall not be inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of any statute,
this chapter or other ordinance of the Township.
B. The rules and regulations shall be in writing, signed by the
Administrator, approved by the Township Committee and filed in the
§ 47-14 PAYROLL § 47-16
43:139
§ 47-17. Disciplinary actions.
office of the Township Clerk. They shall be binding on all persons
subject to the jurisdiction of the department. A written copy of the rules
and regulations shall be distributed to the personnel of the department
affected and shall be posted in the headquarters of the department.
Copies shall also be available to the personnel of the department upon
request.
A. Dismissal or demotion. A permanent employee may be dismissed from
the service or demoted for cause. The causes sufficient for removal
from the service shall include the following:
(1) Neglect of duty.
(2) Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave
has expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked;
provided that any regular member or officer of the Police
Department who shall be absent from duty without just cause for a
term of five days continuously and without leave of absence shall,
at the expiration of such five days, cease to be a member of the
Police Department as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122, as amended.
(3) Incompetency, inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical
disability.
(4) Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
(5) Intoxication while on duty.
(6) Commission of a criminal act.
(7) Participation in any political activity prohibited by this chapter.
(8) Disobedience of the departmental rules and regulations established
pursuant to this Code.
(9) Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
(10) Any violation of the Township disciplinary guidelines.26
B. Suspension.
(1) When in the opinion of the Administrator an employee's
performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of
dismissal, the Administrator may suspend or furlough the employee
without pay, or with reduced pay.
(2) An employee who shall be suspended, fined or demoted more than
three times in any one year, or more than five days at one time, or
for a period of more than 15 days in the aggregate in any calendar
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 47-16 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-17
43:140
§ 47-18. Personnel records.
The Administrator shall provide that adequate personnel records are
maintained for each employee of the Township. Such records should include
dates of appointments and promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations,
disciplinary actions, leave of any type taken and accumulated, merit ratings,
and any appropriate additional information.
§ 47-19. Medical examinations.
The Municipal Administrator may schedule medical examinations for all
Township employees annually or more frequently if required.
§ 47-20. Surety bonds.
§ 47-21. Grievance procedures.
year shall have the right of appeal to the Civil Service Department,
and the Civil Service Department shall have the power to revoke or
modify the action of the appointing authority.
A. Required. Every officer or employee of the Township who, by virtue of
his office or position, is entrusted with the receipt, custody or
expenditure of public moneys or funds, and any other officer or
employee who may be required so to do by the Township Committee
shall, before entering upon the duties of his office or position, execute
and deliver a surety bond in such amount as may be fixed by the
Township Committee, binding him to the Township in its corporate
name and conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of his
duty. Each officer or employee required by law to give bond shall
execute such bond with sufficient surety and deliver the same to the
Clerk, except that the Clerk shall deliver his bond to the Treasurer,
before he enters upon the discharge of his duties of the office or
employment.
B. Failure to obtain. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and
deliver his bond as herein required within 30 days after due notification
of his election or appointment, his office or position may be declared
vacant by the Committee.
C. Form and requisites. In every case where any person is required by the
laws of the state or by any ordinance of the Township to give a bond for
the faithful performance of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in this state, and the
premium shall be paid by the Township. Each bond shall be approved by
the Township Attorney as to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or more blanket
bonds when so approved.
A. General policy. It is the policy of the Township that every employee at all
times be treated fairly, courteously and with respect. Conversely, each
§ 47-17 PAYROLL § 47-21
43:141
§ 47-22. Code of Ethics.
The Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 through N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.12, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated
by reference.
employee is expected to accord the same treatment to his associates,
his supervisors and the public.
B. Verbal grievance.
(1) Whenever an employee has a grievance he should first present it
verbally to his supervisor. It is the responsibility of the supervisor
to arrange a mutually satisfactory settlement of the grievance
within 48 hours of the time when it was first presented to him or
failing in that, within that time to advise the employee of his
inability to do so.
(2) When an employee is informed by his supervisor that he is unable,
within the discretion permitted him, to arrange a mutually
satisfactory solution to the grievance, the employee must, if he
wishes to present the grievance to higher authority, do so in writing
in the following manner.
C. Formal written grievance. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-6]
(1) The employee shall prepare the grievance in writing in duplicate.
The grievance should be stated as completely and as clearly as
possible in order to permit prompt handling. One copy of the
grievance shall be immediately placed in the hands of the
Administrator.
(2) The other copy of the grievance shall be presented by the employee
to his immediate supervisor to whom the grievance was made
verbally. The supervisor shall report the facts and events which led
up to its presentation in writing, including in his written report any
verbal answer he may have previously given to the employee
concerning the grievance. Within 48 hours after receipt of the
written grievance, the supervisor must present it with the
information required of him to the Administrator.27
(3) The Administrator shall attempt to find a mutually satisfactory
solution to the grievance within seven days.28
(4) All papers and documents relating to a grievance and its
disposition will be placed in the employee's personnel file.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 47-21 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-23
43:142
§ 47-23. Restrictions on award of professional contracts. [Added
4-22-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-8; amended 9-30-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-22]
A. Preamble.
(1) Whereas, professional business entities are exempt from public
bidding requirements; and
(2) Whereas, there is the potential for professional business entities to
make substantial political contributions to the election campaigns
of the local government elected officers who are ultimately
responsible for awarding professional service contracts; and
(3) Whereas, substantial local political contributions from
professionals receiving discretionary contracts from the elected
officials who receive such contributions raise reasonable concerns
of the part of taxpayers as to their trust in the process of local
government, as well as the quality or cost of services received; and
(4) Whereas, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2,
municipalities have the right to establish rules and procedures for
contracting with professional business entities;
(5) Now, therefore, be it ordained, that the policy of the Township will
be to set maximum amounts professional business entities may
contribute politically beyond which they become ineligible to
receive a public professional service contract from the Township.
B. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain contributors.
(1) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
municipality or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, including
all boards and commissions, or any of its independent authorities,
as the case may be, shall not enter into an agreement or otherwise
contract to procure services from any professional business entity,
if that entity has solicited or made any contribution of money, or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions or
purchase of tickets, advertisements or the like, which proceeds will
be used by or on behalf of or, to a campaign committee of any
candidate or holder of the public office having ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any Freehold
Township municipal or county party committee or to any county
party committee in Monmouth County, in excess of the thresholds
specified in Subsection B(5) within two calendar years immediately
preceding the date of the contract or agreement or during the term
of such a contract or agreement. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. O-04-37]
(2) It shall be a breach of the terms of the professional service contract
for a professional business entity to: [Added 10-26-2004 by Ord.
No. O-04-37]
§ 47-23 PAYROLL § 47-23
43:143
(a) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this section;
(b) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(c) Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(d) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee
of any candidate for Township Committee;
(e) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which is made or solicited by the
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to
the restriction of this section;
(f) Fund contributions made by third parties, including
consultants, attorneys, family members, and employees;
(g) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the
intent of this section; or
(h) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
do any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this section.
(3) No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for,
or agrees to, any contract or agreement with the municipality or
any department, board, commission or agency thereof or of its
independent authorities for the rendition of professional services
shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution of money, or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions or
purchase of tickets, advertisements or the like, which proceeds will
be used by or on behalf of or to 1) any candidate or holder of the
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of the
contract, or to 2) any Freehold Township municipal party
committee, 3) any county party committee in Monmouth County
(unless during the preceding calendar year no contribution of
money or in-kind contribution in an amount sufficient to require
reporting on the local campaign election law report has been made
to the local candidate or municipal party committee by the county
committee to which the professional business entity may have
contributed), or 4) any political action committee (unless during
the preceding calendar year no contribution of money or in kind
contribution in an amount sufficient to require reporting on the
local campaign election law report has been made to the local
candidate by the political action committee to which the
professional business entity may have contributed) between the
time of first communications between that business entity and the
§ 47-23 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-23
43:144
Township regarding a specific professional services agreement and
the later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of the
contract or agreement.
(4) For purposes of this section, a "professional business entity"
seeking a public contract means an individual including the
individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at home; person;
firm; corporation; professional corporation; partnership;
organization; or association. The definition of a business entity
includes all principals who own 10% or more of the equity in the
corporation or business trust; partner, and officers in the aggregate
employed by the entity as well as any subsidiaries directly
controlled by the business entity.
(5) Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business
entity" under this subsection may annually contribute a maximum
of $400 each for any purpose to any candidate for Township
Committee, or $500 to any Freehold Township municipal party
committee, county party committee in Monmouth County or
political action committee, without violating Subsection B(1), (2) or
(3) of this section. However, any group of individuals meeting the
definition of "professional business entity" under this subsection,
including such principals having 10% or more ownership interest,
partners, and officers of the entity in the aggregate, may not
annually contribute for any purpose in excess of $2,500 to all
municipal candidates and officeholders with ultimate responsibility
for the award of the contract, as well as all Freehold Township
municipal political parties, county political parties in Monmouth
County and political action committees combined, if proscribed by
Subsection B(3) of this section, without violating Subsection B(1),
(2) or (3) of this section. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-37]
(6) For purposes of this subsection, the office that is considered to
have ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be
the Township Committee. However, the restrictions of this section
apply to boards, commissions or agencies of the Township whose
appointments of professionals either requires the approval of the
Township Committee or whose operating funds are subject to
appropriation by the Township Committee.
C. Contributions made prior to the effective date. No contribution of
money or any other thing of value, including in-kind contributions,
made by a professional business entity to any municipal candidate for
Township Committee, or municipal party committee, county party
committee or political action committee shall be deemed a violation of
this section, nor shall an agreement for property, goods, or services of
any kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was
made by the professional business entity prior to the effective date of
this section.
§ 47-23 PAYROLL § 47-23
43:145
D. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
(1) Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services
with any professional business entity, the Township or any of its
purchasing agents or agencies, as they case may be, shall receive a
sworn statement from the professional business entity made under
penalty of perjury that the bidder or offeror has not made a
contribution in violation of Subsection B hereof and has not made
or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing the source of the contribution(s).
(2) The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to
report any violations of this section that may occur during the
negotiation or duration of a contract. The certification required
under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract
or agreement with the Township and shall be in addition to any
other certifications that may be required by any other provision of
law.
E. Return of excess contributions. A professional business entity may cure
a violation of Subsection B hereof, if, within 30 days after the general
election, the professional business entity notifies the Township
Committee in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of any
contribution in excess of that allowed by Subsection B from the
Township candidate, municipal political party, county political party or
political action committee.
F. Retroactivity of future clarifications adopted. It is anticipated that there
may be some professional business entities which determine to attempt
a legalistic adherence to the letter, rather than the spirit of this section.
It is the declared intent of this municipal governing body to remain
vigilant to recognize such attempts to subvert the underlying purposes
for which this section was adopted. Any professional business entity
which may attempt such creative subversion does so at its peril. If and
in the event creative actions are taken in order to defeat the purposes of
this section, it is the intention of the governing body to enact
appropriate clarification of this section, which clarification shall be
retroactive to the initial effective date of this section thereby
disqualifying such creative professional business entities from serving
the Township. Changes to this section which are not for purposes of
clarification, but which are amendments to the provisions hereto, shall
become effective upon adoption and publication according to law.
G. Vote necessary for repeal. This section may be repealed only upon four
affirmative votes of the governing body.
H. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-37]
(1) All Township professional service agreements shall provide that it
shall be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a
§ 47-23 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-23
43:146
professional business entity as defined in Subsection B(4) to violate
Subsection B(5) or to knowingly conceal or misrepresent
contributions given or received, or to make or solicit contributions
through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
(2) Any professional business entity as defined in Subsection B(4) who
knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of this
section, or who knowingly makes or solicits contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting
the source of the contribution, shall be disqualified from eligibility
for future Township contracts for a period of four calendar years
from the date of the violation.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection H(1) and (2), any person
or entity who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable for the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Township of Freehold.
I. Fair and open process. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-3]
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4 et seq., the Township and its
agencies shall award professional contracts pursuant to the "Fair
and Open" process method. Nothing set forth herein, however,
shall render any professional contract null and void in the event the
Township has, in particular cases and pursuant to the discretion
exercised by the Township Committee, awarded a professional
contract under the "traditional" method, i.e., pursuant to
procedures employed prior to the effective date of N.J.S.A.
19:44A-20.4 et seq.
(2) The Purchasing Agent shall, in sufficient time prior to the end of
each legislative year, undertake statutorily required procedures in
seeking request for proposals for professional services required for
the upcoming legislative year. Every effort shall be made by the
Purchasing Agent to have all responses to the request for proposal
received at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the new
legislative year.
(3) Proposals from professionals will be evaluated by the Township
Committee of the Township of Freehold and its agencies on the
basis of the proposals deemed to be most advantageous, price and
other factors considered. The evaluation will consider:
(a) Experience and reputation in the field.
(b) Knowledge and experience with Township Committee form of
government.
(c) Knowledge of the Township of Freehold and the subject matter
to be addressed under the contract.
§ 47-23 PAYROLL § 47-23
43:147
§ 47-24. Tuition reimbursement.
(d) Availability to accommodate any required meetings of the
agency.
(e) Support staff availability.
(f) Compensation proposal.
(g) Other factors, if determined to be in the best interest of the
Township of Freehold and its agencies.
A. Purposes and objectives.
(1) It is the policy of the Township of Freehold to encourage the
professional development of municipal employees. This policy
pertains to every position held by a regular full-time Township
employee. Financial aid to reimburse the employee for the cost of
courses at accredited educational institutions is offered when such
courses fulfill mandated continuing education units in order to
achieve or maintain licenses or certifications required for the
position held by that employee within the Township. [Amended
3-17-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-2]
(2) The objectives of the tuition reimbursement program are to
maintain employee morale, increase interest in the employee's job,
thereby decreasing absences and turnover rates and provide for
greater efficiency in the performance of tasks by the employees.
B. Eligibility. The following are threshold prerequisites for being
considered for the tuition reimbursement program:
(1) Employee eligibility.
(a) Regular full-time employee.
(b) At least six months service as a regular full-time employee.
(c) Course completion with a grade of "C" or better.
(2) Course eligibility.
(a) Completed not less than one year after employee's date of
employment.
(b) Taken at an accredited institution, i.e. college, university,
secretarial, business and/or correspondence school.
(c) To be completed outside of working hours.
(d) Approved by department head and Township Administrator.
(e) Such courses shall fulfill mandated continuing education units
in order to achieve or maintain licenses or certifications
§ 47-23 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-24
43:148
required for the position held by that employee within the
Township [Amended 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-2]
(f) Not reimbursable under veterans educational benefit program
or any other reimbursement program available to the
employee.
C. Management approvals. In addition to satisfying the eligibility
requirements of Subsection B, the following procedures are required
before reimbursement will be made:
(1) Employee must submit a plan of goals and objectives for approval
by his or her department head and by the Township Administrator.
The plan must demonstrate that the proposed course is an integral
part thereof.
(2) Department head must review and approve the plan of goals and
objectives as well as the proposed course and course load.
(3) Township Administrator must review and approve the educational
institution, the plan of goals and objectives, the proposed course
and course load. In making his/her decision, the Township
Administrator shall consider, among other things, the employee's
absentee rate and reason therefor, the number of courses taken
and whether or not job performance may be adversely affected
thereby.
D. Reimbursement amount. The following items of expense shall be
eligible for reimbursement under the tuition reimbursement program:
(1) Registration fee.
(2) Tuition which will be reimbursed at a rate equal to the average
tuition rate of New Jersey colleges. The average tuition rate shall
be determined by contacting not less than four accredited New
Jersey state colleges not later than August 1 of each year. The
Township reimbursement rate shall be the average of the tuition
rates of the schools contacted.
(3) Laboratory fees.
(4) Graduation fees.
(5) Required books, which reimbursement shall not exceed $50 per
course. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(6) Diplomas.
(7) Thesis bindings.
E. Written agreement. No reimbursement shall be made until the
employee has executed an agreement which acknowledges the
employee's review and familiarity with this section, the conditions of
§ 47-24 PAYROLL § 47-24
43:149
§ 47-25. Indemnification of municipal officers and employees.
the reimbursement program and agrees to refund any such
reimbursement to the Township if any of the following occur:
(1) Any condition set forth in this section is violated.
(2) Employee resigns from employment before completion of course.
(3) Employee fails to complete course satisfactorily with a grade of "C"
or better.
(4) Employee is discharged for cause from employment with the
Township.
(5) Employee resigns or otherwise discontinues his/her employment
with the Township within two years of receiving a certification or
degree for which some or all of the course requirements were
reimbursed by the Township to the employee.
A. Indemnification; requirements. Subject to Subsection C of this section,
whenever any civil action has been or shall be brought against a
member of the Township Committee, other Township official, any
member of any board, commission, council or other agency of the
Township, or Township employee for any action or omission arising out
of or in the course of the performance of the duties of such person's
office, the Township shall defray all defense costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorney's fees and expenses together with the
cost of any appeal, in accordance with Subsection B and shall save
harmless and protect such individual from any financial loss resulting
from the litigation.
B. Indemnification; defense.
(1) Where the defendant is a Township employee or Township official
other than a Township Committee member, the Township
Committee shall appoint counsel for the defendant.
(2) The defendant entitled to indemnification pursuant to Subsection A
may designate his/her own legal representation. If the defendant
designates his/her own legal representative, said designation shall
be subject to the following restrictions:
(a) The legal representative shall be an attorney in good standing,
licensed and admitted to the practice of law in the State of New
Jersey.
(b) The defendant shall submit a letter to the Township Committee
indicating his/her desire to have a designated legal
representative and shall, at the same time, designate the legal
representative.
§ 47-24 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-25
43:150
(c) The legal representative shall agree to bill the Township at no
more than the rate per hour established by the Township
Committee for the Township Attorney at the time of the legal
representative's designation as counsel by the defendant.
(d) The legal representative shall periodically submit an itemized
bill for all services rendered to the defendant in accordance
with the designation and shall complete such forms and/or
vouchers as required for payment by the Township.
(e) Agreement that the legal representative and defendant shall
not enter into a settlement of the civil action without prior
approval of the Township Committee.
C. Indemnification; exceptions. The Township Committee shall not be
required to provide for a defense and/or indemnification pursuant to
this section under the following circumstances:
(1) Where the legal proceeding involves a criminal matter or arises
under the election laws of the State of New Jersey.
(2) Where the civil action is brought by the member of the Township
Committee who is seeking indemnification; provided, further, that
where a defendant member of the Township Committee asserts a
counterclaim in an action in which such member is a defendant, a
defense and indemnification shall be provided by the Township
Committee except as to matters arising under the counterclaim.
(3) Where the civil action is brought by the Township Committee
against the defendant.
(4) Where the civil action has resulted in punitive damages being
awarded against the defendant; provided, further, that where
Township funds have been expended in the defense resulting in the
awarding of punitive damages, said funds shall be reimbursed to
the Township by the defendant.
(5) Where the civil action arises from acts or omissions not within the
scope of duty of the Township employee, member of the Township
Committee or other Township official or arises from acts of willful
misconduct or actual malice.
(6) Where the Township has obtained an insurance policy which
insures the Township employee, member of the Township
Committee or other Township official, and the insurance company
has agreed to defend the cause of action and indemnify the
defendant; provided, further, that the Township shall be liable for
the payment of any minimum deductible amount which the
insurance policy does not cover.
§ 47-25 PAYROLL § 47-26
43:151
§ 47-26. Health care benefits buyout. [Amended 4-22-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-13; 7-25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-29; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-1; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-23]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-16 et seq., the Township shall provide
health care benefits to its full-time "employees" as that term is defined
in N.J.S.A. 40A:10-16b; however, that term shall not include elected
officials. The different plans to be made available and the coverage
levels shall be determined, from time to time, by the Township. The
Township may redirect enrollment in and make available different plans
and coverage in its discretion
B. Those employees receiving health care benefits shall contribute to the
cost of such benefits as required by P.L. 2011, Ch. 78.
C. If an employee or retired employee (Hereafter, for purposes of this
Subsection C only, both employee and retired employee shall be
referred to as "employee.") is eligible for health care benefit coverage,
and meets the eligibility requirements set forth in Subsection C(1)
below, such employee may annually elect to receive the monetary
payments provided for in Subsection C(2) below ("buyout payment").
(1) Eligibility. All of the following eligibility requirements must be
satisfied:
(a) The employee must have health care benefits coverage from
another source.
(b) The alternate source of coverage must be from a source other
than the Township. For example, if the employee's spouse is
employed by the Township and both the employee and his/her
spouse are eligible for health care benefits coverage through
the Township, a spouse declining coverage under this
subsection, would not be eligible for the buyout payment.
(c) Employees must execute an appropriate application form as
prepared and provided by the office of the Township
Administrator no later than November 30, prior to each
calendar year for which the employee will seek the buyout
payment.
(2) Buyout payment. For eligible employees, the following buyout
payments will be paid in two equal installments, the first
installment on June 1 and the second installment on December 1:
(a) If medical coverage, including prescription plan, is declined,
the buyout payment will be the lesser of $4,800 annually or the
percentage, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:10-17.1, of the
Township’s cost for the health care coverage declined.
[Amended 12-17-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-37]
§ 47-26 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-26
43:152
§ 47-27. Employee program discounts. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-2]
(b) If dental coverage is declined, the buyout payment will be $150
annually.
(c) The payments provided for hereunder would be subject to
income tax, but not considered pensionable income.
(3) Annual election. The election provided for in this section must be
made on an annual basis. If an employee elects the buyout payment
for a particular calendar year, he/she may decline to apply for the
option provided in this section for a subsequent calendar year and
may enroll, during prescribed enrollment periods, for health care
benefit coverage through the Township to resume for such
subsequent calendar year.
(4) An employee who waives coverage because he/she was covered by
a spouse’s benefits shall be permitted to resume coverage under
the same terms and conditions as though he/she had not waived
coverage if the employee ceases to be covered through the
employee’s spouse for any reason. [Added 12-17-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-37]
(5) An employee, who is scheduled to retire may, at least 30 days prior
to the scheduled retirement date, terminate his/her buyout election
and shall be permitted to resume coverage under the same terms
and conditions as though he/she had not waived coverage. [Added
12-17-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-37]
(6) An employee who wishes to resume coverage shall file a
declaration with the Township, in such form as the Township shall
prescribe, that the waiver is revoked. [Added 12-17-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-37]
(7) An employee who resumes coverage shall repay, on a pro rata
basis, any amount which represents an advance payment for a
period of time during which coverage is resumed. [Added
12-17-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-37]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish permissible areas of
discounts for Township employees. The scope of the permissible areas
has been established to provide a level of benefit to Township
employees, while at the same time not resulting in such benefits being
given from collected tax revenue.
B. Definitions. All terms used herein shall have their usual and customary
meanings unless the context in which such term or terms is used shall
provide otherwise. The following specified term shall have the following
meaning:
§ 47-26 PAYROLL § 47-27
43:153
§ 47-28. Retirement plan eligibility of positions. [Added 7-29-2008
by Ord. No. O-08-15]
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The Township employee, his/her spouse, any
child or step-child providing such spouse/child is living in the same
household as the Township employee.
C. Scope of employee discount program. Township employees shall be
allowed discounts, subject to Subsection E below, only to the Township
employee and his/her immediate family for enrollment in the summer
recreation program and for rental of the senior center.
D. Amount of discount. The discount shall be in the amount of 25% of the
fee as established by the Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners.
E. Approval of Parks and Recreation Commissioners required. This section
sets forth the scope of permissible Township employee discounts, but
shall be effective only upon approval, by resolution, of the Board of
Parks and Recreation Commissioners, being the entity in the best
position to assure that the impact of any such discounts shall not
adversely impact the existence or quality of the recreation program.
Nothing herein shall prevent the Parks and Recreation Commissioners
from reassessing, on an annual basis, the impact of any such discounts.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2
and the guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services, as set forth
in Local Finance Notice 2008-10, requiring that local governing bodies
adopt an ordinance identifying positions eligible for membership in the
Defined Contribution Retirement Program (DCRP) as established by
N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq., and those positions, which are eligible for
membership in the Public Employees' Retirement System (PERS).
B. Pension Certifying Official. The Township's Chief Financial Officer,
functioning as the Pension Certifying Official, is responsible for making
determinations concerning enrollment in PERS and DCRP, subject to
review by the State of New Jersey Department of the Treasury, Division
of Pensions and Benefits.
C. Positions eligible for membership in PERS. The following are positions
or descriptions of circumstances under which a person holding a
position is eligible for membership in PERS:
(1) Positions that are a routine appointment by the governing body as
set forth and explained in N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2(a)(3), for example,
administrative support staff and public works rank and file staff.
(2) Individuals holding a professional license or certificate and serving
in any of the following capacities:
(a) Certified Health Officer.
§ 47-27 FREEHOLD CODE § 47-28
43:154
(b) Tax Collector.
(c) Chief Financial Officer.
(d) Construction Code Official.
(e) Qualified Purchasing Agent.
(f) Tax Assessor.
(g) Municipal Planner.
(h) Registered Municipal Clerk.
(i) Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspectors.
(j) Person holding the certification for Certified Public Works
Manager, commonly known as "Principal Public Works
Manager."
(3) A person appointed to a temporary or interim acting position
requiring a professional license or certification for the positions set
forth in Subsection C(2) above.
(4) A person employed by the Township who is already enrolled in a
PERS position, but thereafter promoted through a valid promotion
to a position which would otherwise require DCRP enrollment.
(5) An individual who was a member of PERS on or before June 30,
2007, even though appointed to a DCRP position, if such person has
continuously been a member of PERS since that time.
"Continuously," as used herein, shall mean that a period of no more
than two years has elapsed from the time the individual left
employment in a PERS position until the time that the person was
reemployed.
D. Positions requiring enrollment in DCRP. Except as otherwise described
in Subsection C above, the following positions are only eligible for
DCRP enrollment:
(1) Positions that involve executive decisionmaking or are senior
management whose hiring or appointment requires approval of the
governing body, as based on statute or ordinance.
(2) The following positions, provided they are not filled pursuant to a
professional services resolution or professional services
agreement, and provided the employee holding such position is
salaried:
(a) Township Administrator.
(b) Any department head.
(c) Municipal Attorney.
§ 47-28 PAYROLL § 47-28
43:155
Chapter 51
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26.
§ 51-1. Establishment.
There shall be a Police Department in the Township, the appropriate
authority for which shall be the Police Subcommittee. Within the Police
Department, there shall be such officers and other employees as the
Township Committee may deem necessary, provided all such offices shall be
created by ordinance.
§ 51-2. Appointment of members.
All members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the Municipal
Administrator upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police to hold office
as provided by law.
§ 51-3. Appropriate authority.
The Police Department of the Township shall be under the control and
direction of the Police Subcommittee. The Police Subcommittee shall consist
of the Township Administrator and the Police Commissioner and shall act
as the appropriate authority as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The Chief of
Police shall be in charge of and have supervision and control of the Police
Department as further defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
(d) Municipal Engineer.
(e) Municipal Prosecutor.
(f) Municipal Court Judge.
E. No person employed pursuant to a professional services resolution or a
professional services agreement shall be eligible for enrollment in
either the DCRP or PERS.
F. All PERS membership appointments are subject to review and approval
of the State of New Jersey Department of the Treasury, Division of
Pensions and Benefits.
G. Interpretation of section. All interpretations of this section and
application of its provisions shall be guided by and in accordance with
Local Finance Notice 2008-10 and any amendments or supplements
thereto.
§ 47-28 FREEHOLD CODE § 51-4
51:156
§ 51-4. Police Commissioner.
Each year as soon after the organization of the Township Committee as may
be possible, its members may select and designate a member thereof who
shall be the Police Commissioner and who shall act as liaison between the
Township Committee and the Chief of Police.
§ 51-5. Rules and regulations.
The Police Subcommittee shall establish, and may from time to time amend
and repeal, such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the
efficient working of the Department. Within five days after the adoption
of such rules and regulations or any amendment or repeal thereof, a copy
thereof shall be posted by the Chief of Police in the room in the Municipal
Building assigned to the Police Department and a copy thereof delivered to
each and every member of the Police Department and a copy filed with the
Township Administrator.
§ 51-6. Qualifications of applicants for membership.
A. Each applicant for the Police Department shall comply with all of the
laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining thereto. No person shall be
given or accept a permanent appointment as a police officer in the
Township unless such person has first been given a probationary or
temporary appointment to such office in accordance with N.J.S.A.
52:17B-69, and has successfully completed a police training course in
the Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 56 of the Laws of 1961 (N.J.S.A.
52:17B-66 et seq.).
B. All duly qualified applicants for the position of police officer shall be
classified in the following classes:
(1) Residents of Freehold Township.
(2) Other residents of Monmouth County.
(3) Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(4) All other qualified applicants.
C. All appointments to the position of police officer shall be made in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a, with all those in Class 1 to be
appointed first and then those in each succeeding class in the order
above listed.
D. All applicants classified as Class 1 must be residents of Freehold
Township as of the announced closing date of the civil service
examination for the position and must maintain such residency
continuously up to and including the date of appointment.
E. No person shall be appointed to the Police Department as a regular or
probationary member unless such person shall at the time of making
§ 51-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-6
51:157
§ 51-7. Oath of allegiance.
Before entering upon the performance of his duties, each member of the
Police Department shall take and subscribe an oath to bear true faith
and allegiance to the government established in this state, to support the
Constitution of the United States of America and the State of New Jersey
and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and perform all the duties
of his office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Clerk.
§ 51-8. Chief of Police.
application be at least the age of 21. The applicant shall be a citizen of
the United States of America. The applicant shall obtain, at Township
expense, a certificate from the Township Physician stating that he/
she is in good health and that his/her hearing, eyesight and general
physical condition are such that he/she is capable of performing the
duties required of a police officer. Each applicant shall be given an
examination as arranged by the New Jersey Department of Personnel in
order to determine whether such person is fully qualified to serve in the
Police Department.29
A. Creation; powers; qualifications. The office of Chief of Police is hereby
created, the holder of which shall be charged with the supervision and
direction of the Department pursuant to the provisions of this section.
The minimum standards and qualifications upon which the Chief shall
be selected are as follows:
(1) The Chief of Police shall be chosen on the basis of his thorough
knowledge of the principles and practices of modern police, civil
defense administration and supervision, knowledge of the
principles and practices of modern police science and crime
prevention, and his ability to command the respect of officers and
to plan, assign, direct, supervise and evaluate their work.
(2) The Chief of Police shall have at least eight years' experience as a
member of a Police Department or force and a minimum of five
years of supervisory experience as a part of the eight-year
experience qualification. Supervisory qualifications, however, shall
have been obtained in a civil Police Department or force.
B. Appointment; term. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the
Township Committee in accordance with the laws of the State
Department of Personnel of New Jersey and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The
Police Chief shall be responsible to the Township Committee and the
Police Subcommittee as established under this chapter and consistent
with his oath of office.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 51-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 51-8
51:158
§ 51-9. Duties and responsibilities of Police Department.
C. Salary. The police chief shall be paid such salary as is provided for by
the Township Committee.
D. Duties.
(1) The Chief of Police shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Police Department and shall be directly responsible to the
Administrator for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations
thereof pursuant to policies established by the Police
Subcommittee. He shall be responsible for the protection of lives
and property in the Township and for the organization and
direction of all Township activities concerned with public safety
and the police function as defined by the applicable statutes.30
(2) He shall further pursuant to policies established by the Police
Subcommittee:
(a) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the
force and its officers and personnel;
(b) Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties
of the force;
(c) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and
other personnel;
(d) Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for
the efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his
direction and supervision; and
(e) Report at least monthly to the Police Subcommittee in such
form as shall be described by the Police Subcommittee on the
operation of the force during the preceding month, and such
other reports as may be requested by such authority.
E. Removal. The Chief of Police may be removed for cause by the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 et seq., and Title 11A of the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
F. Residency. The Chief of Police shall be a resident of the State of New
Jersey and shall make his/her permanent residence within 15 miles of
the geographical boundary lines of the Township within six months
after the date of his/her appointment and shall, during his/her term of
office, remain a resident within that geographical area. Should he/she
cease to reside in that area, his/her office may be deemed vacant.
A. The Police Department shall:
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 51-8 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-9
51:159
(1) Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime,
detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances
effective within the Township, suppress riots, mobs and
insurrections, disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages, and
preserve order at all elections and public meetings and
assemblages.
(2) Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the use of the streets by vehicles and persons, to protect
the safety and facilitate the convenience of motorists and
pedestrians, and make and enforce rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the ordinances and resolutions of the Township
for such purposes.
(3) Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the Township, inspect and observe
all places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of
business requiring any state or municipal license or permit and
report thereon to the appropriate department.
(4) Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
(5) Provide for the attendance of its member in court as necessary for
the prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and
offenses, and cooperate fully with the law enforcement and
prosecuting authorities of federal, state and county governments.
(6) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
B. The Police Department shall consist of the following positions, in
addition to the Chief of Police as described in § 51-8section 4-8:
(1) Captain: one position. The Captain is assigned as the operations
commander. The Captain oversees and directs the day-to-day
operations of the Patrol Division, Records Bureau, Special Services
Bureau, Detective Bureau, Traffic Bureau, Park Ranger program
and the Freehold Township/Freehold Borough Joint Investigation
Team.
(2) Lieutenants: six positions. The Lieutenants are assigned to oversee
the day-to-day operations of the Detective Bureau, Records Bureau
and Special Services Bureau. Lieutenants are also assigned as
watch commanders to oversee and direct the 2:00-to-midnight
shift.
(3) Sergeants: eight positions. The Sergeants are assigned to directly
supervise the three patrol shifts, the Detective Bureau and Traffic
Bureau.
§ 51-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 51-9
51:160
§ 51-10. Residency requirements.
Any officer or member of the Police Department and force shall be a
resident of the State of New Jersey while serving in such position.
§ 51-11. Special law enforcement officers.
The Police Chief, subject to the approval by resolution of the Township
Committee, may appoint special law enforcement officers for a term not
exceeding one year, said appointment may be revoked by the Township
for cause after an adequate hearing unless the appointment is for four
months or less, in which event the appointment may be revoked without
cause or hearing. The special law enforcement officers shall carry out their
duties and responsibilities under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police
and their powers, rights and duties shall be specifically defined by the
Chief of Police. Their powers, rights and duties, however, shall immediately
cease at the expiration of the term for which they were appointed or upon
revocation of their appointment. The special law enforcement officers shall
not carry a revolver or other weapon at any time except while engaged
in actual performance of the officer's official duties and when specifically
authorized by the Chief of Police or in the absence of the Chief such
other chief law enforcement officer of the Township Police Department and
further provided that the special law enforcement officer has satisfactorily
completed the basic firearms course required by the State Police Training
Commission. No person shall be appointed a special law enforcement officer
(4) Detectives: eight positions. Detectives can be assigned to
investigate all offenses covered under the laws of the State of New
Jersey, ordinances of Freehold Township and can be assigned
specific duties such as juvenile problems, Megan's Law compliance,
narcotics and various duties assigned by their supervisors.
(5) Police officers: up to 50 positions. Police officers patrol the
Township of Freehold, respond to calls for service, enforce all
criminal and motor vehicle laws of the State of New Jersey and
ordinances of the Township of Freehold. Police officers can be
assigned to specific duties such as Traffic Bureau, street crimes,
investigations and task forces, among other details.
(6) Class II special law enforcement officers: two positions. Class II
special law enforcement officers can be assigned to many different
duties, some of them include parking enforcement, traffic
enforcement, court officer, traffic control and patrol duties.
(7) Class I special law enforcement officers: four positions. Class I
special law enforcement officers can be assigned to a variety of
duties, some of which include park patrol, traffic control, court
detail and special details.
C. All appointments previously made to any position within the Police
Department are hereby ratified and confirmed.
§ 51-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-11
51:161
unless he is a citizen of the United States, is able to read and write and
speak English well and intelligently and has a high school diploma or its
equivalent; is physically qualified; is of good moral character; and shall not
have been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or which would
make him unfit to perform his duties; and has successfully undergone the
same psychological testing that is required of full-time police officers in
the Township. Every special law enforcement officer shall be fingerprinted,
and his fingerprints filed with the Division of State Police and the Federal
Bureau of Investigations. Reports shall be made by the Chief of Police to
the governing body and Police Subcommittee concerning the eligibility and
qualifications of any person proposed to be appointed as a special law
enforcement officer.
§ 51-12. Classroom, field and police car training.
All probationary police officers appointed to the regular police force shall,
during their probationary period, complete a police training course at an
approved school in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated
by the State Police Training Commission, unless any such person
demonstrates to the State Police Training Commission satisfaction that he
has successfully completed a police training course given by any federal,
state or other public or private agencies, the requirements of which are
substantially equivalent to the requirements of the police training and the
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. All special officers shall
prior to the commencement of their duties successfully complete a training
course approved by the Police Training Commission, and no special law
enforcement officer may be issued a firearm unless he has successfully
completed the basic firearms course approved by the Commission for
permanent regularly appointed police and annual requalification
examinations as required under N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14.
§ 51-13. Special duty.
All members of the Police Department including the Chief of Police shall
serve as police officers at such hours and in such manner as ordered
pursuant to the instructions through the Police Subcommittee and the Chief
of Police.
§ 51-14. Hours of employment.
The hours of employment for the members of the Police Department shall
be established by work schedules set by the Chief of Police or his designee
in accordance with the rules, regulations and policies promulgated by the
Police Subcommittee, the collective bargaining agreement and the federal
and state labor standards. In the case of an emergency the Chief of Police
shall have charge or control of the Police Department. The Police Chief shall
have full authority to summon and retain on duty any and all members of
the Police Department during the period of emergency. Emergency work
schedules shall be prepared and implemented by the Chief of Police.
§ 51-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 51-15
51:162
§ 51-15. Removal and suspension.
§ 51-16. Uniforms, badges and other equipment.
All members of the Police Department shall dress in such wearing apparel
as shall be prescribed by the Chief of Police. The uniforms shall be furnished
and maintained as required, at the expense of the Township. The members
shall also be issued a badge and identification card and other supplies and
equipment as may be required by the Township. The badge, identification
card and all other equipment shall be returned to the Township at the
termination of the appointment.
§ 51-17. Firearms.
All firearms which may be provided by the Township shall remain the
property of the Township.
§ 51-18. Promotions.
All promotions to superior positions in the Police Department shall be made
from the membership of the Department as constituted at the time of
promotion and shall be made with due regard to length of service of the
person to be promoted and his merit in the Department in accordance with
the regulations and policies of the New Jersey Department of Personnel. No
person shall be eligible for promotion to a superior position unless he shall
have first served in the grade of patrolman in the Department.
§ 51-19. Leave with pay.
Members of the Police Department who shall be injured, ill, or disabled
may be granted a leave with pay for a period not to exceed one year,
provided that the Township Physician, or if there be none, the member's
treating physician shall certify to such injury, illness, or disability; and
further provided that the member has exhausted all sick time,
compensatory time, vacation time, personal time, as well as all other forms
A. No person shall be removed from office or employment for any causes
other than incapacity, misconduct, neglect of duty, conduct unbecoming
of a police officer, disobedience of the rules and regulations now in
effect and hereafter established for the Department, or absence from
duty without just cause for five days or more.
B. Any member of the Department may be suspended, removed, fined or
reduced from his office or employment therein, for any of the causes
referred to in § 47-17 of the Code, or for violating rules and regulations
governing the Police Department enacted pursuant to this chapter,
after due notice and service of written charges and a hearing.
C. Any such hearing thereon shall be held by the Police Subcommittee no
more than 30 days from the date of the service of a complaint upon an
officer of a violation.
§ 51-15 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 51-19
51:163
of paid leave which may be available. Written request for leave with pay
must be initiated by the Police Department member and approved by the
Municipal Administrator upon favorable recommendation of the Chief of
Police. Leave so approved shall not be for longer than three months. Periods
of leave with pay for longer than three months and up to the maximum of
one year shall require the approval of the Township Committee.
§ 51-20. Extra duty.
A. Applicability; agreement required. Whenever the Chief of Police or his
designee determines that extra duty assignments shall be performed
for a party requesting private or quasi-public duty, the Chief of Police or
his designee shall enter into an agreement providing for extra duty
assignments for which the Township shall be compensated at the rate
set from time to time by resolution. Such agreement shall be in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) The party requesting the assignment shall execute and deliver an
agreement in a form approved by the Township Committee by
resolution from time to time. The Chief of Police or his designee
shall be authorized to execute any such agreement, provided that it
has been submitted in the form approved by resolution.
(2) The Township shall be responsible to provide all necessary
insurance coverage as required by law, including but not limited to
workers' compensation, public liability and claims for damage for
personal injury, including death or damage to property which may
arise or result from the Township's performance under the
contract.
(3) The party requesting the assignment of police officers shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Township from any and all claims
made by said police officers for injury or illness while performing
extra duty assignments for said party. In addition, the party shall
hold the Township harmless from any and all claims made by any
third party for injury, illness or damage to property arising out of
the extra duty assignment of a police officer.
(4) Any and all extra duty assignments shall be determined and
approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. The Chief of Police
or his designee may assign a patrol vehicle for use in performing
extra duty if and in the event it is determined that the use of a
patrol vehicle is necessary to perform the contracted duty.
(5) The work to be performed shall be considered "special assignment
from independent contractors" and will not be considered direct
assignment or duty on the job through the Township. The taking of
any and all extra duty assignments shall be on a voluntary basis in
accordance with a system established and administered by the
Chief of Police.
§ 51-19 FREEHOLD CODE § 51-20
51:164
Chapter 59
TORT CLAIMS
§ 59-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to compel the filing of a notice of tort
claim by potential claimants against the Township, which notice will require
providing more detailed information to the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A.
59:8-6 in order that the Township may more completely investigate and
evaluate potential claims against it.
§ 59-2. Notice of tort claim form adopted.
All notices of potential tort claims against the Township of Freehold
pursuant to the New Jersey Tort Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:8-1 et seq.) shall be
in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof.31
§ 59-3. Necessity for filing completed forms.
All persons making claims against the Township of Freehold pursuant to
the New Jersey Tort Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:8-1 et seq.) are hereby required
to complete the form herein adopted as a condition of compliance with the
notice requirements of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act. Failure to file the
attached form, completed and executed, within the time prescribed by the
New Jersey Tort Claims Act, shall bar any further proceeding against the
Township of Freehold for any incident arising under, pursuant to or covered
by the New Jersey Tort Claims Act.
(6) Any and all payments due under any such agreement shall be paid
15 days from the date of billing. Interest shall be charged at the
rate of 12% per annum on any amount billed for which payment has
not been made within 15 days. The delinquent party shall be liable
for all costs, fees and attorney's fees associated with the collection
of any amounts due.
B. Exception. This section shall not apply to police officers serving on any
prosecutorial task forces as may from time to time be established, or
other duty assignments during which police officers are assisting any
law enforcement agencies.
31.Editor's Note: The form is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 51-20 TORT CLAIMS § 59-3
59:165
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 67
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 162. Licensing — See Ch. 195.
§ 67-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices
and equipment, whether they operate by producing a visual or audible
signal and whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means of
activating a device requiring response thereto by the Police Department,
Fire Department or other agencies serving the municipality.
§ 67-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm or
local alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency
or designed to summon the Police Department, Fire Department or any
agency serving the municipality to any location in response to any type
alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall in no way prohibit alarm
companies from providing service by private source to other locations
within or without the Township, so long as such activity is not connected to
the Police Department; except, however, that any person having a premises
protected by such an alarm device shall still be responsible for the
registration in accordance with § 67-4.
§ 67-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person for a profit which
engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining,
repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to an alarm system, or
which causes any of these activities to take place.
ALARM CONSOLE — The console, panel or collection of devices giving a
visual and/or audio response and located within the confines of the Police or
Communications Department of the Township of Freehold.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system activating equipment in the
alarm console providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other
peril.
§ 59-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 67-3
67:166
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one or more buildings at a location other than the alarm
console.
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or a device or an assembly of equipment
and devices designed to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard
requiring urgent attention and to which Police or Fire Department or any
other services may be expected to respond.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Any person designated by the police
chief to perform a function required or permitted by the provision of this
chapter. The term "designated representative" shall be limited to members
of the Township Police Department or employees of the Police Department
assigned to and working in the Communications Department.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm using telephone lines transmitting an
alarm directly through the police phone system providing warning of
intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of an alarm system actuated by
inadvertence, negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a person other
than an intruder, and shall include, as well, alarms caused by
malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant equipment, but shall
not include alarms caused by malfunction of the alarm console or police
device.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when actuated, produces
a signal not connected to another source, such as store burglar alarms
actuating bell devices.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device or a local alarm within
the scope of this chapter.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Township of Freehold or his
designated representative.
§ 67-4. Registration or permits. [Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-46]
A. No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless
the system has been registered and approved by the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police may make rules and regulations which interpret or
amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of administering
the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective. No
regulation shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision of
this chapter, and no regulation shall impose any requirements that are
expressly or by implication imposed by any provision of this chapter.
B. The alarm system shall be deemed registered at such time as the permit
is issued. Any person who owns or operates an alarm device or system,
no matter what type, shall make application for a continuance of
installation thereof, in writing, to the Chief of Police, which application
shall include, among other data, the name, type and location of the
device; the name, address and twenty-four-hour telephone number of
§ 67-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-4
67:167
§ 67-5. General regulations. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-46]
the alarm installer or person responsible for its maintenance; a list of a
minimum of three persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm; the
person responsible for remitting any fees or fines assessed under this
chapter; and such other information as the Chief of Police may deem
pertinent. Failure to meet these requirements will result in the denial
of a permit to register the alarm.
C. Alarms shall be registered when the occupant or owner of the building
in which the alarm is installed shall have filed a registration form with
the Chief of Police and received approval of such registration and a fee
as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, has been remitted to the Township.
D. No further registration or renewal will be required unless there is a
material change in the information submitted with respect to any alarm
system. It shall be the duty of the owner/occupant of the building served
by an alarm system, within 10 days of any change in the registration
information, to notify the Chief of Police by completing a new
registration form. Failure to comply with these provisions will be
deemed violation of this chapter and will subject the violator to the
penalties set forth herein.
E. Notwithstanding the registration of an alarm as herein required, the
Police Department of the Township and the Township have no liability
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, the operation or the maintenance
of the alarm system so installed. The Township hereby assumes no
liability whatsoever for any failure of any such alarm system, the failure
to respond to such alarm or for any act or omission or commission as a
result of any such alarm, device or system. Each person registering an
alarm hereby agrees to hold and save harmless the Township, its agents
and/or employees from any liability whatsoever with any such alarm
system or the operation of same.
F. The provisions of Chapter 195, Licensing, Article I, are modified as
pertaining to alarms where made inconsistent by this chapter.
A. The sensory mechanism of alarms shall be adjusted so as to suppress
false indications and not be actuated by impulses due to pressure
changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noise, rattling or
vibrations of doors, windows, or other forces unrelated to general
alarms.
B. All components of alarm equipment shall be maintained by the owner in
good repair. Failure to comply with the operational requirements of this
chapter shall authorize the Chief of Police to demand that such an alarm
be disconnected until such time as compliance is insured. If, upon
written notice from the Chief of Police, the owner of an alarm shall fail
to disconnect said alarm within 10 days, he shall be liable to a penalty
§ 67-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 67-5
67:168
§ 67-6. False alarms.
§ 67-7. Payment of penalties.
Penalties shall be payable to the Township within 30 days of receipt of
written notice thereof. Failure to remit the required penalty fees due
because of false alarms after written notice to the permittee will result in
police refusal to acknowledge the alarm. Continual violation of the terms of
this chapter may result in disconnection of alarm devices.
§ 67-8. Local alarm tests. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-46]
as provided in § 67-10. Each day of continuing violation shall be
considered a separate offense under this chapter.
C. No person, firm, or corporation shall install or permit to be maintained
in its premises any automatic dial alarm system, which directly
transmits an alarm or prerecorded message of intrusion directly to the
Police Department of the Township of Freehold.
A. In the event of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department in the manner prescribed by
the rules and regulations. The Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation to be made and keep a record of all false alarms. False
alarms, shall result in the following penalties:
(1) For the first and second alarm in the same twelve-month period, a
warning shall be issued.
(2) For the third false alarm in the same twelve-month period, a
penalty of $15 shall be paid to the Township of Freehold.
(3) For the fourth and subsequent false alarm, a penalty of $25 shall be
paid to the Township of Freehold.
B. If, due to weather conditions, electrical failure, or other malfunction,
three or more false alarms from unrelated locations are received within
30 minutes of each other, a penalty shall not be assessed nor shall that
alarm be counted for enforcement purposes.
A. It shall be unlawful for an alarm device, local alarm or other audible
alarm to ring or put forth any other sound for a period in excess of 30
minutes. Any such occurrence shall result in a penalty as provided in
§ 67-10 for each violation.
B. Any person testing an alarm system covered by the provisions of this
chapter shall notify police headquarters or his/her private alarm
monitoring service to assure police are not alerted, immediately prior to
and after testing is completed. Failure to make the required notification
shall subject the owner to the appropriate penalties above.
§ 67-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-9
67:169
§ 67-9. Hearings.
An alarm owner/user disputing the application of this chapter or the
assessment of a penalty hereunder may request a hearing by the Chief
of Police or a representative designated by the Township Committee by
serving a request therefor upon the Chief of Police within five days of
service of a notice of violation. Such request shall set forth briefly the
grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and the
factual matters contained in the notice of violation, which are to be disputed
at the hearing. The Chief of Police, upon receipt of the request, shall set a
hearing date within 30 days. A decision will be issued within 30 days of the
hearing.
§ 67-10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 71
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Alliance Committee — See Ch. 2,
Art. XI.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Consumption of alcohol in pool halls — See
Ch. 240.
Sports Code of Conduct — See Ch. 295.
§ 67-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 67-10
71:170
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1 (Ch. VIII of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-02-19]
§ 71-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Freehold in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled an "Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 71-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 71-3. Applicability of statute.
Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the act, rules and
regulations referred to in § 71-1, and all other applicable laws of the State
of New Jersey or the United States.
§ 71-4. Issuing authority.
All licenses required by this article shall be issued by the Township
Committee, which shall also administer the provisions of this article.
§ 71-5. License required.
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without having obtained a license in accordance with the act referred to in
§ 71-1 and the provisions of this article.
§ 71-6. License fees; maximum number of licenses.
A. License fees. The annual license fees shall be as provided in Chapter
150, Fees, and the maximum number of licenses for the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
[Amended 9-3-2005 by Ord. No. O-03-23; 10-9-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-31]
Class of License No. of Licenses
Plenary retail consumption 12
Plenary retail distribution 4
§ 71-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 71-6
71:171
§ 71-7. Licenses for hotels. [Added 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-14]
§ 71-8. Hours of sale.
No retail licensee shall allow, permit or suffer the sale, service, delivery or
consumption of any alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises on
any day of the week between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., and on
Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 71-9. Package sales of alcoholic beverages.
The sale of malt alcoholic beverages and wine in original containers for
off-premises consumption by a retail licensee with such license privilege is
permitted during any period that the sale of any alcoholic beverage in open
containers for on-premises consumption is authorized in §§ 71-8 and 71-11.
Package sales of any other type of alcoholic beverage is permitted only
between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week and on Sunday
between 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m.
Class of License No. of Licenses
Club 3
B. The number of licenses set forth above shall change from time to time,
without the necessity of further ordinance amendment, to reflect the
maximum number of each class of license permitted to be issued by the
Township pursuant to the pertinent New Jersey statutes. The annual
fees shall apply to licenses issued in each year. The annual fee shall be
the maximum license fee allowed by the pertinent New Jersey statute.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.20, the Township may issue a
plenary retail consumption license to a person or entity operating a
hotel or motel containing 100 guest sleeping rooms or who may
hereafter construct and establish a new hotel or motel containing 100
guest sleeping rooms.
B. The plenary retail consumption license for a new qualified hotel or
motel, which has not already received a license prior to the effective
date of this section, shall be publicly bid on, based on such terms as the
Township Committee may establish by resolution in accordance with
the procedures, including notice, set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-19.1 et seq.
C. A "guest sleeping room" shall be defined as a partitioned part of the
inside of a hotel/motel building which contains a bed or beds, and is
maintained primarily for sleeping purposes and which is let out by its
owner, or any agent of its owner, at any time for compensation, whether
on a daily, periodic, weekly or seasonal basis and whether to relatives,
friends, guests or other third parties, as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.20.
D. All hotel or motel retail consumption licenses which have been issued at
any time shall be confined to that hotel or motel property and shall not
be subject to transfer to another premises.
§ 71-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 71-10
71:172
§ 71-10. New Year's Day and Christmas Day.
The provisions of § 71-8 shall not apply on January 1 or December 25. On
those days, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or delivered to
any patron or consumed in any licensed premises between 3:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. unless either day is on a Sunday; in which case, no alcoholic
beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in a licensed
premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 71-11. Sales to certain persons.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly or
indirectly, any alcoholic beverage to any actually or apparently intoxicated
person or any person under the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages; nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above-named classes of persons or
permit any such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 71-12. Plenary retail transit license.
The provisions of §§ 71-8 and 71-10 shall not apply to the issuance of a
plenary retail transit license. A plenary retail transit license shall be issued
only for limousine service and shall apply only to the particular limousine
for which the license is issued. Said license may be issued to a Class C
licensee whose license privilege permits the sale of alcoholic beverages in
original containers for off-premises consumption. In order to qualify for the
issuance of the license, the limousine must have installed what is commonly
referred to as a "car bar" or similar device for the purpose of providing
liquor service to passengers. The term "limousine" shall mean a motor
vehicle with a capacity of not more than nine passengers offered for hire
to transport persons to a specific place or motor vehicle furnished as an
accommodation for a patron in connection with a business purpose.
§ 71-13. Minors. [Amended 1-25-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-4]
A. Purchase of alcoholic beverages by a minor. No minor shall purchase,
attempt to purchase, or have another purchase for him any alcoholic
beverage on any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
B. Purchase of alcoholic beverages for a minor. No person shall purchase
or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for a minor. It shall be
unlawful for any person to induce or attempt to induce any licensee or
any employee of a licensee to sell, serve or deliver alcoholic beverages
to a minor.
C. Misstating age. No person shall misrepresent his age or the age of
another person for the purpose of inducing any licensee or his employee
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under 21
years or to permit a person under 21 years to remain on any premises.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 71-10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 71-13
71:173
§ 71-14. Revocation of licenses.
§ 71-15. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided by statute, violations of the provisions of this
article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty.
D. Presumption. Any parent or guardian of a minor who accompanies such
minor into a premises in which alcoholic beverages are served and who
permits the minor to possess or consume alcoholic beverages shall be
presumed to have misrepresented the age of the minor.
E. Possession. No minor shall possess, serve, sell or consume any alcoholic
beverage in any public place within the Township.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
§ 71-13 FREEHOLD CODE § 71-15
71:174
ARTICLE II
Consumption by Underage Persons on Private Property
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-00-25 (§ 6-22 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 71-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the enforcement of P.L. 2000
c.33. (N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2)
§ 71-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 71-18. Penalty for possession or consumption.
§ 71-19. Effect of violation on driver's license.
A. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses without legal authority or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished
by a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
The court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this offense,
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
defendant.
A. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement
of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to
this article. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less
than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including a
suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
B. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
§ 71-16 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 71-19
71:175
§ 71-20. Exceptions.
C. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
D. The court shall, of any person convicted under this article who is not a
New Jersey resident, suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall
not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this article.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
A. This article does not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
B. This article does not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment
by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school or post secondary educational institution; however, no ordinance
enacted pursuant to this article shall be construed to preclude the
imposition of a penalty under this article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other
section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic
beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.32
32.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Registration of Beer Kegs Before Sale, consisting of
§§ 71-21 through 71-27, adopted 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-11, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-37.
§ 71-19 FREEHOLD CODE § 71-20
71:176
Chapter 75
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Licensing — See Ch. 195.
Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 240.
§ 71-20 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 71-20
71:177

ARTICLE I
Places of Public Amusement
[Adopted by Ord. No. 42 (§ 7-6 of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 75-1. Permit required.
No person shall carry on or conduct the business of an auctioneer of
merchandise, medicines and remedies, auction stores for the sale of
silverware, jewelry and goods and chattels of any kind whatsoever, traveling
or other shows, circuses and all street parades in connection therewith,
theaters, moving-picture shows, opera houses, concert halls, nightclubs,
public dance halls, skating rinks, merry-go-rounds, carnivals, bowling
alleys, exhibition grounds, and all other places of public amusement within
the Township without having first obtained a license from the Township
Clerk in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 195, Licensing, Article I.
The number of moving-picture shows requiring permits shall be equal to the
number of motion-picture screens upon which one motion picture is shown
at any one time.
§ 75-2. Approval and issuance of license.
Applications shall be filed with the Township Clerk and presented to the
Township Committee not later than the second regular meeting following
the filing of the application, at which meeting the Township Committee
may act upon any application so presented or at any subsequent meeting
to which it shall defer action thereon. No license shall be issued by the
Township Clerk until the issuance has been duly approved by resolution
adopted by the Township Committee, provided that if the Township
Committee does not take any action on the application by either granting or
refusing to allow the license within 60 days of the date on which it is first
submitted to the Township Clerk, the license shall be deemed approved, and
the Clerk is authorized to issue the license.
§ 75-3. License fees.
A. The license fees under this article shall be as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees.
B. For the purpose of this section, a new day shall be deemed to be in
effect if any auction is conducted at any time within the next 24 hours
following the conclusion of any one-day auction sale, provided that, if an
auction is personally conducted by the owner of the goods being
auctioned and at a site owned or rented by him within the Township, no
fee for the license shall be required to be paid but a license shall be
obtained; and provided further that in no event shall any license be
issued for more than 30 days for such purpose.
C. In the event that the net proceeds from the licensed activity shall be
donated to a nonprofit organization, the license fees set forth in
Chapter 150 will be waived, provided that an annual report is filed with
§ 75-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-3
71:179
§ 75-4. Cash bond required. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
Each applicant for a license for a traveling show, exhibition ground, carnival
or circus shall deposit with the Township Clerk at the time of filing
application a cash bond in the amount of $1,000 to guarantee that upon
the expiration of the license, the licensed premises and the adjacent public
roads and immediate vicinity of the licensed premises will be left in good
condition, cleaned up and cleared of all paper, waste material and debris.
§ 75-5. Regulations.
the Township Clerk on or before June 30 of each year in which a license
is sought, which report shall set forth the following information:
(1) Gross proceeds from the licensed activity for the previous 12
months.
(2) Net proceeds of the licensed activity for the previous 12 months.
(3) Name and address and the amount donated to the nonprofit
organization.
D. For the initial exemption, the applicant shall submit a certified
statement to the Township Clerk that the net proceeds from the
licensed activity shall be donated to a nonprofit organization. For each
subsequent exemption, it shall be necessary that the aforementioned
report has been filed.
A. No person attending any amusement, show or theatrical shall create a
disturbance in the audience.
B. Licensees shall not permit or gather such a crowd to witness any
amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire
or other risks.
C. No person shall present any public amusement or show of any kind
which tends or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance.
D. In the case of a block party, the applicant shall insure that the street or
streets on which the party is to be held will be adequately protected
from the intrusion of vehicular traffic to the satisfaction of the Chief of
Police.
E. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building
or hall used as an assembly hall with accommodations for 100 persons
or more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures and other
entertainment are offered, operated or presented to provide and place a
sign, on which the word "EXIT" shall appear in letters at least six inches
high, over every door or other opening from the hall to every means of
egress therefrom, and a light shall be provided with a red globe or
§ 75-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 75-5
71:180
§ 75-6. Suspension or revocation.
In addition to the causes specified in § 195-9 of Chapter 195, Licensing, the
Township Committee may at any time refuse to grant or may suspend or
revoke the license of any licensee for permitting or suffering any activity
upon the licensed premises which is or may be detrimental to the public
health, safety, welfare or morals.
§ 75-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
similar covering and placed at or over the sign. The light shall be kept
burning during the entire period that the hall is open to the public and
until the audience has left.
§ 75-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-7
71:181

ARTICLE II
Coin-Operated Amusement Games
[Adopted 7-25-1977 (§ 7-5 of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. O-92-32]
§ 75-8. License required.33
No person shall install, maintain, operate or possess in any building where
business is conducted or other place wherein the public is invited or where
the public may enter or in any building or place where any club or
organization meetings are held within the Township, any amusement, game
and/or machine of the type commonly known and designated as pinball,
electric crane, bagatelle, baseball, console, cathode ray tube game
machines, jukeboxes, video games and any other machines similar to the
above or otherwise operated by the insertion of coins or tokens received in
exchange of consideration, except merchandise vending machines without
first obtaining a license. This section shall not apply to coin-operated
amusements commonly known as kiddie rides; more specifically, those coinoperated
machines which are sat upon or in and cause a certain motion or
gyration following the insertion of a coin, and are designed primarily for
use by children under the age of 10, nor to carousel or merry-go-round type
operations.
§ 75-9. Fees.
The annual license fee for each amusement game or machine and music
machines (jukeboxes) shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 75-10. Application.
In addition to the information required in § 195-2 of Chapter 195, Licensing,
the application shall designate the exact location of the machine and any
other information required by the Township Committee.
§ 75-11. Inspection of premises and approval by Code Official.34
Upon receipt of the application, the Clerk shall refer it to the Code Official
who shall inspect the premises and the type of machine. Upon completion
of his inspection and investigation, the Code Official shall attach to the
application his written report stating the nature and type of machine, the
place and time it is to be operated or maintained, the name of the proprietor
of the store in which the same is to be operated, the name and address
of the owner of the particular machine and such other information as the
Code Official may deem pertinent. In addition the Code Official shall state
his approval or disapproval and the reasons therefor.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 75-8 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-12
71:183
§ 75-12. Approval or disapproval of application.
A separate application with the recommendation of the Code Official shall
be submitted to the Township Committee for approval or disapproval. Upon
approval, the Clerk shall issue the license. Upon disapproval, the Clerk shall
be directed to return the fee deposited with the application to the applicant
and shall file the application after making notation upon it of the action
taken.
§ 75-13. Contents of license.
In addition to the information required in § 195-4 of Chapter 195, Licensing,
the license shall indicate the serial number of the licensed machine, the
name and address of the actual owner and the license fee for the use,
possession, operation, installation or maintenance of each device.
§ 75-14. Number of machines and hours of operation limited.
§ 75-15. Substituting machines.
The licensee may substitute one machine for a similar machine without
paying an additional license fee, provided that he first applies to the
Township Clerk for permission to make the exchange and supply all of
the information required for the original application. The new machine
shall be described in the application and noted upon the original license
issued. In the event of application to substitute, the Township Committee
may delegate authority to the Township Clerk to issue the permit for
substitution.
§ 75-16. General regulations.
A. Not more than two machines or devices shall be licensed or operated
for the first 20,000 square feet of any one place of business as
calculated within the principal building wherein that business is
conducted. A license may be issued for an additional one machine for
every 10,000 square feet in excess of the first 20,000 square feet. In a
building or any portion thereof occupied by a nonprofit corporation and
used primarily for nonprofit purposes, the number of machines or
devices shall not exceed three for every 5,000 square feet. Music
machines (jukeboxes) shall not be counted in the determination of the
original two machines and/or devices.
B. The licensee shall at all times control the sound so as not to cause
disturbance or nuisance to others in the vicinity of the machine. The
licensee shall at all times place the machine so that the part of the
machine from which the sound emits shall not be within five feet of the
front entrance of the place of business and shall not at any time place a
music machine so that the sound is disturbing to the public in the
streets or to other persons occupying buildings in the immediate
vicinity.
§ 75-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 75-16
71:184
§ 75-17. Revocation of licenses.
§ 75-18. Enclosed shopping malls.
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the following
provisions shall apply to the application of this article to enclosed shopping
malls:
A. The person operating the place of business where a machine is located
shall be responsible for the proper operation thereof regardless of
whether or not he is the actual owner of the machine or has rented it;
but this shall not in any way release the actual owner of the machine or
device from liability or responsibility for compliance with this article
and all other laws and ordinances.
B. No person under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to play or
operate any of the games or machines licensed prior to 3:00 p.m. on any
day on which school is in session, as established by the Freehold
Regional High School District unless that person is accompanied by his
parent or legal guardian.
C. Shooting galleries where guns or firearms are used, for a consideration
or prize or otherwise, shall not be licensed or permitted within the
limits of the Township.
A. In addition to the causes specified in § 195-9 of Chapter 195, Licensing,
the Township Committee may revoke the license issued at any time if
the machine or device is causing a nuisance or disturbance of the peace
or a condition which the Township Committee may deem to be
detrimental to the welfare of the community.
B. The Township Committee shall be the sole judge as to whether or not a
machine is causing an annoyance to others, and upon its finding that
the machine does disturb others in the neighborhood, shall have the
authority to revoke the license by resolution. In the event that a license
is revoked, the Township Committee shall return a proportionate share
of the license fee to the licensee. 35
A. For the purposes of this section, an enclosed shopping mall shall be
defined as a structure consisting of 20 or more separate retail
establishments connected by an enclosed common area, with a total
floor area of not less than 500,000 square feet.
B. There shall be permitted in enclosed shopping malls not more than one
machine for each 10,000 square feet of floor space of the enclosed
shopping mall as calculated within the principal structure which
comprises the mall, together with interior common areas. The placing
of licensed machines shall be limited to one separate and contained
location within the enclosed shopping mall, except as permitted by
35.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-5.11, Removal of Machines, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 75-16 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-18
71:185
§ 75-19. Family-style restaurants. [Added 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-4136]
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the following
provisions shall apply to the application of this article to family-style
restaurants permitted as a conditional use in Chapter 190 § 190-212B.
§ 75-20. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Subsection E below. The ratio of floor space within such separate
location to the number of machines shall not exceed one machine per
20 square feet. No other amusement machines or devices, whether or
not controlled by this section, shall be permitted in any other location
within the enclosed shopping mall, except as permitted by Subsection
E below.
C. Any separate and contained location as referred to in Subsection B
above, which contains 10 or more licensed machines shall be
supervised during all hours of operation by having such supervisor
personally in attendance at the location.
D. Except as other provisions of this article are modified by Subsections A,
B and C above, all other provisions of this article shall remain and apply
with full force and effect.
E. In addition to the placing of licensed machines in one separate and
contained location as required by Subsection B above, up to four kiddie
rides as described in § 75-8 above may be located at one other location
in the interior common area of the mall, provided that the machines are
compatible in size, color scheme and design and are clustered under a
common canopy type cover and in such a manner as to give the
appearance of a uniform ride area. Such single location shall be within
an area that provides sufficient space for the unhindered flow of
pedestrian traffic, near an outside entrance to the mall and as
otherwise approved by the Township Fire Official.
A. There shall be permitted in family-style restaurants children's
entertainment areas including video games. The placing of video or
other electronic amusement machines and other children
entertainment uses within the children's entertainment area shall be
limited to one separate and contained location within the restaurant
building.
B. Video interactive devices shall be permitted in family-style restaurants
provided that not more than one video interactive device shall be
permitted at any table within the restaurant.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 75-19 as § 75-20.
§ 75-18 FREEHOLD CODE § 75-20
71:186
ARTICLE III
Amusement Games with Prizes or Awards
[Adopted 8-31-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-19]
§ 75-21. Designation of amusement and entertainment center.
It is hereby determined, decided and declared that there exists within the
Township of Freehold a recognized amusement and entertainment area,
according to the usual and customary understanding of such terms, located
on Block 70.10, Lot 2, as shown on the official Tax Map of the Township of
Freehold, which amusement and entertainment center is presently known
and designated as IPLAY AMERICA.
§ 75-22. License required to operate games.
A licensee shall be permitted to install and operate billiard and pool tables
within the licensed premises and such billiard or pool table shall be deemed
to be amusement games within the meaning of this article. The provisions of
Chapter 240 of these general ordinances shall not apply to the maintenance
and operation of pool or billiard within the licensed facility. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, conduct or operate
within this municipality any amusement game or games, as said amusement
game or games are defined by the Amusement Games Licensing Law
(Chapter 109 P.L. 1959; N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.), as amended from time to
time, whether said amusement game or games are of skill or chance, or
both, and whether said amusement game is played and operated with or
without numbers, symbols or figures, without first having obtained a proper
license from the Township Committee of the Township of Freehold. Said
license shall be issued subject to the provisions of the Amusement Games
Licensing Law and the Revised Amusement Games Regulations, effective
April 11, 1966, promulgated by the Office of Amusement Games Control,
Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey.
§ 75-23. Application requirements.
Each applicant for such license shall file with the Township Clerk a written
application in such form as prescribed by and in accordance with said
Amusement Games Licensing Law as amended and supplemented from time
to time. Said application shall contain the minimum information required by
N.J.S.A. 5:8-102 and shall require the applicant to furnish the information
required by N.J.S.A. 5:8-103 as amended from time to time. Each application
shall include proposed rules and regulations designed to govern conduct
on the licensed premises and shall state the number and description of the
games to be licensed.
§ 75-24. Issuance of license; certificate; display.
A. Upon proof of compliance with all applicable requirements, the
Township Committee shall authorize the issuance of a license, to be
effective for not more than one year. By resolution, said license is to be
§ 75-21 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-24
71:187
§ 75-25. License fee.
The annual fee for each such license shall be calculated in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 236 of the general Ordinances of the Township of
Freehold.
§ 75-26. Hearing prior to refusal of license; amendments.
§ 75-27. Control and supervision.
The Township Committee shall have and exercise control and supervision
over all amusement games operated or conducted under such license with
all of the powers authorized and granted to it under the Amusement Games
Licensing Law and all amendments and supplements thereto.
effective for a term of one year, commencing on the date of issuance
and terminating on December 31 in each year. Said resolution shall
specifically recite that the premises to be licensed are located in a
recognized amusement and entertainment area within the municipality.
A certified copy of the resolution shall be transmitted, together with
a copy of the application and license certificate issued, to the
Commissioner of Amusement Games Control. No license shall be issued
unless the applicant has complied with all of the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq. and N.J.A.C 13:1-1.1 et seq., as amended from
time to time.
B. Each license certificate shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Amusement Games Control and shall indicate: the
name of the licensee; the address of the licensed premises; the name or
description of the kind of games licensed; the amount of fee paid; a
statement of the hours between which such games may be conducted.
C. Each license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the
game is to be conducted at all times during conduct thereof.
D. Each licensee shall notify the municipality of any material change of any
relevant fact regarding the License application within 10 days of the
occurrence thereof.
E. Each licensee shall enforce the rules and regulations approved as a part
of the application under § 75-23 of this article.
A. No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the
Township Committee until after a hearing is held on due notice to the
applicant at which time the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon
the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application.
B. Any license issued under this chapter may be amended upon
application made to the Township Committee, if the subject matter of
the proposed amendment could lawfully have been included in the
original license.
§ 75-24 FREEHOLD CODE § 75-28
71:188
§ 75-28. Forfeiture of license for certain acts.
In the event any licensee shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
the Amusement Games Licensing Law, the rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Amusement Games Control Commissioner or the
specific terms of the license, such licensee shall be a disorderly person and,
if convicted as such, shall in addition to suffering any other penalties which
may be imposed, suffer forfeiture, revocation or suspension of any license
issued under this chapter.
§ 75-29. Hours of operation.
A. The licensee shall be permitted to operate and conduct any amusement
game on the licensed premises as follows:
(1) While school is in session: [Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-2]
(a) Mondays through Thursdays: 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight.
(b) Fridays and Saturdays: 10:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m.; however, the
operation of all rides must cease by 1:00 a.m.
(c) Sundays: 10:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. (except when the
following Monday is a holiday, then until 2:00 a.m.; however,
the operation of all rides must cease by 1:00 a.m.).
(d) On the evening before a holiday occurring on a Tuesday
through Friday, closing may be extended to 2:00 a.m.; however,
the operation of all rides must cease by 1:00 a.m.
(2) While school is not in session: [Amended 12-17-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-40]
(a) Mondays through Thursdays: 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight.
(b) Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays: 10:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m.,
however, the operation of all rides must cease by 1:00 a.m.
B. The determination of holidays for purposes of this section shall be made
based upon the Freehold Township Elementary School System calendar.
C. The hours of operation restrictions of this section may be modified to
allow occasional overnight play ("overnight play") upon written
resolution of the Township Committee pursuant to the following
requirements and regulations: [Added 9-27-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-24]
(1) The licensee shall, at least 21 days before the proposed date for the
overnight play, submit a letter of request ("request") to the
Township Clerk, with a copy to the Chief of Police, setting forth:
(a) Proposed date and time for overnight play.
§ 75-28 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-29
71:189
§ 75-30. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GAME — Any game or amusement which is authorized under the provisions
of the Amusement Games Licensing Law.
§ 75-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Article II, Chapter 1, of these general ordinances.
(b) Name, address and contact information of charity or other
benefit, group or organization seeking to hold or sponsor the
overnight play ("proposed beneficiary").
(c) Age range of those expected to participate, excluding
chaperones.
(d) Number of participants expected.
(e) Number of chaperones who will be present throughout the
hours of the overnight play.
(f) Name and telephone number of a representative of the
licensee who will be constantly available at the number given
throughout the hours of overnight play.
(2) The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee shall undertake such
review, inquiry or investigation as is deemed necessary by him/her
and shall report to the Township Clerk with a recommendation
whether the Township Committee should grant the request.
(3) The Township Committee may act upon the request. Such action, if
taken, shall be by written resolution. If no action is taken, it shall be
deemed that the request is denied. If the Township Committee
adopts a resolution permitting the overnight play, it may impose
such restrictions as it deems appropriate.
(4) By submitting the request pursuant to Subsection C(1) above, the
licensee shall be acknowledging that the grant of a request for
overnight play is not a right, but a privilege. In the event the
provisions of this Subsection C or the action of the Township Clerk,
Chief of Police or his/her designee or of the Township Committee
are challenged by the licensee or the proposed beneficiary, all
provisions of this Subsection C shall be deemed automatically
repealed and of no further force or effect.
§ 75-29 FREEHOLD CODE § 75-31
71:190
Chapter 79
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Pets in manufactured/mobile home
parks — See Ch. 213.
Shelters for pets — See Ch. 190, §§ 190-125
and 190-133.
Noise from animals — See Ch. 217, § 217-2C.
Inoculation of cats — See Ch. 368, Art. I.
§ 75-31 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-31
71:191

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 9-14-1960 (Ch. IX of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. O-98-31]
§ 79-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, except that the terms used herein which are defined in N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.1 shall have the meanings given therein:
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his control.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-13]
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not
part of a kennel, wherein animals for sale are kept or displayed.[Added
7-21-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-13]
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid which has been
declared by a Municipal Judge to be potentially dangerous.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of animals seized either
under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.[Added 7-21-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-13]
SHELTER — Any establishment where animals are received, housed and
distributed without charge.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-13]
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid which has been declared by a
Municipal Judge to be a vicious dog.
§ 79-2. Licensing provisions.
A. When license required. Licenses shall be required for the following
dogs of licensing age:
(1) Any dog owned or kept within the Township by a resident of the
Township on the first day of January of any calendar year.
(2) Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar
year and kept within the Township for more than 10 days after
acquisition.
(3) Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar
year.
(4) Any unlicensed dog brought into the Township by any person and
kept within the Township for more than 10 days.
(5) Any dog licensed by another state brought into the Township by any
person and kept within the Township for more than 90 days.
§ 79-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-2
71:193
B. Application for license.
(1) Each application for a license under this article shall give the
following information:
(a) A general description of the dog sought to be licensed,
including breed, sex, age, color, markings, whether long- or
short-haired and date of currently effective rabies vaccination
which must be effective for entire licensure period, except that
on a three-year license, the vaccination must be effective
through at least October 31 of the last year of the license.
(b) Name, street and post office address of the owner of, and the
person who shall keep or harbor, the dog.
(2) Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which
applications are received.
C. Deadline for license application. Applications for licenses for dogs
which are required to be licensed by the provisions of Subsection A
shall be made before the first day of February of such calendar year as
is applicable. In all other cases, the application for a license shall be
made within 10 days of the day upon which the dog in question first
becomes subject to the provisions of this article.
D. Number of dogs permitted. No more than five dogs or cats, or
combination thereof, shall be owned or harbored by any person except
in a kennel or pet shop duly licensed or in a pound or shelter.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
E. License record. The information on all applications under this article
and the registration number issued to each licensed dog shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Township Clerk. In addition,
he shall forward similar information to the State Department of Health
each month on forms furnished by the Department.
F. Fees. Any person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay
the yearly fee for such license as provided in Chapter 150, Fees;
provided however, that the fee will be reduced for any owner who
presents a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that the
dog has been spayed or neutered.
G. Expiration Date. Each dog license, registration tag and renewal thereof
shall expire on the last day of January in each year or every third year if
a three-year license has been issued.
H. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog
licensed under § 79-3 of this article. Dogs used as guides for blind
persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye dogs," dogs used to assist
handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs" and dogs
used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear dogs"
shall be licensed in the same manner as other dogs, except that the
§ 79-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-2
71:194
§ 79-3. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
owner or keeper shall not be required to pay any fee. [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
A. License required. Any person who keeps, operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Health
Department for a license entitling him to keep or operate the
establishment. Any person holding the license shall not be required to
secure individual licenses for dogs owned by the licensee and kept at
the establishment; licenses shall not be transferable to another owner
or different premises. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
B. Application information. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed
to be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
(4) The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by the
establishment at any one time.
C. Pet shop disclosure. [Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-1337]
(1) In addition to the application submitted pursuant to this section,
every pet shop shall submit, to the Township Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs in the Township, a report providing the
following information from the prior year of operation:
(a) The name, full street address, e-mail address, if available, and
USDA license number of:
[1] Any breeder from which the pet shop purchased an animal,
whether or not the pet shop offered the animal for sale;
[2] Any breeder that bred an animal that the pet shop
purchased from a broker, whether or not the pet shop
offered the animal for sale; and
[3] Any broker from which the pet shop purchased an animal,
whether or not the pet shop offered the animal for sale;
(b) If a breeder whose identity the pet shop is required to report
pursuant to § 79-3C(1)(a) is required to be licensed in the state
in which the breeder is located, the breeder's state license
number;
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections C
through H as Subsections D through I, respectively.
§ 79-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-3
71:195
(c) If a broker whose identity the pet shop is required to report
pursuant to § 79-3C(1)(a) is different from any breeder whose
identity the pet shop is required to report pursuant to
§ 79-3C(1)(a), and the broker is required to be licensed in the
state in which the broker is located, the broker's state license
number; and
(d) The total number of animals for each breeder and broker for
which the pet shop has reporting requirements in
§ 79-3C(1)(a).
(2) This § 79-3C shall not apply to pet shops submitting an initial
license application to the Township.
D. Approval of Health Officer. No license shall be issued until the proposed
licensee receives an inspection and a satisfactory posting from the
Health Officer or its designee that the establishment or proposed
establishment complies with local and state rules governing the
location of and sanitation at the establishment. [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
E. License term. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained
and all licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year.
F. License fees. The annual fees for kennel and pet shop licenses shall be
as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
G. Compliance with state regulations.
(1) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
subject to revocation by the Township Committee on
recommendation of the State Department of Health or the Board of
Health for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health or the Board of Health, after the owner
has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department of
Health or the Board of Health.
(2) Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel,
pet shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all Township
ordinances and the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the
preservation of sanitation and the prevention of the spread of
rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from these
establishments.
H. Report to State Health Department. The Health Officer shall forward to
the State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters
and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses are issued, which
list shall include the name and address of the licensee and the kind of
license issued. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 79-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-3
71:196
§ 79-4. Disposition of fees.
§ 79-5. Dog canvass. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
The Department of Health of the Township shall annually or biennially cause
a canvass to be made of dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of
the Township and shall report to the Health Officer, the Board of Health
and the State Department of Health the results thereof, setting forth in
separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or
harboring dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by
each person, together with the registration number of each dog; the number
of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with
a complete description of each unlicensed dog.
§ 79-6. Vicious or potentially dangerous dogs.
I. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off the premises, except on leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Township Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt, and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of
the other accounts of the Township and shall be used for the following
purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to
seizure under this article; local prevention and control of rabies;
providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the local Board of
Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject, and for administering the provisions of this
article. Any unexpended balance remaining in the special account shall
be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and
may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end
of the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from the special account to the
general funds of the Township any amount then in the account which is
in excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee in the amount as prescribed from time to time
by the state for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days after
collection by the Board of Health to the State Department of Health.
A. Complaint; investigation; report; notification. It shall be the duty of the
Police Department and the Animal Control Officer to receive and
investigate complaints against dogs. If they reasonably believe any dog
complained of to be a vicious or potentially dangerous dog, they shall
report their findings in writing to the Municipal Judge.
§ 79-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-6
71:197
(1) The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court and the
Municipal Health Officer immediately that he has seized and
impounded a dog pursuant to this article, or that he has reasonable
cause to believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and
that a hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer shall,
through a reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of
the owner of any dog seized and impounded pursuant to this
article. If its owner cannot be identified within seven days, that dog
may be humanely destroyed.
(2) The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to this article, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and
impoundment and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held
to determine whether the impounded dog is vicious and or
potentially dangerous. This notice shall also require that the owner
return within seven days, by certified mail or hand delivery, a
signed statement indicating whether he wishes the hearing to be
conducted or, if not, to relinquish ownership of the dog, in which
case the dog may be humanely destroyed. If the owner cannot be
notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, or refuses to
sign for the certified letter, or does not reply to the certified letter
with a signed statement within seven days of receipt, the dog may
be humanely destroyed.
B. Notice; hearing. The Municipal Judge shall notify in writing the owner
or keeper of an allegedly vicious or potentially dangerous dog that a
complaint has been made and require the person to appear before him
at a stated time and place for a hearing.
C. Finding to declare dog vicious; grounds.
(1) The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear
and convincing evidence that the dog:
(a) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
(b) Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
(2) A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the
dog was provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof
to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
(3) If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog
may be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
§ 79-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-6
71:198
D. Finding to declare dog potentially dangerous.
(1) The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially
dangerous if it finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
(a) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious
threat of bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Severely injured or killed another domestic animal and poses a
threat of: [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-9]
[1] Serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
[2] Death to another domestic animal; or
(c) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged
to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic
animals.
(2) A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(a) Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person if the dog was provoked; or
(b) Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the
aggressor.
(3) For the purposes of Subsection D(2)(a), the municipality shall bear
the burden of proof to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
E. Control of vicious dogs. No person owning or keeping a vicious dog
shall permit the dog to be off the property of the owner or keeper
without being securely muzzled.
F. Order and schedule for compliance for potentially dangerous dog;
conditions. If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially
dangerous, it shall issue an order and a schedule for compliance which,
in part:
(1) Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(a) To apply, at his own expense, to the Health Officer or other
official designated to license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.2, for a special municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, municipal registration number, and red identification
tag. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the registration
number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location. A
potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until the owner
obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog license,
municipal registration number, and red identification tag;
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 79-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-6
71:199
(b) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises
warning that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises.
The sign shall be visible and legible from 50 feet of the
enclosure required pursuant to Subsection F(1)(c) of this
section;
(c) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the
potentially dangerous dog on the property where the
potentially dangerous dog will be kept and maintained, which
has sound sides, top and bottom to prevent the potentially
dangerous dog from escaping by climbing, jumping or digging
and within a fence of at least six feet in height separated by at
least three feet from the confined area. The owner of a
potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the enclosure to
prevent the entry of the general public and to prelude any
release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous
dogs shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the
enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained with a tether
approved by the Animal Control Officer and having a minimum
tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that required to
restrict the potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius
of no more than three feet from the owner and under the direct
supervision of the owner.
(2) May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance,
which may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall
contain a provision requiring the municipality in which the owner
resides to be named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of
being notified by the insurance company of any cancellation,
termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
G. Procedures for appeal. The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control
Officer in the municipality in which the dog was impounded, may appeal
any final decision, order, or judgment, including any conditions
attached thereto, of a Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et
seq. by filing an appeal with the Superior Court, Law Division, in
accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New
Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of limited jurisdiction. The
Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting a hearing de novo in
the manner established by those rules for appeals from courts of limited
jurisdiction.
H. Liability of owner for costs of impoundment and destruction.
(1) If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all
appeals pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the
dog shall be liable to the municipality in which the dog is
impounded for the costs and expenses of impounding and
§ 79-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-6
71:200
destroying the dog. The municipality may establish by ordinance
a schedule of these costs and expenses. The owner shall incur
the expense of impounding the dog in a facility other than the
municipal pound, regardless of whether the dog is ultimately found
to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
(2) If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to
the time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New
Jersey State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
I. Right to convene hearing for subsequent actions of dog. If the
Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a
hearing to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially
dangerous for any subsequent actions of the dog.
J. Duties of owner of potentially dangerous dog. The owner of the
potentially dangerous dog shall:
(1) Comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. in accordance
with a schedule established by the Municipal Court but in no case
more than 60 days subsequent to the date of determination;
(2) Notify the licensing authority, local Police Department or force, and
the Animal Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large,
or has attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
(3) Notify the licensing authority, local Police Department or force, and
the Animal Control Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or
donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
(4) Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
(5) Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the department and the licensing
authority, Police Department or force, and Animal Control Officer of
that municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name,
address and telephone of the new owner; and
(6) In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3, pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the
municipality as provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-31.
K. Violations by owner; penalties; enforcement; seizure and impoundment
of dog; destruction by order of court. The owner of a potentially
dangerous dog who is found by clear and convincing evidence to have
violated this article, or to have failed to comply with a court’s order,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of the
violation, and each day’s continuance of the violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation. The Municipal Court shall have
jurisdiction to enforce this section. An Animal Control Officer is
§ 79-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-6
71:201
§ 79-7. Impounding and destruction of certain dogs; fees.
authorized to seize and impound any potentially dangerous dog whose
owner fails to comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.,
or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or a court’s order.
The Municipal Court may order that the dog so seized and impounded
be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. [Amended
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-9]
L. Potentially dangerous dog registration number, red identification tag
and license; issuance; telephone number to report violations; publicity.
Each municipality shall:
(1) Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to
the Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the court's
orders. The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog
registration number issued by a municipality will be the threenumber
code assigned to that municipality in the regulations
promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-33. The Animal Control
Officer shall verify, in writing, compliance with the above.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(2) Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this
article. This telephone number shall be forwarded to the State of
New Jersey Department of Health and any changes in this number
shall be reported immediately to the State of New Jersey
Department of Health.
A. Causes for impounding. The Animal Control Officer shall take into
custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, any of the following dogs:
(1) Any unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of
this article.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the Animal Control Officer or his agent
has reason to believe is a stray dog.
(3) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner of or the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
(5) Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog as provided
in § 79-6, provided that these dogs may also be seized by any police
officer, and provided further that if the dogs cannot be seized with
safety, they may be killed.
§ 79-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-7
71:202
§ 79-8. Regulations.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this article and the following regulations.
(6) Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid.
(7) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to
or observed by a Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured or creating
a threat to public health, safety and welfare or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
(8) Any dog or dog hybrid which the Animal Control Officer has
reasonable cause to believe that the dog or dog hybrid has attacked
a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person; or has caused bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person during an unprovoked
attack and poses a serious threat of harm to persons or domestic
animals; or has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in
N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited
or encouraged to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or
domestic animals.
B. Administrative and impound fees. [Added 9-25-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-26]
(1) When any dog is seized by the Animal Control Officer, the owner
shall be liable to the Township for an administrative fee of $50.
(2) When any seized dog is not promptly claimed by its owner and the
Animal Control Officer has turned the dog over for impoundment,
the owner shall be liable to the Township for reimbursement of the
impoundment fee charged to the Township, plus a processing fee of
$10.
(3) In the event the Township is required to initiate any action to
recover any of the fees in this article, all expenses of collection,
including reasonable attorney’s fees, shall be the responsibility of
the owner.
A. Wearing of registration. All dogs which are required by the provisions of
this article to be licensed shall wear a collar or harness with the
registration tag for the dog securely fastened thereto.
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of any dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person
attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this article.
§ 79-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-8
71:203
§ 79-9. Dog bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, the individual, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the police. When the owner or keeper of any dog shall be
notified by the police that the dog has bitten any individual or individuals,
the owner or keeper of the dog must comply with the following procedures:
D. Disturbing the peace. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain
any dog which habitually barks or cries between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
E. Running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit it to run at large upon the public streets or in any
public park, public building or other public place or private property
within the Township without the permission of the owner of such
property.
F. Leashing of dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the
public places or private property within the Township without the
permission of the owner of such property unless such dog is
accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet
long.
G. Property damage. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall
permit or suffer it to do any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property.
H. Curbing of dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall
permit or suffer it to soil, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park,
or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public
property whatsoever or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of such property. The restrictions in this
subsection shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between the
curblines, which shall be used to curb dogs under the following
conditions:
(1) The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by
the Board of Health.
(2) The feces so removed from the aforementioned designated area
shall be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog curbed in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection, in a sanitary manner approved by the Board of Health.
A. Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
§ 79-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-9
71:204
§ 79-10. Rabies vaccination.
B. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for
a period of 10 days.
C. At the end of 10 days have the dog reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the dog's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
A. Vaccination required; exceptions. No person shall own, possess, harbor
or have in custody any dog within the Township over six months of age
unless it has been vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed
veterinarian. The vaccination shall be repeated with the range of known
immunization or annually thereafter and shall consist of the
recommended dosage as prescribed by the manufacturer, who shall be
duly licensed by the United States Bureau of Animal Industry of the
Department of Agriculture. Any dog may be exempted from the
requirement of vaccination for a specified period of time by the Board of
Health, upon the presentation of a certificate from a duly licensed
veterinarian stating that by reason of age, infirmity or other physical
condition the vaccination of the dog, for such specified period of time, is
contraindicated. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require
the vaccination of any dog located in and confined to duly recognized
and licensed kennels, dog pounds, pet shops, shelters or veterinary
hospitals.
B. Certificate.38
(1) Delivery to Health Officer. Any person owning, possessing,
harboring or having custody of any dog shall obtain from the
veterinarian who vaccinates the dog against rabies a certificate
supplied by the Health Officer or on a standard immunization
certificate in use by the licensed veterinarian, and shall within 10
days of each vaccination or within 10 days after bringing the dog
into the Township, if the dog was vaccinated before being brought
into the Township, deliver the certificate to the Township Health
Department where it shall be filed with the records of the office.
(2) Required before issuance of license. No license required for the
owning and keeping of dogs by virtue of any law of the state or the
Township shall be issued to any person unless a certificate issued
by a duly licensed veterinarian is presented to and filed with the
Dog Registrar showing that the dog has been vaccinated against
rabies. The certificate shall indicate that the vaccination has been
made within four months from the date of the filing of the
application for a license.
C. Free vaccination. The Health Officer is authorized and empowered to
provide free vaccination of dogs at a suitable clinic or place designated
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 79-9 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-10
71:205
§ 79-11. Quarantine.
The Township Committee may, by proclamation, require all dogs and cats to
be quarantined during any period in each year which may seem advisable
to the Township Committee.
§ 79-12. Appointment of Animal Control Officer.39
The Township Committee shall have the power to appoint a Animal Control
Officer whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article.40 The
Animal Control Officer may also impound unlicensed dogs running at large
in violation of the provisions of this chapter and shall make a monthly report
to the Board of Health.
§ 79-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-9]
Except as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-29, violations of the provisions
of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty.
by him to be conducted by a licensed veterinarian of the State of
New Jersey. He is further authorized to make and adopt such rules
and regulations not inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this
section as he may deem necessary and proper for the enforcement of
this section.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
40.Editor's Note: An agreement has been entered into with the Townships of Manalapan and
Millstone and the Boroughs of Freehold and Englishtown for the full-time Regional
Animal Control Officer to service all the aforementioned municipalities.
§ 79-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-13
71:206
ARTICLE II
Animal Control
[Adopted 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-6]
§ 79-14. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of an
animal; excrement.
EXOTIC ANIMALS — Any nongame species of mammal, bird, reptile or
amphibian not indigenous to New Jersey.
FARM — The meaning as set forth in § 190-3 of Chapter 190, Land Use.
FARM ANIMALS — Refers to those species of animals that are typically
raised on a farm as defined in this article, such as livestock and poultry.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
IMMEDIATE — At once, without delay.
PERSON — Includes but is not be limited to individuals, corporations,
companies, associations, societies, including nonprofit organizations, firms,
partnerships, joint-stock companies, individuals and governmental entities.
PET — Any animal, other than a disability assistance animal, kept for any
period of time in or at any residence, sold or retained for the purpose of
being kept for pleasure, companionship or utilitarian purposes and not kept
for food source.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS SPECIES — Any exotic mammals, birds,
reptiles or amphibians, or wild animal which, in the opinion of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Fish and
Wildlife (or its successor), is capable of inflicting serious or fatal injuries, or
which has the potential to become an agricultural pest, or a menace to the
public health, or indigenous wildlife populations, including but not limited
to those set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:25-4.8.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for treatment and disposal.
WATERFOWL — Any bird that frequents the water, or lives about rivers,
lakes, etc., or on or near the sea; aquatic fowl including, but not limited to
ducks, geese, swans, herons and egrets.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, which is not human nor domesticated,
including but not limited to bears, coyotes, deer, feral cats, foxes,
groundhogs, opossums, raccoons, skunks, waterfowl, wolves and hybrid
wolves.
§ 79-14 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-15
71:207
§ 79-15. Exemptions.
Horses shall be regulated in accordance with § 190-125 of Chapter 190,
Land Use.
§ 79-16. Animals permitted on residential property.
The following restrictions shall apply to all areas located in a residential
zone within Freehold Township pursuant to §§ 190-125 through 190-143 of
Chapter 190, Land Use:
§ 79-17. Registration of potentially dangerous species.
§ 79-18. Disposal of pet waste.
§ 79-19. Wildlife feeding.
A. Housing or storing of farm animals is prohibited unless a location in
which the animals are being stored is a farm in accordance with this
article.
B. Large exotic animals, as determined by the Freehold Township Health
Department, and potentially dangerous species are not permitted in
residential zones.
A. No person shall possess any potentially dangerous species unless such
person has first received both the required permit from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:25, Subchapter 4, and has registered with the Freehold Township
Board of Health. In registering with the Freehold Township Board of
Health, a person seeking to possess any potentially dangerous species
must present the permit obtained from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. A registration fee as provided in chapter 150, Fees, must be tendered to
the Freehold Township Board of Health upon registering such animal
with the Township.
A. Requirements for disposal. All persons are required to immediately and
properly dispose of their pet solid waste deposited on any property,
public or private, whether or not owned or possessed by that person.
B. Storage of receptacles. At no time may refuse containers be placed
closer than 50 feet from a stream or wetland area, as delineated by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
A. Feeding of wild animals, birds and waterfowl prohibited.
§ 79-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-19
71:208
(1) No person shall purposely or knowingly, as said terms are defined
in Title 2C of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, feed, bait or in any
manner provide access to food to any wild animal, birds or
waterfowl in Freehold Township, on lands either publicly or
privately owned, except as permitted by Subsection B below. This
section shall not apply to the feeding of farm animals, nor to
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in stables, parks or
rehabilitation centers, nor unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers).
(2) No person shall purposely or knowingly leave or store any refuse,
garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or supplement,
salt, seed or birdseed, fruit or grain in a manner that would
constitute an attractant to any wild animal or waterfowl.
(3) After being advised by the Township to undertake remedial action
to avoid contact or conflict with wild animals, no person shall
continue to provide, or otherwise fail to secure or remove, any
likely food sources or attractants, including, but not limited to,
outdoor trash, grills, pet food, bird feeders or any other similar food
source or attractant.
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to:
(a) Any agent of the Township authorized to implement an
alternative control method set forth in any approved
community-based deer management plan and possessing a
special deer management permit issued by the New Jersey
Division of Fish and Wildlife in accordance with the provisions
of P.L. 2000, c.4641; or
(b) Any hunter engaging in baiting for the purpose of hunting
pursuant to a valid hunting license issued in accordance with
the provisions of Title 23 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
B. Feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds permitted. Feeding of
songbirds and other backyard birds shall be permitted outdoors at such
times and in such numbers that:
(1) Such feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance that
affects the rights of surrounding property owners and renders
other persons insecure in the use of their property;
(2) Does not create an accumulation of droppings on the property and
surrounding properties; and
(3) Does not become an attractant for rodents or other wild animals.
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 23:4-42.3 et seq.
§ 79-19 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 79-20
71:209
§ 79-20. Waiver.
Any individual may seek a waiver from full or partial compliance with any
section of this article by filing a written request for a waiver with the
Freehold Township Board of Health. The Board of Health shall have 45
business days from receipt of the waiver request to issue a written decision
either granting or denying the request. A granting of a waiver shall not
serve to cure any violations issued by any entity within the Township prior
to the issuance of such written notification, nor shall the granting of any
waiver request be effective until and unless written notification is issued by
the Board of Health.
§ 79-21. Public health nuisance.
Any animal owned or harbored in accordance with this article must be kept
and maintained so as not to create a public health nuisance as determined
by the Township of Freehold in accordance with the criteria set forth in
N.J.S.A. 26:3-45 et seq.
§ 79-22. Enforcement.
A summons alleging a violation of this article may be issued by the Freehold
Township Code Enforcement Officer, the Freehold Township Health Officer
or designee or by the Freehold Township Police Department. Alternatively,
any individual may file a complaint with the Freehold Township Municipal
Court, which shall issue a summons in accordance with the New Jersey
Rules of Court.
§ 79-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty. Each and every day in which a violation of any provision
of this article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 79-20 FREEHOLD CODE § 79-23
71:210
Chapter 92
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115. Land subdivision procedures — See Ch. 190,
Art. VII.
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Includes all houses and dwellings, stores and business places,
and other buildings, which front upon any street in the Township.
§ 92-2. Inclusion on Tax Map.
The Engineer shall insert upon the Tax Maps of the Township all of the
properties which now or hereafter front upon any street and indicate a
number therefor as assigned by the Building Inspector.
§ 92-3. Street numbers to appear on each building. [Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-36; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
A. All buildings now or hereafter erected within the Township shall bear, in
Arabic figures, the street number assigned to the building by the
Construction Official. Such figures shall be displayed by the owner or
occupant on the front of the building or in the front yard in numerals in
contrasting colors to the background upon which the numerals are
mounted, at or near the front entrance to the building, or such other
visible location as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire
Marshal of the Township, and so located as to be visible to persons
passing by the building or premises on the abutting street. In the case
of manufactured/mobile homes, the house number shall be either
displayed as required above or displayed so that it is clearly
distinguishable from the street on a mailbox located at the sidewalk.
B. Numerals on residential buildings shall be at least six inches in height.
C. Numerals on commercial, office, industrial and other nonresidential
buildings shall be at least 12 inches in height. Numerals on buildings
set back 100 feet or more from the right-of-way shall be at least 18
inches in height. A street number, a minimum of 12 inches in height,
shall be placed on the top of all main shopping center signs.
§ 79-23 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 92-4
71:211
§ 92-4. Filing of map with Clerk.
Upon completion of the plotting upon the Tax Maps of the Township of the
numbers assigned to all lots and buildings on any particular street, the
Engineer shall file a copy thereof with the Township Clerk.
§ 92-5. New numbers.
Upon any subdivision or resubdivision of land in the Township resulting in a
lot or lots other than those delineated on the map, the inspector shall assign
a number to each lot resulting from the subdivision or resubdivision, which
shall be in proper numerical sequence in relation to the number assigned to
the other lots fronting on the same street, and the Engineer shall record the
new numbers on the map within 10 days of the filing of the approval given
for such subdivision or resubdivision of land.
§ 92-6. Numbers to be assigned before approval of subdivision.
No subdivision or resubdivision, major or minor, of land requiring approval
by the Planning Board shall be approved by it unless a number is assigned
to each lot for the building erected or to be erected on it.
§ 92-7. Numbers to be assigned before issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy, or continued certificate of occupancy, shall
be issued by the Building Inspector or anyone in his department for the
occupancy of any building hereinafter erected or enlarged unless the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
§ 92-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 97
CAMPGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Licensing — See Ch. 195.
§ 97-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the terminology of the following definition shall control:
§ 92-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 97-1
97:212
CAMPER — Any person who registers his party for the occupancy of a
campsite or who otherwise assumes charge of, or is placed in charge of, a
campsite.
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are
located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the
general public as temporary living quarters for children or adults, or both,
for a total of 15 days or more in any calendar year, for recreation, education
or vacation purposes.
CAMPING UNIT — Any tent or camping vehicle temporarily located on a
campsite, or a cabin, lean-to, or similar structure established or maintained
and operated in a campground as temporary living quarters for children
or adults, or both, for recreation, education or vacation purposes, but shall
not include any camping unit kept by its owner on land occupied by him
in connection with his dwelling, or any camping unit which is not occupied
and which is kept at a campground for storage purposes only at a location
reserved for the storage of such camping units.
CAMPING VEHICLE — Any camp trailer, travel trailer or other unit built or
mounted on a vehicle or chassis designed without permanent foundation,
which is used for temporary dwelling or sleeping purposes, and which,
under the provisions of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, may
be legally driven, or towed by a passenger automobile, on a highway.
CAMPSITE — Any plot of ground within a campground intended for the
exclusive occupation by camping unit or units in the control of a camper.
OWNER — The owner, lessee, tenant, or other person having authorization
to permit and who permits the occupancy of a campground by campers or
overnight occupants.
§ 97-2. License required.
No person shall construct, expand, operate, or maintain a campground
within the Township unless such person shall first obtain a license for
the construction, expansion, operation or maintenance thereof, from the
Township and pay the fees as hereinafter provided. All campgrounds in
existence as of the date of the adoption of this chapter shall within 60 days
thereafter obtain a license. Any approval of plans and applications for a
license to construct or expand a campground shall be subject to automatic
revocation in the event the applicant to whom the approval is granted shall
fail to commence construction or expansion of the campground for which
a license is applied for within 18 months from the date of the granting
of such approval. No license shall be issued to any owner unless and
until such person shall have applied for and been granted approval for
the construction, expansion, or operation of such campground by the New
Jersey Department of Health pursuant to Chapter XI of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code.
§ 97-1 CAMPGROUNDS § 97-3
97:213
§ 97-3. Location of campground.
Campgrounds shall be permitted solely and exclusively in those locations
for which a license has been granted or renewed; the license shall be issued
or refused on the basis of the criteria contained in this chapter, Chapter XI
of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, and the general welfare.
§ 97-4. Number of licenses.
Only two licenses for the construction, maintenance or operation of a
campground shall be issued.
§ 97-5. Duration of licenses.
Licenses or permits to maintain and operate a campground pursuant to this
chapter shall be issued annually for a three-year period, commencing on
the first day of January and terminating on the 31st day of December three
years hence.
§ 97-6. Fees.
The annual fee for said license shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 97-7. License renewal.
The renewal of any campground license shall be based on prior compliance
by the owner or operator with the provisions of this chapter, the securing
of any and all proper approvals from the State Department of Health, and
the reasonable expectation of future compliance with this chapter and all
applicable state laws and regulations.
§ 97-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 101
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 101-1. Fee established.
A municipal service charge as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, is hereby
established for certain checks which are returned by financial institutions
without payment pursuant to Chapter 105, L. 1990 (N.J.S.A. 40:5-18) for the
Township of Freehold shall exist:
A. Whenever an account owing to a municipality is for tax, water, sewer or
special assessment, the service charge shall be included on whatever
list of delinquent accounts is prepared for the enforcement of the lien.
§ 97-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 101-1
97:214
§ 101-2. Form of future payments by offenders. [Added 6-25-2013
by Ord. No. O-13-20]
The Chief Financial Officer or his or her designee may require that payment
of any account owing to the Township be made by cash or by certified
or cashier’s check by any person, corporation or other entity that has
previously had a check or other written instrument returned to the
Township because of insufficient funds.
Chapter 107
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Alliance Committee — See Ch. 10,
Art. XI.
Consumption of alcohol by minors on private
property — See Ch. 71, Art. II.
§ 107-1. Findings.
The Township Committee makes the following findings:
B. If the account owed is not for tax, water, sewer or special assessment,
this service charge will be tendered in cash or by certified or cashier's
check.
A. The Surgeon General of the United States has called for a ban on the
sale of cigarettes by vending machines.
B. The State of New Jersey has banned the sale or furnishing of cigarettes
or tobacco in any form to minors under N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1.
C. The Township is unable to prevent the sale of cigarettes to minors by
vending machines and no penalty has been imposed by state statute
upon minors for the purchase of cigarettes.
D. The Township is authorized to enact ordinances not contrary to the laws
of this state or of the United States as it may deem necessary and
proper for the protection of persons and for the preservation of public
health, safety and welfare of the Township and its inhabitants.
E. There exists within the Township of Freehold numerous cigarette
vending machines which provide the largely uncontrolled opportunity
for the purchase of cigarettes by minors.
F. In a fact sheet published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services under date of August 10, 1995, the Department reviews the
facts concerning the plague of cigarette smoking by children and calls
for the elimination of cigarette vending machines.
§ 101-1 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 107-2
107:215
§ 107-2. Vending machines prohibited.
All cigarette vending machines are hereby prohibited in the Township.
§ 107-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person owning, operating, renting or permitting the use of a cigarette
vending machine on premises under his or her control shall be subject to
the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Each day on which
such a machine is owned, operated, rented or permitted on the premises
shall result in an additional fine.
Chapter 111
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150. Rapid entry system — See Ch. 162, Art. IV.
§ 111-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE RADIO COVERAGE —
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the floor or floors of a
building which are enclosed and suitable for human occupancy and having
a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet, six inches, but including closet
space, attached garages and hallways and excluding cellars, attics, dead air
space, open porches, breezeways, and all accessory buildings. Such area
shall be measured from outside to outside of exterior walls.
The minimum usable signal required to provide a clear message that is
intelligible and where each word is understandable in the presence of
occasional noise or occasional distortion in 95% of the area of each floor
of the building when transmitted from the closest Freehold Township
police radio communications system site;
A.
The minimum usable signal required to provide a clear message that
is intelligible and where each word is understandable in the presence
of occasional noise or occasional distortion at the closest Freehold
Township police radio communications site when transmitted from 95%
of the area of each floor of the building;
B.
The frequency range which must be supported shall be 500 to 506
MHZ, 154.430, 154.175, 154.205, 154.265, 159.375, 153.830, 155.175,
155.340 and 155.280 VHF and;
C.
D. A reliability factor of 100%.
§ 107-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 111-1
107:216
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the finished grade at the front of the structure to the highest point of the
roof for flat roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials forming a construction,
assembly or erection, the use of which require location upon or below the
ground or attachment to something having a location upon or below the
ground, including among other things, buildings, motor vehicle parking
garages, fences, walls, signs, radio towers, swimming pools, light
stanchions, platforms and manufactured/mobile homes.[Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-36]
§ 111-2. License required.
The owner of a structure used as a motor vehicle parking facility and the
owner of each nonresidential structure in the Township which is 250,000
square feet or more of gross floor area and 35 feet or more in height
must annually apply for and receive a license from the Township for such
structure. No structure, required under this chapter to be licensed, shall be
used or occupied unless licensed.
§ 111-3. Application for license; fee.
Licenses shall be issued on a calendar-year basis. Application for a license
hereunder shall be secured from the office of the Township Clerk.
Completed applications, together with a fee of as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, shall be filed no later than November 1 prior to the license year.
§ 111-4. Requirements for license.
No structure shall be licensed unless there is adequate radio coverage as
verified by a radio coverage survey as described hereafter, except that a
license may be issued for the first calendar year following adoption of this
chapter if:
A. A complete application is filed; and
B. The application fee is paid; and
C. The testing procedure described in § 111-7 is undertaken and results
obtained; and
D. The applicant presents a viable plan, for assuring adequate radio
coverage will be achieved, within nine months from the effective date of
this chapter; and
E. The applicant submits a written certification that all necessary steps to
achieve adequate radio coverage will be completed prior to one year
from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 111-1 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 111-5
107:217
§ 111-5. Radio coverage survey.
In order to determine if a new building or structure needs radio equipment,
a computer-generated radio coverage prediction using a state-of-the-art
propagation analysis system such as RCC's COMSITE™ or its equivalent,
will be performed against the above criteria by Freehold Township
authorized personnel. If a determination is made that the new building or
structure needs radio equipment, a certificate of occupancy shall not be
issued until the new radio equipment is tested and meets the adequate radio
coverage as described in this chapter.
§ 111-6. Amplification systems allowed.
Buildings and structures which cannot support the required level of radio
coverage shall be equipped with either a radiating cable system or an
internal multiple antenna system with or without FCC-type accepted
bidirectional 500 MHZ amplifiers as needed. If any part of the installed
system or systems contains an electrically powered component, the system
shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator
system for a period of at least 12 hours without external power input. The
battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of an external
power input.
§ 111-7. Testing procedures.
A. Acceptance test procedure.
(1) When an in-building radio system is required, and upon completion
of installation, it will be the building owner's responsibility to have
the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each
floor of the building is a minimum of 95%. Each floor of the building
shall be divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. A
maximum of one area will be allowed to fail the test. If more than
one area fails the test, the building owner shall have the system
altered to meet the ninety-five-percent coverage requirement. The
test shall be conducted using a hand-held-type Freehold Township
portable, worn at the hip, with the use of standard lapel speaker/
microphone, talking through the Freehold Township police radio
communications system. A spot located approximately in the center
of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be
keyed to verify two-way communications to and from the outside of
the building through the Freehold Township Police Department
communications system. Once the spot has been selected,
prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be
permitted.
(2) The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test
measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner
so that the measurements can be verified each year during the
annual tests. In the event that the measurement results became
§ 111-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 111-7
107:218
§ 111-8. Qualifications of testing personnel.
All tests shall be conducted, documented and signed by a person in
possession of a current FCC license, or a current technical certification
issued by the Associated Public-Safety Communications Officials
International (APCO) or the Personal Communications Industry Association
(PCIA). All test records shall be retained on the inspected premises by
the building owner and a copy submitted to the Freehold Township Police
Department.
§ 111-9. Field testing.
Freehold Township police personnel and/or their technical representatives,
after providing reasonable notice to the owner or his representative, shall
have the right to enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be
certain that the required level of radio coverage is present. Before doing so,
the Police Department shall notify the various fire companies and the First
Aid Squad serving the Township that such field testing is being scheduled so
that if any such companies/squad want to participate in such field testing,
they may do so at the same time as the field testing is being done by the
Police Department.
§ 111-10. Violations and penalties.
Upon conviction or guilty plea for violation of any provision of this chapter,
the person/entity so pleading or convicted shall be liable for the penalties
prescribed by Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the test so to
reestablish the gain values.
B. Annual tests. When an in-building radio system is required, the building
owner shall test all active components of the system, including but not
limited to amplifiers, power supplies and backup batteries, a minimum
of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the
gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance.
Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load for a
period of one hour to verify that, they will properly operate during an
actual power outage. If within the one-hour test period, in the opinion of
the testing technician, the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test
shall be extended for additional one-hour periods until the testing
technician confirms the integrity of the battery. All other active
components shall be checked to determine that they are operating
within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended purpose.
C. Five-year tests. In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall
perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to
ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the
original acceptance test. The procedure set forth above shall apply to
such tests.
§ 111-7 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 111-10
107:219
Chapter 115
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of commercial and industrial
buildings — See Ch. 111.
Registration of contractors — See Ch. 123.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 162.
Manufactured/mobile homes — See Ch. 213.
§ 115-1. Enforcement of state standards.
A State Uniform Construction Code having been enacted by the legislature
and the Governor of the State of New Jersey, with an effective date of
February 4, 1976; the Township of Freehold has heretofore on October 18,
1976, by resolution duly adopted at a public meeting elected to enforce the
code within the jurisdiction of the Township. A copy of this code is on file in
the office of the Clerk and of the Construction Official and is available to the
public for use and examination during regular business hours.
§ 115-2. Enforcing agency.
There is hereby established an enforcing agency for the State Uniform
Construction Code to be known as the "Construction Division of the Code
Enforcement Department," which Department has been created heretofore
in Article XIV of Chapter 2 of the Code of the Township of Freehold.
The Construction Division shall consist of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official and
Fire Protection Subcode Official. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the Construction Division. Each official position created
herein shall be filled by an appointment for a term of four years and by a
person qualified for such position, provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract
pursuant to law. More than one such official position may be held by the
same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to law.
§ 115-3. Liability of Construction Official.
The Construction Official, any employee and/or subcode official charged
with the enforcement of this code, acting in good faith and without malice
for the Township in the discharge of his duties shall not thereby render
himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act
required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties.
Any suit brought against the Construction Official, any employee and/or
subcode official, because of such act or omission performed by him in the
enforcement of any provision of this code, shall be defended by the Legal
Department of the Township until final termination of the proceedings.
§ 111-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 115-4
107:220
§ 115-4. Office location.
The public shall have the right to do business with the Construction Division
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
§ 115-5. Fees. [Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the fees listed in
§ 150-62A, B and C and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit.
§ 115-6. Fee schedule recommendation by Construction Official.
The Construction Official shall with the advice of the subcode officials
prepare and submit to the Township Committee biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the Township fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 115-7. Surcharge remitted to state.
In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the construction department shall collect in addition to the fees
specified above a surcharge as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 115-8. Rounding to nearest dollar.
All fees calculated pursuant to this chapter shall be rounded to the nearest
dollar, i.e. .01 to .49 will be rounded down, .50 and above will be rounded
up.
§ 115-9. Waiver of construction fees.
Notwithstanding the provision of § 115-5, the following provisions shall
determine circumstances for the waiver of construction fees:
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing private structure or any of the
facilities contained therein.
B. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his or her own living unit.
C. Disabled person for purposes of this subsection shall be as defined in
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e, as same may be amended from time to time.
§ 115-4 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 115-9
107:221
Chapter 119
CONSUMER PROTECTION
§ 119-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Consumer Protection
Ordinance of the Township of Freehold."
§ 119-2. Notice required.
The seller of any real property with a new home on it in the area defined
below must include in the contract of sale a provision which states that the
prospective buyer has been notified of the proximity of the subject property
to all sanitary landfill operations which are in existence, proposed or which
have been closed.
§ 119-3. Applicable area.
The area of Freehold Township in which such notification is required is
defined by the area encompassed within a radius of 3,000 feet of all sanitary
landfill operations which are in existence, proposed or which have been
closed.
§ 119-4. Applicability.
A new home shall be defined as one for which the initial certificate of
occupancy is issued on or after the effective date of this chapter. This
chapter shall not apply to any resales of said homes. This chapter shall
not apply to any homes for which the original certificate of occupancy was
issued before the effective date of this chapter.
D. In recognition of the governmental and quasi-governmental functions
and programs without cost which benefit society as a whole and
specifically lessens the burden which would otherwise have to be borne
by the Township government, the following entities shall not be charged
a construction permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement made to a
building or structure owned and operated by such entity:
(1) Any federal, state, county or local governmental agency.
(2) Freehold First Aid Squad.
(3) East Freehold Fire Company.
(4) Freehold Independent Fire Company.
(5) Religious nonprofit corporations.
§ 115-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 119-5
119:222
§ 119-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 123
(RESERVED)
Chapter 125
CPR/AED TRAINING
§ 125-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CO-SPONSORED PROGRAM — Any program, including but not limited
to nonprofit youth-serving organizations as defined below, which receives
benefits, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to the
provision of funding and/or the provision of fields, facilities and/or
equipment (and including the maintenance of same), from the Township of
Freehold.
CPR/AED TRAINING — Cardiopulmonary resuscitation with automatic
external defibrillator, adult and child, with a certification for completion of
training.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION — A corporation,
association or other organization established pursuant to Title 15 of the
Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes or other law of
the state (but excluding public and nonpublic schools) and which provides
recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities or services for
persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from federal income
taxes.
SPONSORED PROGRAM — Recreation programs run directly by the
Freehold Township Department of Parks and Recreation, including
oversight, control and/or fiscal contribution.
TOWNSHIP EMPLOYEES — All full-time, part-time and seasonal employees
of the Freehold Township Department of Parks and Recreation.
VOLUNTEER COACH — Any person involved with coaching or supervising
participants in a nonprofit youth-serving organization, whether the title is
coach, manager or another title consistent with these terms.
§ 125-2. Mandatory CPR/AED training for volunteer coaches and
Township recreation employees.
A. The Township of Freehold requires that all volunteer coaches of
nonprofit youth-serving organizations involved in sponsored or co-
§ 119-5 (RESERVED) § 125-2
123:223
§ 125-3. Violations and penalties.
Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty.
Chapter 126
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners — See Ch. 10, Art. II.
Criminal history background
investigations — See Ch. 192, Art. II.
Sex offender residency — See Ch. 273.
Sports code of conduct — See Ch. 295.
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COSPONSORED PROGRAM — Any program, including but not limited to
nonprofit youth-serving organizations as defined below, which receives
benefits, either directly or indirectly, including to but not limited to the
provision of funding and/or the provision of fields, facilities and/or
sponsored programs (hereafter "coaches") and Township employees
receive CPR/AED training, and possess a current, in-force certification
evidencing such training. In the event any coaches or Township
employees may have CPR/AED training and current certification of a
higher level than that which is required by this chapter, such training
shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
B. All coaches and Township employees shall have until June 30, 2013,
within which to achieve the required certification. [Amended
2-26-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-4]
C. Failure to achieve such certification within the time set forth herein
shall disqualify such person from serving as a coach on any Township
facility or in conjunction with any sponsored program or co-sponsored
program.
D. The Director of the Freehold Township Parks and Recreation may set
forth policies and procedures which shall not be inconsistent with this
chapter.
E. The Township of Freehold shall bear the cost for the training required
by this chapter.
§ 125-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 126-1
126:224
equipment (and including the maintenance of same), from the Township of
Freehold.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation Identification Division and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATIONS — A corporation,
association or other organization established pursuant to Title 15 of the
Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes or other law of
the state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and which provides
recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities or services for
persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from federal income
taxes.
REVIEW COMMITTEE — A three-member committee consisting of the
Director of Parks and Recreation or designee, Township Administrator or
designee and Chief of Police or designee. The Committee shall be charged
with the review of all appeals of any Township employee or volunteer
whose criminal history background check reveals a disqualifying criminal
conviction.
SPONSORED PROGRAM — Recreation programs run directly by the
Freehold Township Department of Parks and Recreation, including
oversight, control and/or fiscal contribution.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION — The entity located within the
New Jersey State Police responsible for retrieving criminal background
information on individuals as requested by state, local or private entities.
TOWNSHIP EMPLOYEES — All full-time, part-time and seasonal employees
of the Freehold Township Department of Parks and Recreation.
VOLUNTEER COACH — Any person involved with coaching or supervising
participants in a nonprofit youth-serving organization, whether the title is
coach, manager or another title consistent with these terms.
VOLUNTEER REVIEW OPERATION ("VRO") — The unit located within the
State Bureau of Identification that is responsible for administering criminal
background checks for volunteer coaches as specified in this chapter.
§ 126-2. Requests for volunteer criminal background checks; costs.
A. The Township of Freehold requires that all volunteer coaches of
nonprofit youth-serving organizations involved in sponsored or
cosponsored programs request through the Freehold Township
Department of Parks and Recreation that the State Bureau of
Identification and the Federal Bureau of Investigation ("FBI") conduct a
criminal history record background on each prospective and current
volunteer coach of nonprofit youth-serving organizations in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and with the procedures and guidelines
adopted by the VRO. No person will be permitted to act as a volunteer
§ 126-1 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS § 126-2
126:225
§ 126-3. Conditions under which a person is disqualified from
service.
§ 126-4. Submission and exchange of background information
pertaining to volunteer coaches.
coach until the results of the background checks have been received
and reviewed by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
B. The Township shall conduct a criminal history record background check
only upon receipt of the written consent for a check from the
prospective or current volunteer coach.
C. Any prospective or current volunteer coach of a nonprofit youth-serving
organization who refuses to consent to this procedure shall not be
permitted to participate in any sponsored or cosponsored programs
involving nonprofit youth-serving organizations.
D. The Township shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal
history record background checks for prospective or current volunteer
coaches for Township-sponsored programs, and all other nonprofit
youth-serving organizations shall bear the costs for conducting checks
for prospective or current volunteer coaches participating in
cosponsored programs in accordance with the regulations established
by the VRO.
E. The Director of the Freehold Township Department of Parks and
Recreation may set forth policies and procedures which shall not be
inconsistent with this chapter.
F. The VRO shall advise the Director of Parks and Recreation of the
eligibility of the prospective or current volunteer coach under the law.
Any information received by the Director of Parks and Recreation shall
be confidential.
G. Criminal history background checks will be performed for individuals
under the age of 18 in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and
with the procedures and guidelines adopted by the VRO.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as a volunteer coach of a
nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal history
record background check reveals a disqualifying record in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute a disqualifying record in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. may also constitute grounds for
disqualification.
A. Prospective or current volunteer coaches of nonprofit youth-serving
organizations for cosponsored programs shall submit their names,
addresses, fingerprints, written consent, and any other necessary
§ 126-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 126-4
126:226
§ 126-5. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
information.
§ 126-6. Determination by Review Committee; concerning volunteer
coaches; appeal process.
information to the organization for the criminal history record
background check to be performed. The organization shall submit this
documentation to the Director of Parks and Recreation, who shall
coordinate the background check and refer the information to the State
Bureau of Investigation for the background check. The Director of
Parks and Recreation or designee shall be responsible for obtaining
the above information for all prospective and current volunteer coaches
for all nonprofit youth-serving organizations, both sponsored and
cosponsored programs. Thereafter, all information required for
subsequent background checks shall be submitted to the Freehold
Township Department of Parks and Recreation, who shall coordinate
criminal background checks every 24 to 36 months, not to exceed 36
months after the date of the initial check.
B. The Freehold Township Department of Parks and Recreation shall act
as a clearinghouse for the collection and dissemination of information
obtained as a result of conducting criminal history record background
checks pursuant to this chapter.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
members of the Review Committee, as authorized by federal or state
statute, rule or regulations, executive order, administrative code, local
ordinance or resolution regarding obtaining and disseminating of
criminal history record information obtained under this chapter.
B. The Review Committee shall limit its use of criminal history record
information solely to the authorized person for which it was obtained,
and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating
federal or state regulations governing access to criminal history record
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
A. The VRO shall make a recommendation based on the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. as to whether the prospective or current
volunteer coach is being recommended. The VRO will provide the
Director of Parks and Recreation with a letter of recommendation or
nonrecommendation for each individual for whom the VRO completed a
background check.
B. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall promptly notify a
prospective or current volunteer coach who receives a letter of
§ 126-4 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS § 126-6
126:227
nonrecommendation from the VRO. Individuals who receive a letter of
nonrecommendation from the VRO will not be permitted to participate
as a volunteer coach. Such individuals may obtain a copy of their
criminal history record by contacting the VRO in writing. The
individuals shall then have 30 days from the receipt of notification from
the Director of Parks and Recreation to petition the Review Committee
for a review and to cite reasons substantiating the review.
C. Individuals who receive a letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO
may be permitted to serve as a volunteer coach if they affirmatively
demonstrate rehabilitation to the Review Committee. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated clear and convincing
evidence of rehabilitation, the Review Committee may consider the
following factors in conjunction with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1
et seq.:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstance under which the offense occurred;
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work release programs or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
D. In all instances, the final determination of whether an individual will be
permitted to serve as a volunteer coach will lie in the sole discretion of
the Review Committee.
E. The Review Committee shall promptly advise the prospective or current
volunteer coach whether he or she is qualified to serve as a volunteer
coach.
F. When the Director of Parks and Recreation receives a letter of
nonrecommendation from the VRO, the Director of Parks and
Recreation may file that letter with the Freehold Township Police
Department.
§ 126-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 126-6
126:228
§ 126-7. Requests for Township employee criminal background
checks, costs.
G. The Freehold Township Police Department shall keep the written
notification on file for three years from the date it was issued.
H. The Director of Parks and Recreation may request the Freehold
Township Police Department to review its files to determine if there is
written notification on file stating whether a criminal history record
background check of a current or prospective volunteer coach reveals a
disqualifying offense or stating that the person has affirmatively
demonstrated rehabilitation under this act.
I. No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal action
brought by any party based on any written notification on file with the
Freehold Township Police Department pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
A. The Township of Freehold requires that all prospective and current
Township employees, as defined in this chapter, submit to a criminal
history record background check in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1
et seq. and with the procedures and guidelines adopted and set forth by
the State Bureau of Identification and the Freehold Township Director
of Parks and Recreation.
B. The Township shall conduct a criminal history record background check
only upon receipt of the written consent for check from the prospective
or current Township employee.
C. Any prospective or current Township employee who refuses to consent
to the provisions of this chapter shall not be permitted to be employed
by the Township as an employee.
D. The Township shall bear all costs associated with conducting criminal
history record background checks for prospective or current Township
employees.
E. The Director of the Freehold Township Department of Parks and
Recreation may set forth policies and procedures which shall not be
inconsistent with this chapter.
F. The Freehold Township Director of Parks and Recreation will be
responsible for providing information to prospective or current
Township employees covered by this chapter concerning the
appropriate authority to contact for the background check. That
authority shall then conduct a criminal history background check in
accordance with state and federal guidelines.
G. The authority conducting the background check shall forward the
results of each criminal background check to the Freehold Township
Police Department, which shall make a determination as to an
individual's eligibility to be employed as a Township employee in
§ 126-6 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS § 126-7
126:229
§ 126-8. Conditions under which a person is disqualified from
employment.
§ 126-9. Submission and exchange of background information
pertaining to Township employees.
Prospective or current Township employees shall submit their names,
addresses, fingerprints, written consent and any other necessary
information for the criminal history record background check to the agency
designated by the Township to conduct background checks. The Freehold
Township Director of Parks and Recreation shall be responsible for
coordinating the background checks with prospective or current Township
employees. Thereafter, all subsequent background checks shall be
coordinated by the Freehold Township Police Department every 24 to 36
months, not to exceed 36 months after the date of the initial check.
§ 126-10. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
information.
accordance with this chapter, pursuant to the parameters outlined
in N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. All information received by the Freehold
Township Police Department shall be and remain confidential.
H. Criminal history background checks will be performed for individuals
under the age of 18 in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and
with the procedures and guidelines adopted by the State Bureau of
Identification.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as a Township employee if
that person's criminal history record background check reveals a
disqualifying record in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
15A:3A-1 et seq.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute a disqualifying record in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. may also constitute grounds for
disqualification.
A. The Freehold Township Police Department shall act as a clearinghouse
for the collection and dissemination of information obtained as a result
of conducting criminal history record background checks pursuant to
this chapter.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including employment, is restricted to the members of the
Review Committee, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and disseminating of criminal history
record information obtained under this chapter.
§ 126-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 126-10
126:230
§ 126-11. Determination by Review Committee concerning
Township employees; appeal process.
B. The Review Committee shall limit its use of criminal history record
information solely to the authorized person for which it was obtained,
and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating
federal or state regulations governing access to criminal history record
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
A. The authority conducting the background check shall forward the
results of its criminal history record background check to the Chief of
Police of the Freehold Township Police Department or his designee. The
Chief of Police or his designee shall then provide the Freehold Township
Director of Parks and Recreation with a determination as to whether to
hire or retain a prospective or current Township employee, as
appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall promptly notify a
prospective or current Township employee who receives a nonhire
recommendation from the Chief of Police or his designee. Individuals
who receive a nonhire recommendation from the Police Chief or his
designee will not be permitted to be employed. Such individuals may
obtain a copy of their criminal history record by contacting the State
Bureau of Investigation in writing. Such individuals will have 30 days
from the receipt of the official notice from the Director of Parks and
Recreation to petition the Review Committee for a review and to cite
reasons substantiating the review.
C. Individuals who receive a nonhire recommendation from the Police
Chief or his designee may be permitted to be employed as a Township
employee if they affirmatively demonstrate rehabilitation to the Review
Committee. In determining whether a person has affirmatively
demonstrated clear and convincing evidence of rehabilitation, the
Review Committee may consider the following factors:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstance under which the offense occurred;
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
§ 126-10 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS § 126-11
126:231
Chapter 127
CURFEW
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work release programs or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
D. In all instances, the final determination of whether an individual will be
permitted to work as a Township employee will lie in the sole discretion
of the Review Committee.
E. The Review Committee shall promptly advise the prospective or current
Township employee whether he or she is qualified to be employed as
such.
F. The Freehold Township Police Department shall keep the results of
criminal history record background checks on file for three years from
the date such results were received by the Department.
G. The Director of Parks and Recreation may request the Freehold
Township Police Department to review its files to determine if there is
written notification on file stating whether a criminal history record
background check of a current or prospective Township employee
reveals a disqualifying offense or stating that the person has
affirmatively demonstrated a rehabilitation under this act.
H. No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal action
brought by any party based on any written notification on file with the
Freehold Township Police Department to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 126-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 126-11
127:232
ARTICLE I
Halloween Curfew
[Adopted 10-26-1970 (§ 6-9 of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 127-1. Curfew established; restrictions. [Amended 9-25-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-25]
No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted in any public place,
street or property in the Township between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. of each and every day during the period from October 28 to
November 1, inclusive, of each year unless such person shall during such
hours be returning home from work, night school, fraternity or house of
worship or school meetings or en route to or returning from a doctor's or
dentist's office where treatment is to be rendered or has been rendered, or
is accompanied by his parent or guardian over 20 years old.
§ 127-2. Masks prohibited.
During the above-restricted time, no person shall wear a mask or partial
mask in any public place, street or property in the Township.
§ 127-3. Parental responsibility.
A person who is a parent, guardian or standing in loco parentis, who
permits, consents to, approves or allows any person under 18 years of age
to violate any provisions of this article shall likewise be guilty of a violation
of this article.
§ 127-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 127-1 CURFEW § 127-4
127:233
Chapter 134
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 127-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 127-4
127:234
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zone Map
[Adopted by Ord. No. 88-37 (Ch. XXIV of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 134-1. Adoption of map. [Amended 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-27]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the
Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about September 30, 2008, by
Joseph Mavuro, P.E., Township Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted
as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 134-2. Location and boundaries.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 134-1
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 134-3. Changes in location or boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 134-4. Copy of map on file.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 134-1 of this article,
and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may, from time to time, request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the Office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 134-5. Additional matters.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
§ 134-1 CURFEW § 134-5
127:235
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 134-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and
was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the
effective date of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 134-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
§ 134-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 134-5
127:236
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Property Zones
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-98-17 (Ch. XXV of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 134-6. Adoption of map. [Amended 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-27]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997, c. 327, the
Public Property Drug-Free Zone Map produced on or about October 3,
2008, by Joseph Mavuro, P.E., Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
municipality of property which is used for public purposes as specifically
defined and regulated by the above-referenced statute, and of the areas on
or within 500 feet of such public property.
§ 134-7. Location and boundaries.
The Public Property Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant
to § 134-6 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet of
public property to which the statute cited in § 134-6 applies until such time,
if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of public property and drug-free
zones.
§ 134-8. Copy of map on file.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 134-6 of this article,
and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may, from time to time, request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is further directed that a true copy of
such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the County
Clerk and to the Office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 134-9. Additional matters.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 134-6
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location and boundaries of public housing facilities, public
parks and/or public buildings as defined in P.L. 1997, c. 327, within
the municipality;
§ 134-6 CURFEW § 134-9
127:237
(2) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map and approved and adopted
herein as public property qualifies as public property as defined in P.L.
1997, c. 327.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 327, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 134-6 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which, in fact, qualifies as the type of public property defined in P.L.
1997, c. 327, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not public property as defined in that
statute.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1997, c. 327, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Public Property Drug-Free
Zone Map have been complied with.
§ 134-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 134-9
127:238
ARTICLE III
Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-00-24(Ch. XXVI of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-01-41]
§ 134-10. Designation of school crossings.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1999, c. 185, the
following is a list of school crossings which have been so designated by the
Township of Freehold:
§ 134-11. Adoption of map.
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones Map produced on or about June 14,
2000, by Joseph M. Mavuro, the Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
municipality of property which is issued for school purposes and which is
owned or leased to any elementary or secondary school on school land and
of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 134-12. Map and list to constitute official findings.
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant
to § 134-11 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding
and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000
feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drunk
driving free school zones. The list of school crossings designated above
by the Township Committee shall continue to constitute an official finding
and record of the location of school crossing zones within the Township of
Freehold until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect
any additions or deletions with respect to school crossing zones in Freehold
Township.
A. Nottingham Way and Sherwood Drive (Applegate).
B. Bear Oak and Burlington Road (Catena/Eisenhower)
C. Sycamore Avenue and Stillwells Corner Road (Barkalow/West
Freehold).
D. Derby Drive and Stonehurst Boulevard (Donovan).
E. Old Post Road and Elton Adelphia Road (Errickson).
F. Elton-Adelphi Road and Woodstock Place (high school).42
42.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 134-10 CURFEW § 134-13
127:239
§ 134-13. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Township Engineer and
Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes or
of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
§ 134-14. Original map and list to be on file; copies.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 134-11 of this
article and the list of school crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost
a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to
time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true
copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby
further directed that a true copy of such map and list and of this article shall
be provided without cost to the Monmouth County Clerk and to the office of
the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 134-15. Map and list as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated: It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted
pursuant to this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and
that, pursuant to state law, such map and list shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
B. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board.
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
D. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
E. The location of all school crossings in the Township of Freehold.
§ 134-13 FREEHOLD CODE § 134-15
127:240
Chapter 142
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150. Land use — See Ch. 190.
§ 134-15 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 134-15
142:241

ARTICLE I
General Provisions.
§ 142-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Environmental Impact Statement
Ordinance of the Township of Freehold."
§ 142-2. Purpose and policy.
§ 142-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT — A description and analysis of
all direct and indirect effects land development and land use will or may
have on a site to be developed as well as upon adjacent and noncontiguous
areas which may be affected by the development with particular reference
to the effect of the project on the public health, safety and welfare, the
protection of public and private property and the protection, preservation
and enhancement of the environment.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS — Those areas of the Township
as shown on factor maps included in the Natural Resources Inventory
prepared by Dames and Moore (July 1974) as amended to date for the
Freehold Township Environmental Commission, which areas are
particularly susceptible to environmental damage or permanent change as
a consequence of land use or development. Such areas include:
A. It is hereby recognized that the unplanned and unregulated
development and use of land may have an adverse impact upon the
environment of the Township, that certain areas of the Township have
been shown to be more environmentally sensitive than others, that data
concerning the potential environmental impact of the use and
development of land should be collected, compiled, analyzed and
reported upon, and that such a report will be of considerable value to
the proper consideration and review of land use and land development
proposals.
B. It is, therefore, determined that reports in the form of environmental
impact statements shall be submitted and approved as provided herein.
A. Local and regional aquifer (recharge and discharge areas);
Poorly drained soils (as classified by the Freehold Area Soil
Conservation District);
B.
C. Steep slopes (12% or greater);
D. Areas unsuitable for septic systems;
E. Wooded and semiwooded areas;
§ 142-1 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 142-3
142:243
FACTOR MAPS — Maps prepared by Dames and Moore, Cranford, New
Jersey, in July 1974, in connection with the Freehold Township Natural
Resources Inventory for the Freehold Township Environmental Commission.
GROSS PROJECT AREA — That portion of a site upon which the natural
soil or vegetation will be disturbed, removed, altered, destroyed or added
to, and/or upon which the construction, erection, destruction or removal of
natural or man-made structures is proposed.
§ 142-4. Applicability.
F. Historic and aesthetic sites;
Freshwater wetlands and freshwater transition areas in accordance
with NJDEP regulations;
G.
Floodplains in accordance with Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) mapping or one-hundred-year floodplain calculated by
a licensed New Jersey engineer.
H.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to:
(1) Development within any portion of lands in one or more
environmentally sensitive areas;
(2) Mining, soil removal, excavation or filling operations;
(3) Farming operations which involve nonconventional farming
methods or operations;
(4) Waste disposal operations;
(5) Any other use of land or change of use which may have a
substantial impact on the environment.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to development
within the ML Zone. In lieu of a written environmental impact
statement, oral testimony by qualified professionals addressing specific
environmental concerns raised by the Township Engineer, Planning
Board or Environmental Commission shall be provided in public
hearings held in connection with preliminary site plan or subdivision
approval and summarized briefly in memorandum or letter form.43
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 142-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 142-4
142:244
ARTICLE II
Approval Procedure and Requirements
§ 142-5. Environmental impact statement required.
§ 142-6. Required information.
Environmental impact statements shall provide all the information
necessary for a proper evaluation of the effects of the proposed project upon
the environment, in a format that shall provide an item-by-item analysis
referenced to correspond to each letter and numbered item in this section.
Where an item is determined by the preparer to be "not applicable," an
explanation for such determination shall be given.
A. Approval of environmental impact statements shall be required prior to
commencement of development, construction, or other site-disturbance
activity, or other use or change of use to which this chapter applies.
B. No land shall be used in contravention to this chapter unless and until
an environmental impact statement shall have been submitted to and
have been approved by the Township Planning Board.
A. Name, address and qualification of preparer.
B. Description of the manner in which investigations were conducted and
a complete bibliography of sources consulted.
C. Identification of the project sponsor and/or property owner.
D. Information regarding the existing environment of the surrounding
area, including:
(1) Geological character.
(2) Soil characteristics.
(3) Land forms.
(4) Hydrological features (surface and subsurface and including mean,
high and low water table), regional and local aquifers.
(5) Plants and animals (species, diversity and frequency).
(6) Population density and distribution.
(7) Location of all existing and proposed sewerage disposal facilities
(plat).
(8) Location of all existing and proposed water supply facilities (plat).
(9) Natural aesthetic features including wooded and semiwooded
areas as shown on Factor Maps 15 and 16.
(10) Historical, archeological and architectural features.
§ 142-5 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 142-6
142:245
(11) Environmentally sensitive areas (plat).
(12) Air and water quality (existing).
(13) Nature, degree and source of existing pollution or other
environmental problems.
(14) Present land use.
(15) Size, shape and layout of all existing and proposed structures,
buildings, natural or artificial drainage facilities, watercourses,
walkways, parking areas, signs, landscaping (plat).
(16) Portion of total parcel to be utilized (plat).
E. Description of the construction phase, including:
(1) Development schedule and construction phasing.
(2) Work force required.
(3) Construction traffic (nature, amount and routing).
(4) Site preparation, including amount and manner of clearing,
excavating, filling and cutting, burning and/or blasting.
(5) Precautions taken (noise control, dust control, erosion and
sedimentation control, temporary sanitation).
F. Description of the operational phase, including:
(1) Work force required.
(2) Traffic and access.
(3) Output and capacity (where applicable).
G. Description of the consistency of the proposed environmental impact of
the project if implemented, during all phases of site preparation,
construction and operation including:
(1) Discussion of the consistency of the proposed project with accepted
federal, state, regional, county and local plans in progress (master
plans and zoning ordinances).
(2) Discussion of how the proposed project will encourage or
discourage population and industrial growth.
(3) Describe in detail the nature and extent of all substances and
materials to be regularly, periodically or intermittently discharged
from the proposed project into surface and/or subsurface waters.
(4) Discussion of whether and to what extent the proposed project will
result in the loss or alteration of any and all environmentally
sensitive areas.
§ 142-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 142-6
142:246
(5) Identify and discuss the nature and extent of existing and projected
compliance or noncompliance with approved New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection water quality standards,
increases in pollution and/or turbidity levels.
(6) Discussions of the beneficial and adverse effects of the proposed
project on aquatic biota and habitat.
(7) Discussion of the effects the proposed project will have on
groundwater quality and quantity and the basis for such
determinations.
(8) Discussion and description of water usage, including effect on
infiltration capacity and future water supply.
(9) Discussion of any environmental effects from thermal discharges.
(10) Detailed description of the nature and extent of any and all
substances and materials which will be emitted into the ambient
air, and whether such emissions will meet or affect emission
standards and regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(11) Discussion of ambient air quality data, present and projected, with
due regard to cumulative aspects, so that direct comparisons may
be made between present air quality, projected air quality and air
quality standards, considering the effect on nearby residences and
businesses.
(12) Discussions of the precautions taken to prevent odor problems
from becoming a public nuisance and/or being in violation of the
State Air Pollution Control Act.
(13) Discussion of the precautions taken to prevent the dissemination or
any airborne transportation of pathogenic organisms.
(14) Discussion of the gain or loss of aquatic and terrestrial wildlife
habitat and its effect.
(15) Discussion of the gain or loss of food chain on the aquatic and
terrestrial wildlife.
(16) Discussion of the effect of noise, dust, lighting, turbidity and
situation from construction and operation upon aquatic and
terrestrial wildlife.
(17) Discussion of the socioeconomic effects on the Township induced
by the proposed project and additional development attributable to
the proposed action, including availability or lack of public services
(schools, parks, fire and police protection).
§ 142-6 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 142-6
142:247
§ 142-7. Submission; fees.
Environmental impact statements, 12 in number, shall be submitted to the
administrative officer of the Township and shall be accompanied by a fee
in the amount provided in Chapter 150, Fees, to defray costs of review.
The administrative officer shall forward same to the Planning Board. If and
in the event the applicant shall apply to the Planning Board for a waiver,
such application shall be accompanied with a nonrefundable fee as provided
in Chapter 150, Fees. If and in the event the Planning Board denies an
application for waiver, the applicant shall then pay the fee referred to above
for complete review.
§ 142-8. Certification of completeness; substantive review.
(18) Discussion of the nature and extent and effects of construction and
operational noise levels in terms of decibels, time of noise, duration
and source, and discussion of any noise control methods to be used.
(19) Description of any and all effects on the recreational capabilities of
the neighborhood and Township.
(20) Discussion of how the project will affect historical, archaeological
and/or cultural resources.
(21) Discussion of the proposed methods for solid waste handling and
disposal.
(22) Graphic description of the shadows cast by any structures.
(23) Discussion of the potential of man-made accidents and of adverse
environmental impacts which cannot be avoided, reduced in
severity or reduced to an acceptable level in the construction or
operation of the proposed project, including:
(a) Reasons why such adverse impacts cannot be reduced in
severity or reduced to an acceptable level.
(b) Implications of the adverse impact in relation to on-site and offsite
environment.
(c) Where abatement measures can reduce adverse impacts to
acceptable levels, discuss the effectiveness, costs and basis for
considering the adequacy of the determination.
H. Description of alternatives to the project in sufficient detail to permit an
independent and comparative evaluation of the proposed project with
all reasonable alternatives in terms of the benefits costs, environmental
risks, potential for reducing or eliminating adverse impacts and reasons
for not selecting such alternatives as a description of any and all shortterm
cumulative and long-term effects of the proposed project which
either significantly reduce or enhance the state of the environment for
future generations.
§ 142-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 142-8
142:248
A. Certification of completeness. Within 20 days of receipt of
environmental impact statement, the Planning Board shall:
(1) An application for a waiver of environmental impact statement or a
completed environmental impact statement shall be deemed to be
part of the application for development and shall be processed in
the manner and within the time limit set forth in Chapter 190, Land
Use, and the Revised Statutes of New Jersey pertaining to such
application for development.
(2) When the entire application for development is complete, as that
term is defined by law, the land use officer shall submit copies of
the completed environmental impact statement or the request for
waiver of environmental impact statement to the Township
Environmental Commission and to the Township Engineer for their
review and comments.
B. Substantive review.
(1) Upon the issuance of a certification of completeness, the Planning
Board shall submit copies of the completed environmental impact
statement to the Township Environmental Commission and the
Township Engineer for their review and comments, and within 45
days of the issuance of a declaration of completeness notify the
applicant of the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of
the project, unless the applicant agrees in writing, to the extended
consideration of the application.
(2) Site plan or major subdivision applications to be consolidated with
platted information and reviewed simultaneously: Any person who
is required to submit an environmental impact statement and who
further intends to apply for major subdivision or site plan approval
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 190, Land Use, of the Code of
the Township of Freehold, may consolidate all information required
by the environmental impact statement to be in platted form, with
all plats.
(3) Criteria for review. In reviewing an environmental impact
statement, the Planning Board may consider in addition to the
written comments of the Township Environmental Commission and
the Township Engineer, the following criteria:
(a) Construction phase. Adequacy of precautions taken and
methods employed to avoid excessive temporary noise, dust
and other air pollution, erosion, sedimentation, sanitation
problems, water pollution, and traffic problems and to avoid
residual environmental damage from excessive or improper
clearing, excavating, filling, cutting or blasting or other site
preparation activities during the construction phase.
(b) Operation phase and environmental impact.
§ 142-8 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 142-8
142:249
[1] Consistency with federal, state, regional, county or local
land use plans.
[2] Effect on population and industrial growth.
[3] Nature and amount of discharges into surface and
subsurface waters and effect on water quality, turbidity
and New Jersey water quality standards.
[4] Treatment of and effect of proposed project on
environmentally sensitive areas.
[5] Effect on aquatic biota and habitat.
[6] Effect of water usage on water table and future availability
of water.
[7] Effect of thermal discharges.
[8] Nature and amount of discharge into ambient air and
effect on air quality.
[9] Effect of odor problems.
[10] Effect of airborne transportation of pathogenic organisms.
[11] Effect of loss or partial destruction of aquatic and
terrestrial wildlife habitats and its effect.
[12] Socioeconomic effects.
[13] Destruction or loss of recreational capabilities.
[14] Effect on historical, archaeological and cultural resources.
[15] Adequacy of solid waste handling storage and disposal
systems.
[16] Effect of shadow cast.
[17] Potential of man-made accidents and/or natural
catastrophes.
[18] Adequacy or availability of remedial, protective and
mitigative measures to avoid or reduce adverse
environmental impacts, including site design, air quality,
water quality, stormwater systems, aquatic and terrestrial
wildlife habitats.
[19] Need for and adequacy of devices for monitoring
discharges and emissions into air and water.
[20] Adequacy of contingency plans for dealing with man-made
accidents and natural catastrophes.
§ 142-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 142-8
142:250
§ 142-9. Supplementary proposal to satisfy objections.
When an environmental impact statement has been disapproved, the
applicant may submit a supplement to the environmental impact statement
offering a detailed proposal to satisfy the objections of the Planning Board,
which supplement shall, within 30 days of its receipt, be approved,
conditionally approved or disapproved with written reasons given therefor.
[21] Nature and degree of adverse environmental impacts
which cannot be avoided, reduced in severity or reduced
to an acceptable table.
[22] Reasonable and practical alternatives to the proposed
project.
(4) Approval, conditional approval or disapproval of environmental
impact statement. The Planning Board shall within 45 days of
submission of a complete application for development notify the
applicant in writing of the approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the environmental impact statement or request for
waiver of environmental impact statement. The applicant may
extend the time within which the Planning Board is to act
hereunder. A written notification of conditional approval or
disapproval shall state the reasons for such action.
(a) Criteria for approval. The Planning Board shall only approve an
environmental impact statement if, after review and
consideration of the statement and the written comments
submitted thereon, generally accepted engineering practices,
and the state of the art of environmental protection
methodology, it finds that the use or activity as proposed by the
applicant or as conditioned by the Planning Board conforms
with the standards set forth in Subsection B(3)(b).
(b) Conditional approval; permissible conditions.
[1] The Planning Board may impose such conditions on the
approval of environmental impact statements as it deems
reasonably necessary to protect and preserve the quality
of the environment.
[2] Such conditions may include, but are not limited to the
following:
[a] Lower density development than that proposed to
insure an adequate infiltration of quality water into
local and regional aquifers.
[b] Restrictions on removal of trees and ground cover, the
use of septic tank disposal fields and the density of
development on steep slopes.
§ 142-8 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 142-9
142:251
The failure of the Planning Board to act on the supplement within such time
shall constitute and approval thereof.
§ 142-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 142-9
142:252
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 142-10. Waiver of requirements.
Upon adequate demonstration by the applicant or upon the Planning
Board's own motion, any or all of the requirements of this chapter may be
waived, if in the reasonable judgment of the Planning Board the proposed
project or land use activity is of such a nature as will not require a complete
environmental impact statement. The recommendations of the Township
Environmental Commission and/or Township Engineer may form a basis for
such waiver determination.
§ 142-11. Administrative decisions.
Whenever, in the course of administration and enforcement of this chapter,
it is necessary or desirable to make any administrative decision, then,
unless other standards are in this chapter provided, the decision shall be
made so that the result will not be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this
chapter or injurious to the environment.
§ 142-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person engaging in or causing other persons to engage in a use or
activity to which this chapter applies without submitting and having
approved an environmental impact statement, or for the breach of any
lawful condition imposed upon such approval, or for the violations of any
other provision of this chapter, shall be subject, upon conviction of each and
every violation, to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Each and every day that such violation continues, it shall be considered a
separate and specific violation of this chapter.
§ 142-10 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 142-12
142:253
Chapter 150
FEES
§ 150-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose that this chapter, by virtue of this chapter and future
amendments, will eventually contain all fees to be charged by the Township
and its agencies, to the extent that the Township has the power to set
such fees. In the event another level of government shall be exclusively
empowered to set a fee or empowered to set a maximum fee, and there is a
conflict with the fee set forth in this chapter, the fee or maximum allowable
fee as determined by the other level of government shall control. In the
event the amount of a fee set forth herein shall conflict with the fee set forth
in any other provision of the Code of the Township of Freehold, the fees in
this chapter shall control.
§ 150-2. Automatic fee increase.
§ 150-3. Alarm systems and devices (Chapter 67).
Registration fee: $5.
§ 150-4. (Reserved)
§ 150-5. Amusements (Chapters 75 and 240).
A. The fees set forth in §§ 150-3 through 150-49 of this chapter reflect
2004 values. Commencing with January 1, 2004, and on January 1 of
each subsequent year, the fees set forth in §§ 150-3 through 150-49 of
this chapter shall be increased an amount equal to 5% of the 2004 fee,
rounded to the nearest dollar; the fee increases resulting therefrom are
not to be compounded. Fees established by ordinance subsequent to
2004 shall only commence being increased on the first January 1 which
occurs more than 12 months after adoption of the ordinance
establishing the fee. By way of example, if the fee was first established
July 16, 2006, the automatic increase would not commence until
January 1, 2008. In no event shall the automatic increase provided by
this section exceed any statutorily established maximum fee.
[Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
B. The fees established herein supplement and supersede all fees
referenced in various sections of the existing Township Code.
C. The fees set forth in § 150-50 and beyond shall only be increased by way
of ordinance amendment and shall not be automatically increased
pursuant to Subsection A hereof. [Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-11]
A. Licensing of coin-operated amusement games.
§ 142-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-5
142:254
§ 150-6. (Reserved)
§ 150-7. Campgrounds (Chapter 97).
Campgrounds: $300 annually.
§ 150-8. through § 150-9. (Reserved)44
§ 150-10. Environmental impact statements (Chapter 142).
§ 150-11. (Reserved)
§ 150-12. Floodplains and watercourses (Chapter 166).
(1) Each amusement game or machine: $150 annually.
(2) Music machines (jukeboxes): $50 annually.
B. Licensing of certain businesses and amusements.
(1) Auctioneers and operators of auction stores, (if operating at one
permanent place of business on an annual basis): $150 per annum.
(2) Auctioneers and operators of auction stores (operating on a per
diem basis): $25 per each day of operation.
(3) Theaters, movie picture shows, opera houses, concert halls,
nightclubs, public dance halls, skating rinks: $500 per annum.
(4) Pool or billiard parlors, each table: $125 per annum, up to three
tables; each table in excess of three: $25 each table per annum.
(5) Bowling alleys, each alley: $25 per annum.
(6) Traveling shows, exhibition grounds and parades in connection
therewith, for every day they do business or parade within the
limits of the Township: $25 per day.
(7) Merry-go-rounds: $25 for one week.
(8) Carnivals: $75 per day. [Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
A. Environmental impact statements: $200.
B. Application for waiver of environmental impact statement: $50.
C. If waiver is denied, the fee of $200 referenced in Subsection A above
shall be submitted.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 150-8, Contractor registration (Chapter 123), was deleted
pursuant to Ord. No. O-05-37, adopted 11-29-2005.
§ 150-5 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-12
142:255
§ 150-13. Handicapped parking (Chapter 177). [Added 12-27-2005
by Ord. No. O-05-48]
Fee for a temporary placard to allow handicapped parking: $4.
§ 150-14. Junk dealers (Chapter 186).
License: $200. If the license is for part of the license year, the fee shall be
prorated on a monthly basis.
§ 150-15. Land use (Chapter 190).45 [Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-11]
A. Request to Planning Board Secretary for regulated use permit
application: $5
B. A completed regulated use permit application submitted to the
Planning Board: processing fee of $25.
A. Nonrefundable fees.
(1) Minor subdivision approval.
(a) Each informal review: no fee.
(b) Application fee: $400.
(c) Plat review fee: $200. [Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-32]
(2) Major subdivision approval.
(a) Each informal review: $100.
(b) Preliminary application fee: $350.
(c) Preliminary plat review fee: $150 per lot.
(d) Final plat application fee: $150.
(e) Final plat review fee: $50 per lot.
(3) Minor site plan approval (less than 1,500 square feet of building
area and five or fewer parking spaces).
(a) Each informal review: no fee.
(b) Application fee: $250.
(c) Preliminary review fee: $100.
(d) Final review fee: $100.
45.Editor's Note: See also § 150-55, Land Use (Chapter 190).
§ 150-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-15
142:256
(4) Waiver of site plan detail request: $150.
(5) Major site plan approval (2,000 or more square feet of building
area and/or more than five parking spaces).
(a) Each informal review: $50.
(b) Preliminary application fee: $500.
(c) Preliminary approval review fees.
[1] Residential (including hotel, motel, multifamily, planned
residential and community residence, but not including
sheltered care, nursing home, or other medical/
institutional uses), the sum of:
[a] For each new dwelling unit: $50.
[b] For each remodeled, reconstructed, refurbished or
rehabilitated dwelling unit: $50.
[c] For each new or additional parking space:
[i] First 100 spaces: $20 per space.
[ii] Over 100 spaces: $10 per space.
[2] Other uses. The sum of $300, plus the sum of each of the
following fees as applicable:
[a] For each full 1,000 square feet of affected lot area:
[i] First 50,000 square feet: $10 per 1,000 square
feet.
[ii] Over 50,000 square feet: $5 per 1,000 square
feet.
[b] For each full 1,000 square feet of proposed new gross
floor area plus:
[i] First 50,000 square feet: $50 per 1,000 square
feet.
[ii] Over 50,000 square feet: $25 per 1,000 square
feet.
[c] For each proposed new or additional parking space
plus:
[i] First 100 spaces: $25 per space.
[ii] Over 100 spaces: $10 per space.
[d] For each 1,000 square feet of remodeled existing
gross floor area plus $5 per 1,000 square feet.
§ 150-15 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-15
142:257
(d) Final application fee: $200.
(e) Final approval review fees: 50% of fees for preliminary
approval set forth above.
(f) General development plan for planned commercial industrial
development: $7,000.
(6) Variances:
(a) Appeals [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a)].
[1] Single-family residential uses: $75.
[2] Other uses: $125.
(b) Interpretation of Chapter 190, Land Use, or Map [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(b)]: $250.
(c) Hardship or bulk variances [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c)].
[1] Single-family residential uses: $150.
[2] Other uses: $250.
(d) Use variances [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)]: [Amended
11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-32]
[1] Proposed single-family residential uses: $150.
[2] Other uses: $450.
(e) Application for certificate of nonconformity: $375. [Added
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-20]
(7) Conditional uses: $350.
(8) Public hearing fee for those development applications requiring
notice of public hearing: $100.
(9) Change of Master Plan or zone district request:
(a) Single-family residential or other single-family residential:
$150.
(b) Single-family residential to multifamily commercial, industrial,
office research, or other non-single-family zone: $150 plus $40
per acre for each acre over five acres.
(10) Environmental impact statement (EIS):
(a) For those development applications which require review of an
EIS: $350.
(b) For request of waiver of EIS: $150.
§ 150-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-15
142:258
(11) Inspection fees.
(a) When any development proposal approved by the municipal
agency includes the construction of improvements, the
developer, owner or applicant shall pay to the Township of
Freehold, prior to the issuance of any development permit or
the start of construction, a sum determined on the basis of the
performance guaranty as follows:
[1] Seven percent of the amount of the performance guaranty
estimate up to $1,000,000 plus;
[2] Five percent of the amount of the performance guaranty
estimate between $1,000,000 and $5,000,000 plus;
[3] Three percent of the amount of the performance guaranty
in excess of $5,000,000.
(b) The minimum inspection fee shall be $250.
(12) Reproduction fees and Tax Map revision fees: $3 per sheet for the
plat and attachments, except that the minimum fee shall be $5. For
reproduction, a fee of $100 or $20 per lot, whichever is greater,
shall be charged for minor subdivisions and final plats of major
subdivisions to cover the cost of the Township Engineer for revision
of the Township of Freehold Tax Maps. For subdivisions and site
plans involving multifamily housing units or lots less than 9,000
square feet in area, the Tax Map revision fees shall be waived and
the applicant shall be required to prepare Tax Map detail sheets at
a scale to be determined by the Township Engineer.
(13) Revised plats. Any proposed revisions to a plat, including all
supporting maps and documents, previously approved by the
Planning Board, which approval is still in effect, shall require
submission of a revised plan and payment of fees in accordance
with the following: [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(a) Where changes in the plat are requested by the Planning Board
or Township Engineer, no fees need to be paid and only
sufficient copies of the plat incorporating the changes as may
be necessary for distribution.
(b) Where there are only minor changes in the plat proposed by
the applicant or required by another governmental agency
where approval was a condition of the Planning Board
approval, which do not involve any additional building or
parking or significant change in the design of the site or
subdivision, an application and application fee of $25 will be
required along with sufficient copies of the plat incorporating
the changes as may be necessary for distribution.
§ 150-15 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-15
142:259
(c) Where there are changes in the plat proposed by the applicant,
or required by another governmental agency whose approval
was a condition of the Planning Board approval, which involve
additional building or parking or a significant change in the
design of the site or subdivision, an application and application
fee equal to 1/2 the fee required for the initial submission, will
be required along with sufficient copies of the plat
incorporating the changes as may be necessary for
distribution.
(d) Where the proposed changes involve change in use and/or
major alteration of the design concepts of the plat approved by
the Planning Board, it shall be considered a new application
and shall require the full payment of fees set forth above for
new applications for development.
(e) Where revisions in the plat only involve additional information
required as a condition of a previous approval, no additional
fees shall be required.
(14) Requests for reapproval or extensions of time where no change is
required: [Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-32]
(a) Minor subdivision, reapproval only: $200.
(b) Major subdivisions and site plan: $400.
(c) Other applications for development (soil removal, etc.): $75.
(15) Site plan charges computation. In cases where only a portion of a
parcel or site area to be involved in the proposed site plan, the site
area charge shall be based upon an area extending 20 feet outside
the limits of all construction, including grading and landscaping, as
well as all other areas of the site the Township Engineer believes
are reasonably affected by the development application. The 20
feet around the disturbed area shall not extend beyond the
property lines. The Township may still require reasonable
improvements and upgrading to portions of the site not within the
disturbed or affected areas.
(16) Zoning permit: $50.
(17) Sign appeals: $75.
(18) Review of sales map: $250.
(19) Street signs: actual cost.
(20) Review of Technical Review Committee prior to formal application:
$50 per session.
(21) General development plan application fee: $800.
§ 150-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-15
142:260
(22) Special meetings: $350. [Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-32]
B. Escrow fees. The fees required shall be for the purpose of reimbursing
the Township for direct fees, costs, charges and expenses of
professional consultants retained by or on behalf of the Township, its
boards, commissions or agencies and employees and staff of the
Township, its boards, commissions or agencies in reviewing and
testifying and/or assisting the Township in the processing of
applications pursuant to this chapter and/or assisting the Township in
evaluation, planning and proper design of municipal services and
facilities in order to meet the needs of the proposed project and for onsite
inspections related thereto. The fees required shall be deposited
with the Township at the time the initial development documents are
submitted and shall remain in an interest-bearing escrow fund.
Whenever the amount of the fees paid to the Township, or any cash
performance or maintenance guarantees posted with the Township by
the applicant/developer, shall exceed $5,000, the Township shall notify
the applicant in writing of the name and address of the depository and
the amount of the deposit. If the amount of interest earned on the cash
deposit exceeds $100 per annum, that entire amount shall belong to the
applicant/developer and shall be refunded to him by the Township
annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes
for which it was originally deposited, as the case may be, except that
the Township may retain for administrative expenses not more than 33
1/3% of that entire interest amount. All costs, expenses, charges and
fees incurred by the Planning Board, Township or other board,
commission or agency of the Township for the services of the planner,
engineer, attorney, other professional consultant, expert, employee or
staff incurred as a direct result of the developer's project shall be
charged to this escrow fund. [Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-32; 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-20; 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
Escrow Fees
Residential development:
Minor subdivision $750
0 to 25 units or lots $3,500
26 to 100 units or lots $4,000
101 to 500 units or lots $7,000
501 to 1,000 units or lots $9,500
1,001 plus units or lots $12,000
Commercial/industrial development application not involving
structures:
0 to 3 lots $3,500
3+ lots $5,000
§ 150-15 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-15
142:261
Escrow Fees
Commercial/industrial development application involving structures,
total floor plan
0 to 1,249 s.f. $750
1,250 to 1,999 s.f. $1,500
2,000 to 20,000 s.f. $2,500
20,000 + s.f. $6,000
Use or bulk variance [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) and (d)] escrow fees:
Residential uses $350
Nonresidential uses $1,750
Request for zoning change:
Residential uses $850
Nonresidential uses $1,750
Other land use applications
Sign appeals $250
General development plan $6,250
Certificate of nonconformity
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68)
$375
Variances:
Appeals [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a)]:
(1) Single-family residential
uses
$75
(2) Other uses $125
Interpretation of Chapter 190,
Land Use, or Map [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72(b)]
$250
Hardship or bulk variances
[N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72(c)]
Single-family residential uses $150
Other uses $250
C. RMZ-1 Zone.
(1) Submission of each master floor plan for temporary vendor, display
or public assembly space to the Planning Board: $200.
(2) Submission of an amendment or revision to a master floor plan to
the Code Administrator: $100.
(3) Submission of an exception for special one-time events to the
Planning Board Subcommittee: $150.
§ 150-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-15
142:262
(4) Each event submitted to the Code Administrator per approval shall
pay the following fees:
(a) Zoning permit: $35.
(b) The fee for a final permit for the type of event delineated in
N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.8(i).
(5) The Township Committee may waive all or less than all of the above
fees for any not-for-profit sponsored event, show or activity.
(6) Temporary vendor displays (not to exceed six months): $35.
[Added 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-3]
(7) Nonpermanent vendor displays: $35. [Added 2-27-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-3]
(8) Permanent vendor displays: $50. [Added 2-27-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-3]
D. Development fees.
(1) Copy of rules and regulations: in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-32]
(2) Copy of minutes: in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5. [Amended
11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-32]
(3) Copy of verbatim transcript: at expense of requesting party.
(4) Copy of decision: no charge to applicant, all others in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5. [Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-32]
(5) Publication of notice of decision (to be paid at the time of
application): $50.
(6) List of property owners within 200 feet: $10.
(7) Preliminary site plan application: $150.
(8) Final site plan approval: $100.
(9) Preliminary major subdivision application: $100, plus $25 per lot.
(10) Minor subdivision submission: $100.
(11) Submission of revised site plan or subdivision: $50.
(12) Submission of planned unit development: $500 plus $100 per acre.
(13) Field inspection subsequent to preliminary major subdivision
approval: $150 per lot.
(14) Final major subdivision approval: $100 plus $20 per lot.
§ 150-15 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-15
142:263
(15) Field inspection of preliminary major subdivision approval: $50 per
lot.
(16) Review of performance guaranty by Township Attorney (fee due for
each review): $150.
(17) Field inspection of site plan improvements: $200.
(18) Certificate of subdivision approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18:35.15,
N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and N.J.S.A. 54:5-15.
(19)Waiver of site plan: $100.
(20) Variance application: $100.
(21) Sign appeal: $50.
(22) Environmental impact statement submission: $200.
(23)Waiver of environmental impact statement: $50.
(24) Zoning permit: $10.
(25) Certificate of occupancy: $10.
(26) Review of sales map: $100.
(27) Street signs: actual cost.
(28) Where the Township Engineer certifies that no field inspections are
required in conjunction with a site plan approval with waiver of site
plan detail requirements, the Planning Board may waive the field
inspection fee of $200 as otherwise required herein.
E. Waiver/exemptions from fees. [Added 7-29-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-11]
(1) Charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and religious nonprofit
organizations holding a tax exempt status under the Federal
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d)] may be
granted an exemption from any fees or payments required
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
("MLUL") as provided for in this § 150-15 or as provided in Chapter
190 of this Code. Upon written request to the Township Committee
for an exemption hereunder, the Township Committee shall
consider the nature of the payment for which exemption is
requested and if there are sufficient facts supporting such request.
The Township Committee shall approve or deny such request by
formal motion.
(2) A board of education shall be exempt from the payment of any fee
charged pursuant to the MLUL.
(3) A disabled person or a parent or sibling of a disabled person may be
granted an exemption from any fees or payments required
§ 150-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-15
142:264
§ 150-16. Limousines (Chapter 199).
Limousine certification: $25.
§ 150-17. Manufactured/mobile homes (Chapter 213). [Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-36]
§ 150-18. and § 150-19. (Reserved)46
§ 150-20. Police records (Chapter 21). [Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-11]
§ 150-21. Public records (Chapter 249). [Amended 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-11]
pursuant to the MLUL in connection with any application for
development which promotes accessibility to his own living unit.
The meaning of terms herein shall be as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8e. Upon written request to the Township Committee for
an exemption hereunder, the Township Committee shall consider
the nature of the payment for which exemption is requested and
if there are sufficient facts supporting the request. The Township
Committee shall approve or deny such request by formal motion.
A. Application fee for a license: $50.
B. License fees:
(1) Not more than 50 spaces: $600 per annum.
(2) Over 50 spaces: $600 per year, plus an additional sum of $1 per
month for each manufactured/mobile home registered in the park
in excess of 50 spaces.
(3) In addition to annual license fee set forth in Subsection B(1) and (2)
above: $2 per week for each manufactured/mobile home space
occupied by any manufactured/mobile home which is part of the
license fee.
A. Public defender: A person applying for representation by the Municipal
Court Public defender shall pay an application fee of $200.
A. Fee for copies of birth, marriage and death certificates: $8 each.
B. Charges for correction of vital records (birth, death or marriage
certificates): minimum of $15.
C. Large-sized paper documents and maps:
46.Editor's Note: Former § 150-19, Peddling and soliciting (Chapter 236), was repealed
11-29-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-38. See now § 150-28.1, Solicitation, commercial (Chapter
288).
§ 150-15 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-21
142:265
§ 150-22. Rental property registration (Chapter 257). [Added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-2]
§ 150-23. Rent control (Chapter 261). [Added 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-48]
(1) Zoning Map: $5.
(2) Street Map: $5.
(3) Drug-Free School Zone Map: $5.
(4) Soils Survey Map: $5.
(5) Subdivision plat: $5.
(6) Tax Maps: $5.
(7) Engineering plans: $5.
D. Preprinted documents:
(1) Copy of Code book: $300.
(2) Each Code supplement: $30.
(3) Zoning/land use pamphlet: $100.
(4) Master Plan: $50.
A. Registration of one through five units: $100 each.
B. Registration of six through 25 units: $500 plus $75 for each unit over
five units.
C. Registration of 26 through 100 units: $2,000 plus $50 for each unit over
25.
D. Registration of 101 through 200 units: $5,750 plus $25 for each unit
over 100.
E. Registration of 201 or more units: $8,250 plus $20 for each unit over
200.
A. Appeal of tenant for rental increase: $50. If tenant prevails with the
rental appeal, said $50 will be reimbursed by the landlord to the tenant.
B. Certificate of substantial compliance: $3 per multiple dwelling unit. If
repairs are made and landlord requests a reinspection, a fee of $1 per
multiple dwelling unit is required.
C. Application for a hardship increase: $600.
D. Final fee:
§ 150-21 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-23
142:266
§ 150-24. Returned checks (Chapter 101). [Added 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-48]
Returned check fee: $20.
§ 150-25. Bid specifications.47 [Added 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-22]
§ 150-26. Dumpster fee (Chapter 290). [Added 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-22]
§ 150-27. Soil erosion and sediment control (Chapter 282). [Added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
Fee for processing the application for a soil erosion and sediment control
permit: $25.
§ 150-28. Soil removal and soil fill (Chapter 286).
(1) Full session (approximately three hours): $200 per session.
(2) Partial session (up to 1 1/2 hours): $100.
A. Fee for purchase of bid specifications for goods and services: $25.
B. Range of fee for purchase of bid specifications for construction
projects, depending on size of bid specification package: $75 to $100.
A. Dumpster fee (§ 290-90.1): $25.
A. Application fee.
(1) Removal of up to 1,000 cubic yards: $500.
(2) More than 1,000 cubic yards: $500 plus $1,000 per mile of the haul
route which is along Township roads for each 25,000 cubic yard or
fraction thereof. The fee for fractional miles shall be apportioned.
B. Posting of bonds.
(1) Up to 1,000 cubic yards: $30,000 per mile of the haul route which is
along Township roads. The amount for a fractional mile shall be
apportioned.
(2) More than 1,000 cubic yards: $100,000 per mile of the haul route
which is along Township roads for each 25,000 cubic yards or
fraction thereof. The guarantee amount for fractional miles shall be
apportioned.
C. Exemptions. The following instances are exemption from fees:
47.Editor's Note: Former § 150-25, Senior center rental fees, was repealed 1-31-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-2. This ordinance also stated that said fees would be set by the Board of Parks
and Recreation Commissioners per statutory and ordinance authorization.
§ 150-23 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-28
142:267
§ 150-28.1. Solicitation, commercial (Chapter 288). [Added
11-29-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-38]
§ 150-29. Streets and sidewalks (Chapter 300).
(1) The removal of soil in connection with the construction or
alteration of a swimming pool or septic system for a single-family
residence.
(2) The construction, alteration or addition to or of one or two dwelling
houses intended for single-family residential purposes in a
subdivision.
(3) Any soil removal involving soil disturbance of 100 cubic yards or
less on a particular and specific lot.
A. License fee: $50.
A. Street excavation fees.
(1) Every applicant shall pay an application fee of $75 which includes
the engineering inspection fee, plus a minimum deposit of $500 for
every opening which does not exceed 16 square feet.
(2) For an opening which exceeds 16 square feet, there shall be an
additional deposit requirement in an amount not to exceed 120% of
the total cost of pavement replacement in excess of the 16 square
feet as estimated.
(3) Each public utility desiring to obtain permits shall file each year
with the Township Clerk a bond which may be the bond of such
corporation's surety in the sum of $10,000. (No automatic
increase.) [Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
B. Sidewalk construction and removal fees.
(1) Each applicant shall pay a fee of $75 which fees includes an
engineering inspection fee.
(2) A refundable deposit in the amount of $500 is to be paid to cover all
costs for tests deemed necessary by Township Engineer.
(3) Exceptions. The above fees are exempt only in the following
instances:
(a) The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or
gutters in a major subdivision where the work is covered by
performance guaranties required by the Planning Board.
(b) The repair or replacement of less than eight linear feet on an
existing sidewalk.
§ 150-28 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-30
142:268
§ 150-30. Swimming pools (Chapter 305).
Private swimming pool or wading pool: $0.02 cents per square foot with a
minimum fee of $5.
§ 150-31. Tree/natural resource preservation (Chapter 336).
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 150-32. Towing and storage (Chapter 327).
A. Tree removal:
(1) One to two trees: $50.
(2) Three to four trees: $100.
(3) Five to 10 trees: $25 per tree.
(4) Eleven to 20 trees: $35 per tree.
(5) Twenty-one and up: $40 per tree.
B. Establishment of a farm. Tree removal application fee: $200.
C. 48 Fee on appeal: $100 plus an escrow amount of $1,000.
A. Tow list application fee: $150 annually.
B. Use of flat-bed truck: $25. [Added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
C. Towing and storage fees:
(1) Vehicles up to 30,000 pounds.
(a) Light-duty tow rates: $64 for hookup and first mile with a
maximum charge of $81 may be charged between the hours of
5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Motorcycles, station wagons, minivans
and pickup trucks with a gross vehicle weight under 8,000
pounds shall be considered the same as passenger automobiles
for the purpose of determining rates. There will be a charge of
$3.75 per mile for each additional mile of towing to the
authorized facility.
(b) Gross weight between 8,001 and 10,000 pounds: $106 for hook
up and first mile. There will be a charge of $5 per mile for each
additional mile of towing to the authorized facility.
(c) Gross weight between 10,001 and 15,000 pounds: $125 for
hook up and first mile. There will be a charge of $5 per mile for
each additional mile of towing to the authorized facility.
48.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, providing a fee for removal of a heritage/historic tree,
was repealed 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-7. This ordinance also renumbered former
Subsection D as Subsection C.
§ 150-30 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-32
142:269
§ 150-33. Taxicabs (Chapter 315). [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-48]
§ 150-34. Telecommunications licensing (Chapter 319).
(d) Gross weight between 15,001 and 30,000 pounds: $156 for
hook up and first mile. There will be a charge of $5 per mile for
each additional mile of towing to the authorized facility.
(e) A maximum fee of $31 per service shall be permitted for the
pulling of axles or disconnecting driveshafts.
(2) Heavy-duty tow rates (vehicles between 30,001 and 80,000 pounds.
(a) The maximum fee of $281 for hookup and first mile of towing.
There will be a charge of $6.25 per mile for each additional
mile of towing to the authorized facility.
(b) A maximum fee of $31 per service shall be permitted for the
pulling of axles or disconnecting driveshafts.
(3) For every day of dead outdoor storage, $25 per day for passenger
automobiles, trucks and omnibuses, under 8,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight, $44 per day for medium-duty vehicles and $63 per
day for heavy-duty vehicles.
(4) Waiting time and/or winching time for wreckers may be charged
$44 per 1/2 hour. Waiting time shall not begin until at least 1/2 hour
after the time of arrival of the tow truck/wrecker at the scene.
D. Impound lot administrative fees: [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-19]
(1) Impound of vehicle and return to owner: $50.
(2) Impound of vehicle with surrender of title: $100.
A. Owner's license fee: $600 per year or portion thereof per vehicle. If the
application is denied, half of the fee shall be refunded.
B. License to drive taxicab: $150 annually, unless license has been revoked
or suspended. If the license is denied, half the fee will be returned to
applicant.
C. Fee for each decal set or medallion: $35; for each replaced set of
medallions or decals: $35.
D. Certificate of insurance: $10.
A. Telecommunications license application: $250.
B. Construction permit fees: $150.
§ 150-32 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-34
142:270
§ 150-35. Co-location, renewal or replacement applications
(Chapter 190, Article XVI). [Added 5-22-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5]
§ 150-36. Through § 150-49. (Reserved)
§ 150-50. Alcoholic beverage control (Chapter 71). [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
The fees for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be the maximum set by the
state.
§ 150-51. Animals (Chapter 79, Article II).49 [Added 2-28-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-6; amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
The fee for registration of potentially dangerous species with the Board of
Health is $25.
§ 150-52. Board of Health (Part III of the Code). [Amended
11-10-2005 by Ord. No. BH-01-05;12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48;
4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
C. Telecommunications license renewal application: $250. [Added
5-22-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5]
A. Applications to co-locate, remove, or replace equipment at an existing
wirelesss communications tower, base station, or other facility on which
wireless communications equipment is located: $250.
B. Construction permit fees: $150.
A. Swimming Pool Code (Chapter 389).
(1) Issuance of a permit to locate and construct a swimming pool:
$200.
(2) Issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool: $150.
(3) Issuance or renewal of a permit to operate a swimming pool: $500.
B. Retail food establishments (Chapter 373).
(1) The following fees shall be paid for inspections and issuance of a
food handlers' license:
(a) Temporary food establishment to be open less than seven days:
$25.
(b) One to 50 seats or less than 3,000 square feet: $100.
(c) Fifty-one to 200 seats or 3,001 square feet to 10,000 square
feet: $200.
49.Editor's Note: See also § 150-53, Dogs (Chapter 79, Article I).
§ 150-34 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-52
142:271
(d) Two hundred one seats or more than 10,000 square feet: $300.
(2) Late fees. Every licensed personnel who fails to complete his/her
renewal application as of January 31 of the licensing year shall be
assessed a late fee equaling 50% of the license fee. The late fees
are set forth as follows:
(a) One to fifty seats: $50 late fee.
(b) Fifty-one to 200 seats: $100 late fee.
(c) Two hundred plus seats: $150 late fee.
(3) The following fees shall be paid to the Township’s Board of Health
for plan review in conjunction with establishing or modifying a
retail food establishment: [Added 6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
BH-07-02]
(a) Establishments other than restaurants:
[1] Between 0 and 4,000 square feet: $225 per plan.
[2] Between 4,001 and 10,000 square feet: $450 per plan.
[3] Over 10,001 square feet: $750 per plan.
(b) Restaurants:
[1] Seating capacity up to 100: $250 per plan.
[2] Seating capacity over 100: $500 per plan.
(c) Limited establishment alterations: $125 per plan.
C. Standards for individual subsurface sewage disposal systems (Chapter
385). Application, plans and issuance of permit to locate, construct or
alter an individual sewage disposal system: $350.
D. Inoculation of cats (Chapter 368, Article I). Any person redeeming any
cat which was seized shall pay a redemption fee of $25.
E. Licensing of cats (Chapter 368, Article II). [Added 6-14-2007 by Ord.
No. BH-07-03]
(1) Fee for initial licensing and for annual renewal: $11 for each cat.
There is an additional fee of $19 for cats of reproductive age that
have not been neutered. [Amended 3-8-2012 by Ord. No.
BH-12-01]
(2) Administrative and impound fees:
(a) Following seizure by the Animal Control Officer: administrative
fee of $50.
§ 150-52 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-52
142:272
(b) If a cat is not promptly claimed and must be turned over for
impoundment: reimbursement to Township of impoundment
fee charged Township, plus processing fee of $10.
F. Schedule of Inspection Fees. The following fees shall be paid to the
Township's Board of Health for plan reviews, inspections and
reinspections of facilities used by the public: [Added 5-28-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-17]
Schedule of Inspection Fees
Activity Fee
Animal facility operations
Plan review $150
Inspection $75
Facility reinspection $75
Body art/tattoo establishments
Plan review $300
Inspection $200
Reinspection $75
Day-care facilities/preschool
New facility/preoperational
inspection
$100
Facility audit $75
Facility re-audit $75
Public campgrounds
Facility plan review $200
Facility inspection Included in cost of annual permit
Facility reinspection $75
Recreational bathing facilities
Facility plan review $200
Facility inspection Included in cost of annual permit
Facility reinspection $75
Retail food establishments
Plan review As per township ordinance, § 150-52
Food inspection Included in cost of annual permit
Food reinspection
1st offense annually $100
2nd offense annually $200
3rd offense annually $300
4th or more annually $500
§ 150-52 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-52
142:273
§ 150-53. Dogs (Chapter 79, Article I).50 [Amended 6-28-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-17; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
§ 150-54. Fire prevention (Chapter 162). [Amended 9-25-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-25; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
Schedule of Inspection Fees
Activity Fee
Youth camps
Plan review $200
Preoperational inspection $100
Facility reinspection $75
A. License and registration tag fee. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-27]
(1) Non-spayed or non-neutered dogs:
(a) One-year license: $14.
(b) Three-year license $42.
(2) Spayed or neutered dogs:
(a) One-year license: $11.
(b) Three-year license: $33.
(3) Noncompliance to register dogs by residents: $5.
B. License fees for pet shops, kennels, shelters, pounds.
(1) Kennels accommodating 10 or fewer dogs: $10 annually.
(2) Kennels accommodating more than 10 dogs: $25 annually.
(3) Pet shops: $10 annually.
(4) Shelters or pounds: no fee.
A. Non-life-hazard uses inspections. [Amended 5-22-2012by Ord. No.
O-12-8]
Use Fee
Inspection
Frequency
(months)
Assembly:
Eating establishment under 50 $60 12
50.Editor's Note: See also § 150-51, Animals (Chapter 79, Article II).
§ 150-52 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-54
142:274
Use Fee
Inspection
Frequency
(months)
Takeout food service/no seating $60 12
House of worship $50 12
Fraternal organizations/
condominium centers, fewer than
100 people
$60 12
Senior centers, fewer than 200
people
$70 12
Business professional offices:
1,000 square feet or less $60 12
1,001 square feet to 3,000 square
feet
$70 12
3,001 square feet to 5,000 square
feet
$80 12
5,001 square feet to 7,000 square
feet
$90 12
7,001 square feet and over $100 12
Business professional common area per building:
1-story building $60 12
2-story building $70 12
3-story building $80 12
4-story building $90 12
Buildings over 5 stories $100 12
Retail mercantile:
1,000 square feet or less $60 12
1,001 square feet to 3,000 square
feet
$70 12
3,001 square feet to 5,000 square
feet
$80 12
5,001 square feet to 7,000 square
feet
$90 12
7,001 square feet to 12,000 square
feet
$100 12
Retail mercantile common area per building:
1-story building $60 12
2-story building $70 12
3-story building $80 12
§ 150-54 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-54
142:275
Use Fee
Inspection
Frequency
(months)
4-story building $90 12
Buildings over 5 stories $100 12
Manufacturing:
1,000 square feet or less $60 12
1,001 square feet to 3,000 square
feet
$70 12
3,001 square feet to 5,000 square
feet
$80 12
5,001 square feet to 7,000 square
feet
$90 12
7,001 square feet to 12,000 square
feet
$100 12
Storage (low and moderate hazards), per building:
1,000 square feet or less $60 12
1,001 square feet to 3,000 square
feet
$70 12
3,001 square feet to 5,000 square
feet
$80 12
5,001 square feet to 7,000 square
feet
$90 12
7,001 square feet to 12,000 square
feet
$100 12
Residential common areas, per building:
1-story building $60 12
2-story building $70 12
3-story building $80 12
4-story building $90 12
Buildings over 5 stories $100 12
Hotels and motels:
1-story building $60 12
2-story building $70 12
3-story building $80 12
4-story building $90 12
Buildings over 5 stories $100 12
Manufacturing factory:
1,000 square feet or less $60 12
§ 150-54 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-54
142:276
§ 150-55. Land Use (Chapter 190). [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-32; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
(NOTE: The fees below are not subject to the automatic fee increase.)
Use Fee
Inspection
Frequency
(months)
1,001 square feet to 3,000 square
feet
$70 12
3,001 square feet to 5,000 square
feet
$80 12
5,001 square feet to 7,000 square
feet
$90 12
7,001 square feet to 12,000 square
feet
$100 12
B. Special fire permits. [Amended 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-14]
Type Fee
Type 1 $54
Type 2 $214
Type 3 $427
Type 4 $641
Exception: There shall be no fee for Type 4 permits for storage or
activity at the premises registered as a life hazard use in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.
A. Nonrefundable fees.
(1) Copy of rules and regulations: in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.
(2) Copy of minutes: in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.
(3) Copy of verbatim transcript: at expense of requesting party.
(4) Copy of decision: no charge to applicant; all other in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.
(5) Publication of notice of any decision (to be paid at time of
application): cost of actual advertisement.
(6) List of property owners within 200 feet: $10 or $0.25 per name,
whichever is greater.
B. Zoning fees.
(1) Zoning application with no construction permit required:
§ 150-54 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-55
142:277
(a) Change of business: $35.
(b) Fence: $35.
(c) Sheds: $35.
(d) Patio, on-grade: $35.
(e) Temporary signs: $35.
(f) Canopy: $35.
(g) Special events: $35.
(2) Zoning application with construction permit required:
(a) Inground pools: $100.
(b) Aboveground pools and spas: $35.
(c) Sheds: $35.
(d) Decks and gazebos: $35.
(e) Raised patio: $35.
(f) Addition, residential: $35.
(g) Residential units: $150.
(h) Pool barrier fences: $35.
(i) Tenant fit up, commercial: $50.
(j) New commercial construction: $150.
(k) Accessory structure (garage, barn, etc.): $50.
(3) New residence.
(a) Multiple dwellings: $150.
(b) At time of application (nonrefundable): $10.
(c) Demolition: $50.
(4) Commercial structure: $100.
(5) Addition to commercial structure: $100.
(6) Housing continued certificates of occupancy fees shall be in
accordance with § 150-62 of the Township Code. [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-19]
(7) Commercial continued certificates of occupancy: $125.
C. Temporary signs permitted in various nonresidential zones. Permittees
shall pay a temporary sign license fee to the Township of $250 per sign
§ 150-55 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-55
142:278
§ 150-56. Municipal parking lots and drives (Chapter 228).
[Amended 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-38; 12-16-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-32; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
Municipal parking lot fees:
§ 150-57. Police records (Chapter 21). [Amended 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-48; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
§ 150-58. Public records (Chapter 249). [Amended 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-48; 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-16; 4-28-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-11]
per annum and post with the Township a performance guarantee of
$5,000 per sign to guarantee its ultimate removal. [Added 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-3]
A. For the first vehicle in any household: $175 per annum. [Amended
11-20-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-15; 12-17-2019 by Ord. No.
O-19-22]
B. For any vehicle other than the first registered in any household: $175
per annum. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-15;
12-17-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-22]
C. For any vehicle owned by a nonresident of the Township: $275 per
annum. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-15; 12-17-2019
by Ord. No. O-19-22]
D. For any portion greater than one month of the remainder of the year
following August 1 of that year: 50% of the annual fee.
E. Daily permit: $5 per day. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-15]
F. Replacement fee for lost decals: $10.
NOTE: The above fees are not subject to the automatic fee increase of
5% each January 1. See fees listed in § 228-3.
A. Discovery: maximum set by state.
A. Permits for purchase of pistol or revolver: $2 as set by state; annual
increase per § 150-2 is not applicable.
B. Firearms purchaser identification cards: $5 as set by state; annual
increase per § 150-2 is not applicable.
C. Searches for municipal liens (tax searches): $10 plus $2 per year for a
continuation for up to four years.
D. All other documents where multiple copies are available: $0.25 per 10
pages or fraction thereof.
§ 150-55 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-58
142:279
E. All other documents where multiple copies are not available:
(1) One to 10 pages: $0.75 per page.
(2) Eleven to 20 pages: $0.50 per page.
(3) Over 20 pages: $0.25 per page.
F. Copying by person requesting documents more than 100 pages: The
person requesting copies may use Township-owned photocopying
machines for a fee of $15 per day.
G. Faxing fees:
(1) Initial service of faxing: $5.
(2) First page: $5.
(3) Each additional page: $1.
H. Extraordinary copying charge: as set by state.
I. Standard-sized paper documents, up to 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in
size:
(1) One to 10 pages: $0.75 per page.
(2) Eleven to 20 pages: $0.50 per page.
(3) All over 20: $0.25 per page.
J. Police reports and photographs:
(1) Police accident reports: same as § 150-21A above, if requested and
picked up in person.
(2) Police accident reports, when copies are requested other than in
person: $5 for the first three pages and $1 per page for each
additional page, as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
(3) Photographs: $10 per page.
K. Electronic records:
(1) Copy of videotapes: $25.
(2) Copy of audio tape: $25.
(3) Copy of electronic document or database. The following fees cover
the cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or CD. Any
requests for software conversions shall be subject to the special
service charge described below. For security reasons, the use of a
floppy disk or CD provided by the requestor is prohibited.
(a) Floppy disks: cost of floppy disk and 120% of salary of
employee's time to duplicate request.
§ 150-58 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-58
142:280
§ 150-59. Sewers (Chapter 270). [Amended 12-28-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-39; 8-23-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-23; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-46; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-45; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-34; 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-31; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-11]
(b) CD: cost of CD and 120% of salary of employee's time to
duplicate request.
L. Miscellaneous medium:
(1) Mailing labels: $10 per sheet.
M. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to it
being incurred.
N. Conversion of records from one medium to another: cost of duplication
plus special service charges as follows:
(1) Conversion of paper record to electronic form: 120% of salary of
employee's time to duplicate request.
(2) Conversion of electronic files from one software product to
another: 120% of salary of employee's time to duplicate request.
A. Building sewers and connections to sewers.
(1) Building sewer. If not approved by the Township, further tests shall
be made following completion of necessary corrections; there shall
be a charge of $25 for observation of each test subsequent to the
initial test.
A1. Automatic increase in fees; posting. [Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-6]
(1) All charges set forth in Subsections B and C below shall be
increased 1.4% as of the adoption of this Subsection A1 and,
thereafter, shall be automatically increased 1.4% per annum,
compounded, each March 1 of every ensuing calendar year unless
the Township Committee adopts a resolution within the first two
months of a calendar year waiving the increase for that particular
calendar year.
(2) On or before March 15 of each calendar year, a schedule of the
current charges reflecting the annual increase, unless such
increase is waived as provided above, shall be posted on the official
Township website (www.twp.freehold.nj.us) and shall be available
§ 150-58 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-59
142:281
in the office of the Tax Collector. Failure of such schedule to be
available at either or both locations shall not affect or negate any
automatic increase provided for in this section.
B. Sanitary sewer rentals and charges. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-36; 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-5; 10-25-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-25]
Sewer Rentals and Charges
Class Type of Unit
Allowance
per
Quarter
(gallons)
Minimum
Charge
per
Quarter
Surcharge
per
1,000
Gallons
Over
Allowance
1 and 2 Residential 10,000 $118.35 10k to 32k:
$1.96
Maximum
charge:
$161.41
3 Residential - Non-
Water User
N/A $143.05 flat rate
4 Residential - Non-
Water User
N/A $124.84 flat rate
5 Residential -
Manufactured/
Mobile Home
(Silvermead)
N/A $111.35 flat rate
6 Commercial 10,000 $118.35 10k to 32k:
$1.96
32k and up:
$7.33
C. Water and sewer connection fees. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-35; 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-31; 12-27-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-31; 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-28; 12-17-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-38; 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-16; 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-23; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-16;
12-19-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-15; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-17; 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-18]
§ 150-59 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-59
142:282
§ 150-60. (Reserved)
§ 150-61. Topographical maps (Chapter 323). [Amended 4-28-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-11]
For each digital tile or printed map or any portion thereof of a digital tile or
printed map: $150.
Water and Sewer Connection Fees
Description Water Sewer
Connection fee for new
residential dwelling
units; labor and
materials by developer
(1 E.U.)
$3,728 $2,438
Connection fee for new
buildings other than
residential; labor and
materials by developer
$3,728 per E.U. $2,438 per E.U.
Connection and
installation fee for
existing single-family
residential dwelling
unit, including labor and
materials by Township
$5,728 $4,438
Connection and
installation fee for
existing building, nonsingle-
family home;
labor and materials by
developer
$3,728 per E.U. $2,438 per E.U.
2018 average flow per
single-family dwelling
unit (GPD)
$234.53 $241.69
Calculation of
equivalent units (E.U.)
Estimated average
water system
consumption
(gallons per day)
divided by water
average flow per
single-family
dwelling unit (in
gallons per day) for
year 2018
Estimated average
wastewater system
flow (gallons per day)
divided by sewer
average flow per
single-family dwelling
unit (in gallons per
day) for year 2018
§ 150-59 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-62
142:283
§ 150-62. Uniform construction code (Chapter 115). [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
A. Construction permit fees.
(1) Plan review fee shall be 20% of construction permit fee. Whenever
a permit is received based on approved prototype plan, the
construction permit fee shall be reduced by the amount of the plan
review paid.
(2) The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the fees listed
below and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit.
(3) Waiver of construction fees. Notwithstanding the provision of
Subsection A(2) above, the following provisions shall determine
circumstances for the waiver of construction fees:
(a) No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge
fee or enforcing agency fee for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed and
undertaken solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons
to an existing private structure or any of the facilities
contained therein.
(b) A disabled person, or a parent of disabled person, shall not be
required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure
a construction permit for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement which promotes accessibility to his
or her own living unit.
(c) Disabled person shall be as defined in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e, as
same may be amended from time to time.
(d) The following entities shall not be charged a construction
permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement made
to a building or structure owned and operated by such entity:
[1] Any federal, state, county or local governmental entity.
[2] Freehold First Aid Squad.
[3] East Freehold Fire Company.
[4] Freehold Independent Fire Company.
[5] Religious nonprofit corporations.
(4) State of New Jersey training fees.
(a) In order to provide for the training and certification and
technical support programs required by the Act, the enforcing
agency, including the Department when acting as the local
agency, shall collect a surcharge fee to be based upon the
§ 150-62 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-62
142:284
volume of new construction within the municipality. The fee
shall be in the amount of $0.0015 per cubic foot volume of new
construction.
(b) The fee for all other construction shall be $0.00334 per $1,000
of value of construction; all other construction: $1.70.
(5) Building subcode fees shall be: [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-36; 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-12]
(a) For new construction: $0.03 per cubic foot of building or
structure volumes, provided that the minimum fee shall be
$65.
(b) For renovations, alterations and repairs: $32 per thousand of
estimated cost of work.
(c) For additions: $0.03 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume for the added portion, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $65.
(d) Combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of the fees
shall be computed separately as renovations and additions.
(e) Swimming pools:
[1] Aboveground pools: $100.
[2] Private in-ground pools: $250.
[3] Public in-ground pools: $500.
(f) Temporary structures and all structures for which volume
cannot be computed, such as open structural and
telecommunication tower, shall be charged a flat rate of $100.
(g) Woodburning stoves and other heating devices: $35.
(h) Re-roofing and re-siding: $24 per $1,000 of estimated cost of
work.
(i) Asbestos abatement fee: $70.
[1] Certificate of approval fee: $14 for asbestos abatement.
(j) For mobile homes: $24 per thousand of estimated cost of the
work.
(k) The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure
from one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot
shall be $24 per $1,000 of the sum of the estimated costs of
moving, for new foundations and for placement of a completed
condition in the new location, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $65.
§ 150-62 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-62
142:285
(l) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be an annual fee
for a flat sign or a freestanding sign, single- or double-faced, in
the amount of $35 for all signs having a sign face area of up to
50 square feet, an additional $0.35 will be charged for each
square foot in excess of 50 square feet. All double-faced signs
will be multiplied by two.
(m) The fee for a temporary sign shall be $50.
(n) The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure
shall be $24 per thousand of estimated cost of the work.
(o) The fee for fences, patios, sheds and the like shall be $50.
(p) Certificate of occupancy:
[1] Single family: $150.
[2] Multifamily rental: $75.
[3] Manufactured/mobile home: $75.
[4] Commercial/industrial: 20% of the permit fee.
[5] Certificate of continued occupancy, commercial: $250.
[6] Temporary certificate of continued occupancy,
commercial: $250.
B. Plumbing subcode fees. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-12]
(1) Total number of fixtures and stacks, including but not limited to all
sinks, urinals, water closets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs,
floor drains, drinking fountains, dishwashers, garbage disposals,
clothes washers, hot water heaters or similar devices: $15 each.
(2) Total number of special devices, including but not limited to grease
traps, oil separators, water-cooled air-conditioning units, pumps,
utility service connectors, boilers and furnaces: $65 each.
(3) Fees for each fixture, stack and special devices are as follows:
(a) Water closet/bidet/urinals: $15.
(b) Bathtub: $15.
(c) Lavatory/sink: $15.
(d) Shower/floor drain: $15.
(e) Washing machine: $15.
(f) Dishwasher: $15.
(g) Commercial dishwasher: $15.
§ 150-62 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-62
142:286
(h) Water heater: $15.
(i) Water utility connection: $65.
(j) Sewer utility connection: $65.
(k) Hose bib: $15.
(l) Water cooler: $15.
(m) Garbage disposal: $15.
(n) Air-conditioner unit (water-cooled): $65.
(o) Indirect connection: $15.
(p) Sewer ejector: $65.
(q) Grease trap: $65.
(r) Interceptor: $65.
(s) Backflow device: $65.
(t) Reduced-pressure backflow: $65.
(u) Vent stack: $15.
(v) Boilers: $65.
(w) Gas service connections: $65.
(x) Active solar systems: $65.
(y) Fuel oil piping: $65.
(z) Sump pump: $15.
(4) The minimum fee shall be $65.
(5) Fees charged for any disciplines which are inspected by an on-site
inspection agency (third-party agency) shall be as set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20, as amended from time to time by the
Department of Community Affairs, plus an additional fee of 20% for
municipal processing.
C. Electrical subcode fees. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-12]
(1) One to 50 receptacles or fixtures: $65; for each 25 receptacles or
fixtures in addition to this, the fee is $25. For the purpose of
computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall include lighting
outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience
receptacles or similar fixtures, and motors or devices of less than
one horsepower or one kilowatt.
§ 150-62 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-62
142:287
(2) For each motor or electric device one horsepower or greater than
one horsepower and less than or equal to 10 horsepower, and for
transformers and generators one kilowatt or greater than one
kilowatt and less than or equal to 10 kilowatts: $15.
(3) Various electrical fees:
(a) Communication points:
[1] One to 25 points: $25.
[2] Each additional 10 points: $10.
(b) Alarm devices:
[1] One to 25 devices: $25.
[2] Each additional 10 devices: $10.
(c) Electrical range/receptacles: $25.
(d) Oven/surface unit: $25.
(e) Water heater: $25.
(f) Dryer/receptacles: $15.
(g) Dishwasher: $15.
(h) Garbage disposal: $15.
(i) Central air-conditioning unit: $35 per unit.
(j) Space heater/air handler: $40 per unit.
(k) Baseboard heat: $25.
(l) Electric sign/outline light:
[1] One: $50.
[2] Each additional: $25.
(m) Photovoltaic system:
[1] One to 50 kilowatts: $100.
[2] Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts: $200.
[3] Greater than 100 kilowatts: $700 and $100 per kilowatt
thereafter.
(n) Motors:
[1] By horsepower:
[a] One to 10 horsepower: $20.
§ 150-62 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-62
142:288
[b] Ten to 50 horsepower: $50.
[c] Fifty-one to 100 horsepower: $100.
[d] One hundred one and greater horsepower: $500, with
greater than 150 horsepower/kilowatts $600, plus $25
per 50 horsepower/kilowatts or portion thereafter.
[2] Lightpoles:
[a] One to five: $25.
[b] Six and greater: $5.
[3] Service amperes:
[a] One hundred amperes: $100.
[b] One hundred fifty amperes: $125.
[c] Two hundred amperes: $125.
[d] Three hundred amperes: $275.
[e] Four hundred amperes: $400.
[f] Four hundred one to 1,000 amperes: $500.
[g] One thousand one and above: $600, plus $25 per 50
amperes or portion thereafter.
(o) Inground pools: $150.
(p) Aboveground pools: $100.
(q) Hot tubs: $100.
For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except
those in plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control
equipment, generators, transformers and all heating, cooling
or other devices consuming or generating electrical current.
(4) Woodburning stove or other heating device installation: $45.
(5) Various installation fees:
(a) Underground and aboveground fuel tanks: $45.
(b) Heating equipment: gas and oil fired appliances not connected
to plumbing systems: $45
(c) Fire protection and other hazardous equipment: sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat); gas- and oil-fired
appliances not connected to the plumbing system, kitchen
exhaust systems, incinerators and crematoriums:
§ 150-62 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-62
142:289
[1] Twenty or fewer heads or detectors: $75.
[2] Twenty-one to and including 100 heads or detectors: $120.
[3] One hundred one to and including 200 heads or detectors:
$225.
[4] Two hundred one to and including 400 heads or detectors:
$590.
[5] Four hundred one to and including 1,000 heads or
detectors: $820.
[6] Over 1,000 heads or detectors: $1,050, plus $100 per 100
heads or portion thereafter.
In computing fees for heads and detectors, the number
of each shall be counted separately, and two fees, one for
heads and one for detectors, shall be charged.
(d) Standpipe fees:
[1] Per fire pump: $300.
[2] Per standpipe: $300.
(e) Alarm systems:
[1] Residential: $75 per residence.
[2] Nonresidential: $25 per unit or zone.
(f) Each independent preengineered system: $90.
(g) Each kitchen exhaust system: $50.
(h) Each incinerator: $338.
(i) Each crematorium: $338.
D. Housing Code. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-12]
(1) Application for continued certificate of occupancy:
(a) Multifamily rental (apartment and mobile homes): $75.
(b) Single-family homes or condominiums (rental or sale): $150.
(c) Residential reinspection fee after second inspection: $65 per
inspection. [Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-19]
(2) Application for certificate of occupancy, commercial buildings:
(a) Initial application: $250; temporary: $250; first extension:
$250; each subsequent extension: $50 each.
(b) Additional inspections: $65 each.
§ 150-62 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-62
142:290
E. Signs.
(1) Temporary sign permit.
(a) Commercial establishments: $50.
(b) Planned multiple-store shopping areas: $100 per sign per
annum.
(2) Fees for signs.
(a) There shall be an initial review fee of $100 per sign and an
annual fee thereafter for the following types of signs:
[1] Street signs: $35 each, plus an additional 10% if there are
two words to a street name. The charge for the post shall
be $45; if additional sign (such as intersection), 30% is to
be added to fee.
F. Fee for filing certificate of registration: $100.
G. Commercial and industrial business license: $30.
H. Variations: [Added 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-12]
(1) Two hundred fifty dollars per code variation requested. Variation
fees are not refundable.
I. Mechanical subcode fees. [Added 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-9]
(1) Heating equipment: $75 each.
(2) Cooling equipment: $75 each.
(3) After two (2) units: $25 each unit thereafter.
(4) Generator/water heater/pool heater: $75 each.
(5) LPG tank install/removal: $150.
(6) Oil tank UST removal: $150 each.
(7) Oil tank AST removal: $150 each.
(8) Oil tank new AST: $150 each.
(9) Fuel tanks 1,000 gallon: $300 each, install and removal.
(10) Fuel oil piping: $100.
(11) Gas piping: $100 per system.
(12) Gas type appliances: $25 each.
(13) Gas fireplace or like equipment: $75 each.
(14) Hydronic piping, pumps, etc.: $75 each.
§ 150-62 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-62
142:291
§ 150-63. Water (Chapter 351). [Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-11]
(15) Duct work, new/replace: $100.
(16) Chimney/vent, new/replace: $100.
(17) Split units: $75 each, plus $25 per head unit.
A. Use of water for building construction.
(1) Minimum flat rate: $25.
(2) Minimum special hydrant fee (water usage): $200.
(3) In excess of minimum usage, a rate of $2.30 per 1,000 gallons will
be billed.
(4) Construction water: $25 per residential dwelling unit or equivalent.
B. Tapping of mains. Taps over one inch (permit required): $200.
B1. Automatic increase in fees; posting. [Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-6]
(1) All charges set forth in Subsections C, D, E and F below shall be
increased 1.4% as of the adoption of this Subsection B1 and,
thereafter, shall be automatically increased 1.4% per annum,
compounded, each March 1 of every ensuing calendar year unless
the Township Committee adopts a resolution within the first two
months of a calendar year waiving the increase for that particular
calendar year.
(2) On or before March 15 of each calendar year, a schedule of the
current charges reflecting the annual increase, unless such
increase is waived as provided above, shall be posted on the official
Township website (www.twp.freehold.nj.us) and shall be available
in the office of the Tax Collector. Failure of such schedule to be
available at either or both locations shall not affect or negate any
automatic increase provided for in this section.
C. Metering and water service charges. [Amended 8-23-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-23]
(1) Water rents: [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-5;
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25; 5-31-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-4]
§ 150-62 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-63
142:292
Surcharge Over
Minimum
Meter Size
(inches)
Quarterly
Minimum
Quarterly
Allowance
(gallons)
Surcharge
per 1,000
Gallons
Gallons
Over
Minimum
3/4 $26.94 12,000 $3.04 12,000 to
30,000
$3.19 30,000 to
50,000
$3.25 50,000 to
100,000
$3.34 100,000 and
up
1 $121.19 40,000 $3.40 40,000 to
50,000
$3.50 50,000 to
100,000
$3.56 100,000 and
up
1 1/2 $260.06 80,000 $3.50 80,000 to
100,000
$3.56 100,000 and
up
2 $388.74 120,000 $3.56 120,000 and
up
3 $686.94 200,000 $3.56 200,000 and
up
4 $1,219.35 350,000 $3.56 350,000 and
up
6 $2,464.45 700,000 $3.56 700,000 and
up
3/4 (not
Freehold
Township)
$29.59 12,000 $3.36 12,000 to
30,000
$3.52 30,000 to
50,000
$3.59 50,000 to
100,000
$3.66 100,000 and
up
§ 150-63 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-63
142:293
In order to bill in an equitable fashion, all multiple residential
complexes served by a single water meter shall be billed as if
such individual residential unit was metered separately. The total
meter reading shall be divided by the number of residential units
to determine the average use per residential unit. The bill shall be
based on the average use time of the total number of users in the
complex.
(2) The rates to be charged for metered water to a unit located outside
of the Township shall be 110% of the rates set forth above.
(3) Fire protection; quarterly rates: [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-5; 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25]
Size of Connection
(inches) Cost Per Quarter
2 $48.42
3 $71.58
4 $95.45
6 $161.07
8 $238.61
10 $328.10
12 $477.22
(4) Private fire hydrants: $59.66 per quarter per hydrant. [Amended
3-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-5; 10-25-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-25]
(5) Water meters: charge for customers of Township. [Amended
3-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-5; 10-25-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-25; 5-31-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-4]
Size of Meter
(inches) Rate
3/4 $322.12
1 $357.92
1 1/2 $382.38
2 $503.18
(6) Interconnections. Emergency water service: per rates set forth in
an interconnection operating agreement or in the event of no
agreement, $2.50 per thousand gallons. [Amended 10-25-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-25]
(7) Discontinued water service. Disconnect fee: $21.50; reconnection
fee: $21.50, after regular working hours: $43 for disconnect or
§ 150-63 FREEHOLD CODE § 150-63
142:294
§ 150-64. Charitable bins. [Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
The fee for licensing charitable bins is $25.
§ 150-65. Tax lien certificate redemption calculation. [Added
11-29-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-27]
The Tax Collector will provide up to two calculations, at no cost, of the
amount required to redeem a tax lien certificate within one calendar year.
reconnect fee. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-5;
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25]
(8) Shut off at curb, curb stop sealed: $55. [Amended 10-25-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-25]
(9) Restoration of service when service was either temporarily or
permanently shutoff: $21.50; after working hours: $43. [Amended
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25]
(10)Water meter readings to determine if meter is working properly:
$65. If found that the meter is not working properly, the fee shall be
returned. [Amended 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25;
1-29-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-1]
(11) Private fire hydrants supplied with water by the Township, annual
maintenance fee: $215 per hydrant per year. [Amended
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25]
(12) Thawing of water service pipes or main. The service of a Utilities
Department inspector shall be paid at the rate of $23.50 per
daytime work hour, or $43 per nighttime work hour by the company
or individual to whose work he is assigned. [Amended
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25]
(13) Hydrant meter requirements (construction only).
(14) Final water meter reading: $27. [Added 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-5; amended 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-25]
D. Short-term use of hydrants: $80, plus $3.10 per 1,000 gallons shall be
billed to the developer after use. [Amended 10-25-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-25]
E. Hydrant meter and backflow preventor: supplied by Utilities
Department to be returned at the end of the period by the developer. If
not returned promptly after use: $270. [Amended 10-25-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-25]
F. Long-term use of hydrants: $270, plus $3.10 per 1,000 gallons shall be
billed quarterly to the developer. [Amended 10-25-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-25]
§ 150-63 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS § 150-65
142:295
For each subsequent written request within the same calendar year, there
will be a charge of $50. This fee is not subject to the automatic fee increase.
Chapter 154
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearm purchaser identification cards — See
Ch. 150.
§ 154-1. Definitions.
FARM — A parcel of land containing at least five acres which is used for
the raising of agricultural products, livestock, horses, poultry and dairy
products and which is vacant land or upon which is located only a principal
dwelling and related outbuildings.
FIREARM — Any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic or
semiautomatic rifle, or any gun, device or instrument in the nature of a
weapon from which may be fired or ejected any solid projectible ball, slug,
pellet, missile, or bullet, or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing, by means
of a cartridge, or shell or by the action of an explosive or the ignition of
flammable or explosive substances. It shall also include, without limitation,
any firearm which is in the nature of an air gun, spring gun or pistol or other
weapon of a similar nature in which the propelling force is a spring, elastic
band, carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas or vapor, air or compressed
air, or is ignited by compressed air and ejecting a bullet or missile smaller
than 3/8 of an inch in diameter, with sufficient force to injure a person.
HANDGUN — Any pistol, revolver or other firearm originally designed or
manufactured to be fired by the use of a single hand.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed to be fired from the shoulder and using the
energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a single projectile
through a rifled bore for each single pull of the trigger.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed to be fired from the shoulder and using
the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire either a number
of ball shot or a single projectile for each pull of the trigger, or any firearm
designed to be fired from the shoulder which does not fire fixed ammunition.
§ 154-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited in certain areas.
No person shall discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun, weapon or any firearm
within the Township of Freehold except as set forth hereinafter.
§ 150-65 FREEHOLD CODE § 154-3
154:296
§ 154-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 154-2 of this chapter shall not be applicable to the
discharge of any handgun, rifle, shotgun, weapon or firearm in the following
places and/or under the following circumstances, except that the "farmer"
exemption allowed by Subsection C shall be only as to shotguns, and 0.22
caliber rifles using hollow point bullets and not as to any other firearm:
A. Upon a firearm range which is under the supervision of the Township
Police Department, the County of Monmouth or the New Jersey State
Police.
B. By members of the Township Police Department, any law enforcement
officer of any municipal, county or state or federal government or any
representative of the Division of Fish and Wildlife, the Department of
Environmental Protection, State of New Jersey, while in the
performance of their official duties.
C. By the owner, tenant or lessee of a farm, or the immediate family of
such owner, tenant, or lessee, while in and upon said farm and so long
as no firearm other than a shotgun or 0.22 caliber rifle using hollow
point bullets is used and: 1) the closest outbound property line is at
least 200 feet from the proposed target; and 2) the closest outbound
property line from the shotgun or 0.22 caliber rifle using hollow point
bullets, as measured in the direction of fire, is at least a distance of 200
feet; and 3) the shotgun or 0.22 caliber rifle using hollow point bullets,
while loaded, and the proposed target are at least 450 feet from any
occupied building other than that of the owner, tenant or lessee, except
that Subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply if the intended target is a
groundhog or other pest likely to be detrimental to the farmer's crops
or property.
D. By any person in protection of himself/herself, members of his/her
family or his/her guests or in protection of his/her property.
E. During a recognized ceremonial event such as the firing of salutes by
veterans' organizations and similar associations as part of patriotic and
holiday activities. This subsection shall not be deemed to create an
exception for any individual discharging a firearm in celebration of
holidays such as the 4th of July, New Year's Eve, etc.
F. On any properties within the Township which are zoned R-R (Rural
Residential) or R-E (Rural Environmental) pursuant to the latest official
Zoning Map of the Township, so long as either Subsection F(1) or (2)
below applies:
(1) The closest outbound property line is at least 200 feet from the
proposed target; the closest outbound property line from the
firearm, as measured in the direction of fire, is at least a distance of
200 feet; and both the firearm, while loaded, and the proposed
target are at least 450 feet from any occupied building other than
that of the owner, tenant or lessee; or
§ 154-3 FIREARMS § 154-3
154:297
§ 154-4. Posting of signs; distribution of chapter.
On or before September 1 of each year, the Township administrator shall
arrange for the posting of appropriate signs on all major roads which
provide access to this Township advising the general public that there
are zones within the Township of Freehold where firearms shall not be
discharged. The signs shall also indicate that it shall be necessary for
any persons desiring to discharge firearms or to hunt in this Township to
obtain a copy of this chapter at the Freehold Township police headquarters.
In addition, the Township Administrator shall prepare and arrange for
distribution of copies of this chapter in any other appropriate manner so
that any persons desiring to discharge firearms or hunt in this Township
shall be made aware of this chapter and the state statute which it
supplements. Copies of this chapter shall be made available free of charge.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to abrogate the presumption that each
person knows the various laws applicable to any activity being undertaken.
Failure of compliance with this section shall not provide a defense for
charged violations of this chapter.
§ 154-5. Areas considered supplemental to areas described in
statute.
The prohibited areas affected by this chapter are intended to be
supplemental to those areas described in N.J.S.A. 23:4-16, as amended from
time to time.
§ 154-6. Violations and penalties.
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except
§ 154-4, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the fines and penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 158
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
(2) Upon a supervised firearm range operated by a duly organized and
established gun club which has at least two years' experience
operating and supervising a firearm range.
G. By a duly licensed hunter, so long as he/she is in full compliance with all
laws, rules and regulations governing hunting in the State of New
Jersey.
H. By a person to whom has been issued a permit by an agency of the State
of New Jersey permitting the killing of a bird, animal, vermin or pest
with the type of firearm permitted thereby, so long as he/she is in full
compliance with all laws, rules and regulations applicable to such
permit holder.
§ 154-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 158-1
158:298
§ 158-1. Municipal claims for fire damage to properties.
No insurance company shall pay a claimant in excess of $2,500 for fire
damages on any real property located within the Township of Freehold
pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption
of this chapter and after the filing of this chapter with the State
Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as anticipated demolition costs,
all taxes and assessments, and all other municipal liens or charges due and
payable, appearing on the official certificate of search of the Township, have
been paid either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance
company pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-10; or the Township has entered into
an agreement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq. or for
the payment in full of any anticipated costs of demolition by installment if
the Township Committee is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be
used to restore or improve the fire damaged property.
Chapter 162
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Districts — See Ch. 30. Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
§ 158-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 158-1
162:299

ARTICLE I
Fire Lanes
[Adopted 9-14-1970 (§ 12-15 of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 162-1. Obstruction and parking prohibited.
All fire lanes now in existence or hereafter designated and marked shall be
kept free from all obstructions. Parking of vehicles in fire lanes is strictly
prohibited.
§ 162-2. Issuance of summonses for violations.
In addition to other Township officials, the Fire Prevention Bureau can issue
summonses for vehicles parked in fire lanes.
§ 162-3. Violations and penalties.
Notwithstanding any other provision for penalty set forth herein, the
penalty for a violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty. The penalty funds shall be deposited into the Fire
Prevention Bureau's account.
§ 162-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 162-3
162:301

ARTICLE II
Uniform Fire Code
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-78-16 (§§ 12-1 to 12-10 of the Revised
General Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-00-44]
§ 162-4. Local enforcement.51
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally
enforced in the Township of Freehold. See also N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq.
§ 162-5. Local enforcing agency.
The Freehold Township Fire Prevention Bureau shall be under the
supervision of the Fire Official who shall be appointed by the governing
body pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes. The
Fire Official shall hold his position pursuant to Civil Service requirements.
Such fire inspectors and other support staff as may be necessary for the
Freehold Fire Prevention Bureau to properly carry out its responsibilities
shall be appointed by the Township Administrator pursuant to Title 11A,
Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes. The Fire Official, fire inspectors
and other support staff shall be removed from their offices and positions
pursuant to the requirements of Title 11A, Civil Service, of the Revised
Statutes.
§ 162-6. Duties of Fire Prevention Bureau.
The Freehold Township Fire Prevention Bureau shall enforce the Uniform
Fire Safety Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it and all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the Township of Freehold, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform
Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 162-7. Life hazard uses.
The Freehold Township Fire Prevention Bureau established by § 162-5 shall
carry out the periodic inspection of life hazard uses required by the Uniform
Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
§ 162-8. Organizational structure.
The Freehold Township Fire Prevention Bureau established by § 162-5 and
pursuant to state regulations shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Fire Official who shall report to the Township Administrator.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 162-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 162-9
162:303
§ 162-9. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively) any person aggrieved by any
order of the Freehold Township Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Monmouth.
§ 162-10. Life hazard use inspections.
The state permit fees as established in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c) are as provided
for in Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 162-11. Inspections.
Subject to the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code, the Fire Official shall
make or cause to be made inspections of all buildings and premises as often
as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, endanger life from fire, or any
violations of the provisions or intent of the code or of any other ordinance
affecting the fire hazard. The Fire Official shall make a minimum of one
fire inspection per calendar year unless more frequently required by the
Uniform Fire Safety Act.
§ 162-12. Fire Prevention Board.
The Fire Prevention Board shall consist of the Chiefs of the fire companies
or their designees, the Chief of Police or his designee, the Construction
Official or his designee, the Fire Official or his designee, and six members
at large designated by the Township Committee. The terms of the six
at large members shall be for four years. Appointment shall be by the
Township Committee at its organizational meeting. If a member at large,
during that member's four-year term, shall be elected or appointed as a
Fire Chief, Police Chief, Construction Official or Fire Official, his or her atlarge
membership shall be deemed vacated in which event the Township
Committee shall appoint a replacement at-large member to fill the
unexpired term. The members of the Board shall, at its annual
reorganization meeting held in January of each year, elect one of the
members to serve as Chief of the Board and another of its members to serve
as Deputy Chief of the Board.
§ 162-13. Non-life-hazard uses inspections.
In addition to the inspections and fees required for life hazard uses
pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the
Department of Community Affairs, the inspections and fees required for
non-life-hazard uses and shall be carried out by the Fire Prevention Bureau
shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 162-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 162-13
162:304
ARTICLE III
Fire and Smoke Detectors
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-88-43 (§ 12-12 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 162-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKE DETECTOR — A fire alarm device capable of sensing visible or
invisible particulars of combustion, providing suitable alarm, audible in all
sleeping areas.
§ 162-15. Smoke detectors required.
Each guest room, hotel suite, motel suite, or apartment dwelling unit shall
be provided with a minimum of one approved smoke detector unit installed
in a manner and location approved by the Freehold Township Fire
Prevention Bureau and in compliance with the applicable sections of the
National Fire Protection Association, Bulletin No. 74 (Standard of
Installation, Maintenance and Use of House Fire Warning System), the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code and the Uniform Fire Code as amended
to date. Any such smoke detectors installed shall bear a seal, tested and
listed by an approved rating organization such as Underwriter Laboratories,
Inc. (UL), Factory Mutual Laboratories (FM) or any nationally recognized
agency.
§ 162-16. Responsibility.
It shall be the responsibility of the owners and/or managing agents of all
buildings referred to herein to install and maintain smoke detectors in full
operating condition in the locations prescribed.
§ 162-17. Interference with operation of smoke detector prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally interfere with the proper
operation of a smoke detector in any manner without permission of the
owner or his agent.
§ 162-18. Exceptions.
Any residential premises having in operation a form or system of electronic
or other fire detection system, device or similar system approved by the Fire
Prevention Bureau as an alternative alarm system shall be exempt from the
equipment requirements of this article as to all areas so protected.
§ 162-19. Compliance deadline.
Compliance with this chapter shall be mandatory for multifamily residences
including apartment houses and other residential housing including two or
§ 162-14 FIRE PREVENTION § 162-19
162:305
more dwelling units on or after January 1, 1981; provided, however, that
no residential property of two or more dwelling units shall be sold and
no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued hereafter
except upon certification by the applicant therefor of compliance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 162-20. Enforcement jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be considered to vest exclusive
jurisdiction within the Freehold Township Fire Prevention Bureau in terms
of its enforcement; violation of this chapter may be enforced by other
Township officials, including personnel of the Code Enforcement and the
Police Departments.
§ 162-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed generally for violation of the ordinances of the
Township as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code
of the Township of Freehold.
§ 162-19 FREEHOLD CODE § 162-21
162:306
ARTICLE IV
Rapid Entry System
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-96-22 (§ 12-13 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 162-22. Purpose.
The governing body of the Township of Freehold finds that in order to better
protect the property and welfare of certain businesses, business patrons
and fire company members, a uniform system for rapid entry into certain
buildings in the event of a report of a fire emergency is required.
§ 162-23. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings set
forth below unless the context in which it is used clearly requires a different
meaning:
AFFECTED STRUCTURES or AFFECTED BUILDINGS — Any of the
structures or buildings described in § 162-24 below.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS — A residential building containing three or more
dwelling units.
RAPID ENTRY BOX SYSTEM — A locking vault-like container permanently
mounted into the affected structure or building and accessible from outside
of such structure or building.
§ 162-24. Applicability.
The following structures or buildings shall be required to have installed a
rapid entry box system:
§ 162-25. Exemptions.
The following buildings or structures shall be exempt:
A. Any industrial or warehouse building or structure;
B. Hotels, motels or multiple dwellings which have locked main entrances
at any time during the day or night or which have locked boiler rooms,
electrical rooms, basements, sprinkler control rooms or elevator control
rooms.
C. All educational and day-care buildings or structures.
D. All mercantile buildings and structures including shopping centers.
E. All office buildings and structures.
F. All buildings and structures of public assembly, including houses of
worship, restaurants and movie theaters. [Amended 9-25-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-25]
§ 162-22 FIRE PREVENTION § 162-25
162:307
§ 162-26. Type of rapid entry box required.
Each affected building or structure shall cause an appropriate rapid entry
box to be permanently mounted into the structure or building and
accessible from outside the structure or building. Each rapid entry box
shall be of sufficient size and configuration to allow the required contents
as set forth in § 162-28 below to be conveniently stored therein. In order
to assure acceptability of the rapid entry box chosen, each owner, tenant,
or other responsible party of each affected structure or building shall
receive approval from the Freehold Township Fire Official as to the size and
configuration of the proposed rapid entry box.
§ 162-27. Location requirements.
The location on the outside of the building or structure at which the rapid
entry box is to be located must be, as nearly as possible, uniform among
similar type structures in order to promote quick accessibility upon arrival
of fire personnel at the scene of an emergency. Given differing structural
characteristics of different types of structures and buildings, the location of
the rapid entry box on the exterior of each building or structure shall be
submitted to and approved by the Township Fire Official.
§ 162-28. Required contents of rapid entry box.
The rapid entry box for each building or structure shall contain a separately
and clearly labeled key for each locked area within the building or structure
(for example, boiler rooms, electrical rooms, sprinkler control rooms,
elevator control rooms, etc.), the building plan of any structure or building
in excess of 30,000 square feet, sprinkler keys, elevator keys, and
information concerning any hazardous materials contained within the
building or structure, and a clear indication as to the part of the building or
structure within which such hazardous materials are contained.
§ 162-29. Compliance deadline.
Compliance with the provisions of this article must be achieved on or before
January 1, 1998.
A. Any building or structure staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
B. Any building or structure already constructed or for which a building
permit has been issued as of the effective date of this article and which
is less than 5,000 square feet in area, except for educational and daycare
buildings or structures. For purposes of determining this
exemption, where more than one business is maintained in a common
structure (i.e., strip shopping centers), the measurement of the square
footage of the structure shall include all individual businesses within
the overall building or structure.
§ 162-25 FREEHOLD CODE § 162-30
162:308
§ 162-30. Master key security.
As used herein, "master key" shall mean the instrument used to gain access
to the various rapid entry system boxes to be utilized as a result of the
provisions of this article. The Fire Department shall establish a system of
security and procedure to limit access to any master key(s) to authorized
personnel in times of emergency. The Fire Department shall, to the extent
feasible and practical, use the latest technological advances available to
preserve and enhance the security of the master key(s).
§ 162-31. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 162-30 FIRE PREVENTION § 162-31
162:309
Chapter 166
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.
Environmental impact statements — See Ch.
142.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Manufactured/mobile homes — See Ch. 213.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
282.
Soil removal and soil fill — See Ch. 286.
Water resources protection — See Ch. 355.
§ 166-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 166-2. Findings of fact.
§ 166-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Freehold are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
C. It is further recognized that various streams and watercourses in the
Township of Freehold are subject to siltation, erosion of banks,
recurrent and increasing flooding and degradation of water quality and
that such conditions endanger life and public and property, that such
conditions are aggravated by development and encroachments in the
streams and watercourses, and that the most appropriate method of
alleviating such conditions is through regulation of developments and
encroachments.
§ 162-31 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-3
162:310
§ 166-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 166-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the content clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 166-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-5
162:311
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Engineer's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual-
or-greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD (FLOOD HAZARD AREA) — The land
in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater
chance of flooding in any given year.
BANK — The area of land adjoining a watercourse sloping from level grade
to the beginning of the channel.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CHANNEL — The bed and banks which confine and conduct the
continuously or intermittently flowing water of any stream or watercourse.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
ENCROACHMENT — Any structure or obstruction within a stream or
watercourse or within the flood hazard area or floodplain of such stream or
watercourse.
§ 166-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-5
162:312
EROSION — Detachment and movement of soil and rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
EXCAVATION — Removal, displacement, or recovery by any means
whatsoever of minerals, mineral substances, or organic substances, other
than vegetation, from the water, land surface, or beneath the land surface,
whether exposed or submerged. Normal agricultural activities shall not be
considered to be excavation.
FILL — Sand, gravel, rocks, earth, vegetation, rubble, or other materials
placed or deposited within a stream, watercourse, flood hazard area, or
floodplain.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — The susceptibility of a land use or activity
at a particular site to damage by potential floods at that site, as well as the
potential of a land use or activity to cause or add to off-site flooding or floodrelated
damage.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of any delineated flood hazard area, not
designated as floodway, as depicted on maps prepared by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or its predecessor agencies,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., and filed in the offices of the
Township Clerk and Engineer.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of relatively flat land adjoining a stream or
watercourse and subject to flooding from an overflow of such stream or
watercourse, including lands delineated as floodplains on maps prepared by
the Freehold Township Environmental Commission and filed in the offices
of the Township Clerk and Engineer.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 166-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-5
162:313
GROUNDWATER — That water, beneath the land surface, which is below
the water table.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Includes, but not limited to, inorganic mineral
acids of sulphur, fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorus,
selenium and arsenic and their common salts; lead, nickel, and mercury and
their inorganic salts or metallo-organic derivatives; coal tar acids, such as
phenols and oresols, and their salts; petroleum products; and radioactive
materials.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IMPROVED PARKING AREA — An area for the temporary or permanent
location of motor vehicles which has been modified from its natural
condition by excavation, fill, structures, or pavement.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 166-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-5
162:314
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, excepting such vehicle as runs only upon rails or tracks.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
OBSTRUCTION — Any building, structure, material or combination of
materials placed in, along, across, or projecting into any stream,
watercourse, flood hazard area, or floodplain which may impede, retard or
change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water or that is placed where the flow of
water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
PERSON — Corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, the state and
all political subdivisions of the state or any agencies or instrumentalities
thereof.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substance labeled, designed
or intended for use in preventing, destroying, repelling, sterilizing or
mitigating any insects, rodents, nemotodes, predatory animals, fungi, weeds
and other forms of plant or animal life or viruses, except viruses on or in
living man or other animals. The term "pesticide" shall also include any
substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed or intended for use as
a defoliant, desiccant, or plant regulator.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT — Oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form,
including crude oils and derivatives of crude oils, whether alone, as sludge,
oil refuse or oil mixed with other wastes.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Any natural or artificially produced substance
or combination of substances which emit radiation spontaneously.
RATE OF LOCAL RUNOFF — Speed with which a given quantity of water
will move across the land surface at the site of the proposed use or activity
under the influence of gravity.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
§ 166-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-5
162:315
SEDIMENTATION — The transport and depositing of solid material by
water.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, sludge, refuse, trash, rubbish, debris or other
discarded solid materials.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STREAM — Any natural course of running water, whether improved,
unimproved, enclosed or realigned, which presently or prior to any
improvement, enclosure or realignment had been cut by the erosion of
running water; a channel with well-defined banks and bed and through
which water flows ordinarily and frequently, but not necessarily
continuously.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 166-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-5
162:316
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
SURFACE WATER — Water on the land surface.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
WATER-CARRYING CAPACITY — The ability of a stream or watercourse to
transport flow as determined by its shape, cross-sectional area, bed slope
and coefficient of hydraulic friction.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or man-made carrier of water which has a
definite channel with a bed and banks and along which water has flowed
either continuously or intermittently for a sufficient period of time to give it
substantial existence, including, but not limited to streams, rivers, brooks,
rills, ponds, springs and drainage ditches.
§ 166-6. Uses in floodplain areas.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic
structure."
B.
A. Prohibited uses. No person shall hereafter engage in or cause other
persons to engage in any of the following prohibited activities or land
uses within any portion of a flood hazard area, except as permitted as a
lawful preexisting use under § 166-12.
(1) Placing, depositing or dumping any solid waste in a sanitary landfill
or otherwise.
(2) Dumping, disposing or discharging of pesticides, domestic and
industrial wastes, radioactive materials, petroleum products, or
other hazardous materials, except as authorized under other
provisions of law, including authorized Mosquito Control
Commission programs.
B. Nonregulated (exempt) uses.
(1) For purposes of this subsection, nonregulated uses are activities
and land uses within the flood hazard area which:
(a) Are not prohibited under Subsection A;
(b) Have an inherent low flood damage potential;
(c) Do not obstruct flood flows;
§ 166-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-6
162:317
(d) Do not require channel modification or relocation;
(e) Do not increase significantly the local rate of runoff and/or
erosion and sedimentation;
(f) Are undertaken with full on-site flood damage risks accepted
by the owner or his assigns;
(g) Do not increase off-site flood damage potential; and
(h) Do not require erection of structures.
(2) Nonregulated uses in the area of special flood hazard and
floodplain must satisfy the above conditions and shall include and
be limited to:
(a) Residential. Residence improvement activities such as lawns,
gardens, landscaping, play areas, park areas and fences.
(b) Private and public recreation. Playing fields, picnic grounds,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, hunting and fishing areas, shooting preserves, biking
and horseback riding trails, tennis courts, basketball courts,
driving ranges, archery ranges, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges and fish hatcheries.
(c) Agriculture. General cultivation, pasture, grazing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. Fences
associated with these agricultural uses are nonregulated.
C. Regulated uses.
(1) For purposes of this subsection, regulated activities and land uses
are those within the flood hazard area and floodplain which are not
prohibited under Subsection A of this section, do not qualify as
nonregulated (exempt) uses under Subsection B of this section, do
not qualify as preexisting uses under § 166-12 and which involve,
incorporate or make use of one or more of the following:
(a) Structures (both temporary and permanent);
(b) Fill;
(c) Excavation; or
(d) Channel modifications or relocations.
(2) Regulated uses shall include but are not limited to the following:
(a) All nonregulated uses under Subsection B of this section when
they involve any of the factors listed above;
§ 166-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-6
162:318
§ 166-7. Unmapped floodplains.
(b) Public and private recreation facilities such as golf courses,
tennis courts, swimming pools, boat launching ramps, docks,
piers and wharves;
(c) Improved parking areas;
(d) Utilities and transportation, such as railroads, streets,
highways, bridges, pipelines, and transmission lines;
(e) Retaining walls, dams, bulkheads, and dikes; and
(f) Construction of or substantial improvement of residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other structures,
including manufactured/mobile homes. [Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-36]
A. Applicability. The channel and floodplain of any stream or watercourse,
the flood hazard area of which has not been marked, delineated or
mapped by the Department of Environmental Protection or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations.
B. Mapping of floodplains by individual engaging in prohibited or
regulated activity.
(1) Any person intending to engage in a prohibited or regulated use or
activity as herein defined on lands traversed by or abutting a
stream or watercourse, the flood hazard area or floodplain of which
has not been delineated or mapped, shall prior to engaging in such
prohibited or regulated use or activity cause the floodplain, flood
hazard area (floodway and flood-fringe) and channel of such stream
or watercourse to be delineated and mapped by a licensed
professional engineer of the State of New Jersey based on the onehundred-
year storm and accepted engineering practices to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer and, where applicable, the
State Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) Upon the completion of such delineation and mapping process,
such person shall be barred from engaging in any prohibited use or
activity absolutely and from engaging in any regulated use or
activity unless a regulated use permit has been applied for and
received.
C. Prohibited uses. No person shall hereafter engage in or cause other
persons to engage in any of the following prohibited activities or land
uses within the channel or floodplain of any stream or watercourse to
which this section applies, unless such use or activity qualifies as a
lawful preexisting use under § 166-12 or is otherwise exempt:
§ 166-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-7
162:319
§ 166-8. Regulated use permits.
Subject to the provisions of § 166-12, Preexisting structures and uses, and
§ 166-13, Maintenance and repair of regulated uses, no person shall
hereafter engage or cause other persons to engage in any regulated use or
activity as defined in §§ 166-6C and 166-7D unless and until such person
shall have applied for and received from the Township Planning Board a
regulated use permit. The Township Construction Official is appointed to
administer and implement this chapter.
(1) Placing, depositing or dumping any solid waste in a sanitary landfill
or otherwise.
(2) Processing, storing, discharging, dumping or disposing of
pesticides, domestic or industrial wastes, radioactive materials,
petroleum products or other hazardous materials, except as
authorized under other provisions of law, including authorized
Mosquito Control Commission programs.
D. Regulated uses. No structure, fill, obstruction, encroachment,
excavation, channel modification or relocation shall be undertaken,
placed, continued or allowed to remain within the floodplain or flood
hazard area of any stream or watercourse to which this section applies
without a regulated use permit having been applied for and received,
unless such use qualifies as a lawful preexisting use under § 166-12 or
is otherwise exempt.
A. Duties and responsibilities of the Construction Official shall include but
not be limited to the following. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to require that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
(4) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
Subsection D(2)(c) of this section.
(5) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 166-9A are met.
§ 166-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-8
162:320
(6) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
(7) Alteration of watercourses:
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control
Section and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
B. Township Engineer. When base flood elevation and floodway data has
not been provided, in accordance with § 166-17, the Township Engineer
shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer Subsection H(5) and (6).
C. The Township Engineer shall make interpretations where needed, as to
the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 166-15.
D. Application procedures.
(1) An applicant for a regulated use permit shall request an application
number and an application form from the Secretary of the Planning
Board. A nonrefundable application fee as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, must accompany the request. The application number shall
identify the application and shall be predominantly displayed on all
correspondence and submissions of information relating to the
application. The request shall include the applicant's name,
address, a brief description of the proposed project and the
project's location. The Secretary of the Planning Board shall send
the applicant his application number and application form, which
shall be returned to the Secretary of the Planning Board and copies
forwarded to the appropriate agencies. (See application form for all
required information.)
(2) The application shall include but is not limited to the following
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, and drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the
following information is required:
§ 166-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-8
162:321
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure has been floodproofed;
(c) Plans showing how any nonresidential floodproofed structure
will meet the floodproofing criteria of Subsections H and I of
this section and which, after the structure is built, shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection.
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(3) Completion of application; copies submitted.
(a) The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board at least five
copies of the completed application and any additional
information required and shall submit at least two copies of the
completed application to the Township Engineer and, upon
receipt of a declaration of completeness, shall within three
days thereof submit an additional five copies to the Township
Environmental Commission. A nonrefundable application
processing fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be
submitted to the Planning Board with the completed
application.
(b) All information shall be complete, responsive and accurate to
the best of the applicant's knowledge and ability and if
required to be in platted form shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer.
(4) Declaration of completeness and submission of additional
information.
(a) The Planning Board shall make a formal declaration of the
completeness or incompleteness of an application within 14
days of its receipt and shall notify the applicant in writing
within three days of such declaration.
(b) In lieu of the making of a declaration of completeness or
incompleteness, the Planning Board may request in writing
additional information other than that disclosed on the
application and which is reasonably necessary for the proper
review of the application, which request shall suspend the
running of the fourteen-day period following the receipt of any
application.
§ 166-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-8
162:322
(c) Upon the receipt of all the additional information requested,
the Planning Board shall within 14 days make a formal
declaration of completeness or incompleteness of the
application. The failure of the Planning Board to make a formal
declaration of completeness or incompleteness or to request
additional supplementary information within 14 days of the
initial receipt of an application shall result in its being deemed
complete.
(5) Notification to other parties. The applicant shall notify in writing all
property owners within 200 feet that he has applied for a regulated
use permit. Such notification shall be made within three days of the
receipt of the declaration of completeness and shall include the
name and address of the applicant, location of the proposed use,
and abbreviated description of the use or activity and a statement
that written objections to the application must be forwarded to the
Planning Board within 30 days of the receipt of such notification.
(6) Site plan or major subdivision applications to be consolidated with
regulated use permit applications:
(a) Any person who intends to apply for a regulated use permit
hereunder and who further intends to apply for major
subdivision approval or for site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 190, Land Use, of this Code shall consolidate all
information required by the regulated use permit application
to be platted form, with all tentative and final major
subdivision plats and site plan plats submitted under Chapter
190.
(b) Where platted information has been consolidated as herein
required, the Planning Board shall consider simultaneously the
application for regulated use permit and the application for
major subdivision approval or site plan approval.
(c) Where platted information has been consolidated as herein
required, such consolidation shall not constitute a waiver of
the requirements of any other provision of this or any other
chapter, except that the Planning Board shall not be required
to issue, issue with conditions, or deny a regulated use permit
within 45 days as set out in Subsection G of this section but
may refrain from taking any action on such regulated use
permit application until final major subdivision or site plan
approval is granted or denied.
(d) This subsection is in no way intended to excuse any applicant
for major subdivision or site plan approval from any other
applicable provision of Chapter 190, Land Use, of this Code, or
any other provisions of law, but is solely intended to eliminate
the necessity for dual plat submission.
E. Review and comment by interested parties.
§ 166-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-8
162:323
(1) Completed applications shall be available in the office of the
Planning Board in the Municipal Building during normal working
hours for at least 10 calendar days prior to review by the Planning
Board.
(2) Any interested party may submit written comments to the Planning
Board within the thirty-day period following the date the
application was declared complete.
F. Review by Planning Board and Township Engineer. In reviewing any
regulated use permit application, the Planning Board shall consider the
written comments of the Township Engineer and all written comments
received from the Township Environmental Commission or other
interested party within 30 days of the issuance of a declaration of
completeness and shall further consider all of the following criteria as
they apply to the proposed use or activity:
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
(2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
insulation of these systems from disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions resulting from flooding.
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the
effects of such damage.
(5) The need for a waterfront location and the availability of alternate
locations not subject to flooding within the applicant's property.
(6) The duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of floodwaters
expected at the site.
(7) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(8) The extent to which the water-carrying capacity of the floodway or
channel would be disrupted.
(9) The degree to which the proposed use would serve the general
public health, safety and welfare.
(10) The degree to which any aspect of food chain or plant, animal, fish
or human life processes would be affected adversely within or
beyond the proposed use area.
(11) Whether the proposed use provides adequate facilities for the
proper handling of litter, trash, refuse and sanitary and industrial
wastes.
§ 166-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-8
162:324
(12) The degree to which the proposed activity would alter natural
water flow or water temperature.
(13) The degree to which archaeological or historic sites and structures
endangered or rare species of animals or plants or irreplaceable
land types would be degraded or destroyed.
(14) The degree to which the natural, scenic and aesthetic values at the
proposed activity site could be retained.
(15) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(16) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(17) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(18) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
G. Issuance, conditional issuance or denial of regulated use permit.
(1) The Planning Board shall, within 45 days, unless the applicant
waives such action in writing or proceeds pursuant to Subsection
D(6) of this section, notify the applicant in writing of the issuance,
issuance with conditions or denial of a regulated use permit, and a
copy of such notification shall be submitted to each party who
submitted written comments on the application.
(2) A written notification of conditional issuance or denial shall state
the reasons for such action.
(3) The Planning Board shall only issue a regulated use permit if, after
review and consideration of the application and the written
comments submitted thereon, with due regard for the criteria of
Subsection F of this section, it finds that the use or activity as
proposed by the applicant, or as conditioned by the Planning
Board:
(a) Has low flood damage potential;
(b) Neither obstructs flood flows nor increases flood heights or
velocities unduly, whether acting alone or in combination with
other existing or expected uses;
(c) Does not degrade significantly the water-carrying capacity of
any delineated floodway or channel;
(d) Does not increase significantly the rate of local runoff, erosion
and sedimentation;
§ 166-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-8
162:325
(e) Does not degrade significantly the quality of surface water or
the quality and quantity of groundwaters;
(f) Does not stress unduly the environment of the floodplain;
(g) Does not require channel modification or relocation;
(h) Does not involve the storage of hazardous materials; and
(i) Does not require excessive fill.
H. Conditional issuance; permissible conditions. The Planning Board may
impose such conditions on regulated uses as it deems necessary to
promote and protect the public safety, health and welfare, to protect
public and private property and to preserve, protect and enhance the
natural environment of the floodplain and, to the maximum extent
possible, existing natural features such as trees, other vegetation and
the natural configuration of the land. Such conditions will include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(c) Specific requirements shall be that:
[1] Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of
the manufactured/mobile home, with two additional ties
per side at intermediate locations, and manufactured/
mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one
additional tie per side; [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-36]
[2] Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with
five additional ties per side at intermediate points and
mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four
additional ties per side;
[3] All components of the anchoring system be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and
[4] Any additions to the manufactured/mobile home be
similarly anchored. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-36]
§ 166-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-8
162:326
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction of substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters.
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which is greater
than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
(5) Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.
(6) Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
§ 166-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-8
162:327
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated
one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the
base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capacity of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards
of this subsection are satisfied.
(7) Mobile homes.
(a) Mobile homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Subsection H(1) of this section.
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is
one foot above the base flood elevation.
(8) Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A
minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
I. In areas of special flood hazard, any or all of the following measures
may also be required:
(1) Floodproofing to include any or all of the following:
(a) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters or
similar devices.
(b) Reinforced walls to resist water pressures.
(c) Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls.
(d) Addition of weight to structures to resist flotation.
(e) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
§ 166-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-8
162:328
§ 166-9. Floodways.
Since a floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential,
the following provisions apply:
(f) Pumping facilities, or comparable measures, for the subsurface
drainage system of buildings to relieve external foundation
wall and basement flood pressures.
(g) Construction that resists rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
(h) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of
sewage or stormwaters into the structure. Gravity drainage of
basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices.
(i) Location of all electrical equipment, circuits, and installed
electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they are
not subject to inundation and flooding.
(j) Adequate emergency electrical power supplies.
(2) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(3) Requirements for construction of dikes, levees, and other
protective measures.
(4) Installation of an adequate flood warning system on the project
site.
(5) All fill and other earthwork must be established according to the
Soil Conservation Service (Freehold District).
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of § 166-8H and I.
C. Prohibit the placement of any manufactured/mobile homes, except in
any existing manufactured/mobile home park or existing manufactured/
mobile home subdivision. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-36]
D. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
§ 166-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-9
162:329
§ 166-10. Limitations on permit.
All permits issued pursuant to these regulations shall state that the
application has been reviewed only in terms of these regulations and that
the permit represents neither express nor implied approval of the
application under any other state or local law.
§ 166-11. Revocation of permits.
Regulated use permits issued by the Planning Board may be revoked by
the Planning Board or Construction Official for any violation of these
regulations or for violations of any permit conditions. Continuation of a
regulated use or activity subsequent to revocation shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
§ 166-12. Preexisting structures and uses.
Uses of land or structures which lawfully existed on or before the effective
date of this chapter shall be permitted to remain subject to the following
conditions:
§ 166-13. Maintenance and repair of regulated uses.
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
A. Routine maintenance and repair of preexisting structures are permitted
and do not require a regulated use permit.
B. No preexisting structure shall be expanded or enlarged unless a
regulated use permit has been applied for and received.
C. If a preexisting structure is damaged by any means, including floods, to
the extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds 50% of the
reproduction cost, such structure shall not be reconstructed unless a
regulated use permit has been applied for and received.
D. If a structure is substantially and lawfully under construction on or
before the effective date of the regulations, then such structure may be
completed without a regulated use permit.
E. No preexisting use shall be changed or modified so as to increase its
flood damage potential, unless a regulated use permit has been applied
for and received.
F. Sanitary landfills may be considered lawfully preexisting uses and may
be permitted to expand vertically if they comply with all other
applicable provisions of law but shall not be permitted to expand
horizontally.
A. Routine maintenance and repair of a structure for which a regulated
use permit has been granted is permitted and shall not require
§ 166-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-13
162:330
§ 166-14. Violations and penalties.
Any persons engaging in or causing other persons to engage in a use or
activity prohibited by this chapter or engaging in a regulated use or activity
without applying for or receiving a regulated use permit, or violating any
other provision of this chapter, shall be subject, upon conviction of each and
every violation, to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty. Each and every day that such violation continues after written
notification thereof shall be considered a separate and specific violation of
this chapter.
§ 166-15. Appeals.
Any person who considers himself aggrieved by any decision, action or
nonaction of the Planning Board may pursue an appeal subject to the
following provisions.
additional regulated use permits. Maintenance and repair shall comply
with the terms of the original permit.
B. If a structure for which a regulated use permit has been granted is
destroyed to the extent that the cost of reproduction or repair exceeds
50% of the reproduction cost, such structure shall not be reconstructed
unless a new regulated use permit has been applied for and received.
A. Flood hazard area. Where the subject property is located within a
delineated flood hazard area, floodplain, channel or unmapped
floodplain, an applicant who considers himself aggrieved by the
decision of the Planning Board may apply within 30 days of the date the
decision was rendered to the Township Committee for a plenary
hearing.
(1) The Township Committee shall set the date for the hearing no later
than 45 days after receipt for the request.
(2) The applicant shall be notified as to the hearing date at least 14
days prior to its being held.
(3) At the hearing, the aggrieved party has the burden of proof, which
shall be a mere preponderance of the evidence. The aggrieved
party and all interested parties shall have the right to offer
evidence and call and cross-examine witnesses.
(4) The Township Committee may affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the Planning Board according to the standards
previously set forth in this chapter and shall notify the applicant in
writing of its decision on the appeal within 14 days of the date of its
hearing, which notice shall set forth the specific reasons for the
decision.
B. Application of appeal. Application of appeal under Subsection A herein
shall be in writing and shall include:
§ 166-13 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-15
162:331
(1) A copy of the decision;
(2) Wherein said decision aggrieves such persons;
(3) Which findings of fact (including omissions) are challenged; and
(4) Which conclusions of law (including those not articulated) are
challenged.
C. Cost of plenary hearing. The costs of a plenary hearing are to be borne
by the applicant, and a reasonable amount in bond may be required to
be posted for the same.
D. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey, as
provided by Rule of Court 4:69-1.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 166-15G(4) and the purposes of
this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The Township Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Insurance Administration upon request.
G. Variance procedure; Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by the Township Committee
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Engineer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, as provided in Rule of Court 4:69-1.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
§ 166-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-15
162:332
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
H. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in Subsection G(4)(a) through (k) in § 166-15 have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
§ 166-15 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-15
162:333
§ 166-16. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all streams and areas of special flood hazards
within the jurisdiction of the Township of Freehold, Monmouth County, New
Jersey.
§ 166-17. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 166-8G, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Freehold,
Community No. 340297, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Monmouth County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September
25, 2009.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (all
jurisdictions) as shown on index and panel numbers whose effective
date is September 25, 2009:
34025C0140F 34025C0141F 34025C0142F
34025C0143F 34025C0144F 34025C0161F
34025C0163F 34025C0260F 34025C0266F
34025C0267F 34025C0280F 34025C0281F
34025C0282F 34025C0283F 34025C0284F
34025C0290F 34025C0291F 34025C0292F
34025C0301F
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the
Freehold Township Municipal Building, Schanck and Stillwells Corner
Road, Freehold, New Jersey 07728.
§ 166-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-18
162:334
§ 166-18. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall,
upon conviction or plea of guilty, result in such penalties as prescribed by
§ 1-3 of this Code. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of
Freehold from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 166-19. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 166-20. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 166-21. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Freehold, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 166-18 FIRE PREVENTION § 166-21
162:335
Chapter 171
GAMES OF CHANCE AND BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 75.
§ 166-21 FREEHOLD CODE § 166-21
162:336
ARTICLE I
Sunday Games
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-78-27 (§ 7-10 of the Revised General
Ordinances)
§ 171-1. Findings.
§ 171-2. Games of chance on Sunday permitted.
The Township Committee ordains that legalized games of chance on Sunday
shall be allowed within the Township subject to such approvals of the
Township Committee as are required by law.
§ 171-3. Filing of copy of chapter with state.
A copy of this chapter, certified to be a true copy, shall be forwarded to the
Legalized Games of Chance Commission of the State of New Jersey.
A. The Township has received several requests for the holding of legalized
games of chance on Sunday within the Township.
B. Before approving the holding of such legalized games of chance on
Sunday, the Township Committee by law must pass the appropriate
ordinance.
C. The proceeds of such games in the past have been utilized to sponsor
charitable and humanitarian causes.
D. It is the opinion of the Township Committee that the holding of such
games will not be detrimental to the interests of the residents of the
Township.
§ 171-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 171-3
162:337

ARTICLE II
Licensing
[Adopted 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-3952]
§ 171-4. Authorization to approve licenses.
The Township Clerk of the Township of Freehold is hereby authorized and
delegated the authority to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses
to be held in the Township of Freehold.
52.Editor's Note: The provisions of this local law were originally adopted as Ch. 80 but were
redesignated to fit into the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 171-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 171-4
162:339
Chapter 177
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 11. Fees — See Ch. 150.
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meaning.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building, structure, facility or complex used by
the general public or to which the general public is invited, including,
but not limited to, theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools,
libraries, recreation facilities, public transportation terminals and stations,
factories, office buildings, businesses, shopping centers, hotels or motels
and public eating places whether privately or publicly owned, except that
this term shall not include private family residences, warehouse storage
areas and all buildings conducting hazardous occupancies that involve
highly combustible, highly flammable or explosive material.
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — A physical impairment which confines a person to
a wheelchair, causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity, affects
the sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas
is insecure or exposed to danger, causes faulty coordination or reduces
mobility, flexibility, coordination and perception to the extent that facilities
are needed to provide for the safety of that person.
STATUTORY DEFINITIONS — The definitions set forth in N.J.S.A.
39:4-207.6 (P.L. 1989, c. 200), as may be subsequently amended, are hereby
incorporated by reference.
§ 177-2. Spaces to be provided at public buildings; exemption.
The owners of all public buildings which provide parking spaces adjacent
to or used in conjunction with the public building shall within 30 days
of notice thereof provide for parking spaces for handicapped persons in
accordance with the guidelines herein set forth and in a location and
manner as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. Any parking
facility with less than 16 existing spaces shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 177-3. Construction guidelines.
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be constructed
according to the following guidelines:
§ 171-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 177-3
177:340
§ 177-4. Vehicle identification required.
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and marked
as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking facility
whether on public or private property unless said vehicle shall have affixed
thereto an identification certificate or marker issued either by the New
Jersey Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles and/or a local certificate
and a handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in the vehicle.
Parking in a handicap space without the aforesaid vehicle identification
shall create a rebuttable presumption that use of the space was not for the
physically handicapped.
§ 177-5. Identification card; temporary placard.
A. A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces in the parking
facility shall be used for handicapped parking, but these shall be not
less than two parking spaces in each such facility.
B. The location of the physically handicapped spaces shall be in an area of
the parking facility which is most accessible and approximate to the
building or buildings which the facility serves. The determination of the
location shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer in conjunction
and consultation with the owner. In shopping centers and other
multistore facilities, the handicapped spaces shall be as near to the
flagship store as possible and/or at such other locations as may be
agreeable between the Code Enforcement Officer and the owner.
C. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the international symbol of access along with the
following words, "These Spaces Reserved for Physically Handicapped
only. Special Vehicle Identification Required," together with notification
of the penalties which may be imposed for a violation. The layout,
designing and positioning of the signs erected shall be subject to review
and approval by the Code Enforcement Officer. No proof of such
approval shall be required for prosecution of violations of this chapter.
The lines designating the area shall be painted in fluorescent yellow
paint, and the center of the space shall have painted thereon the capital
letter "H" or the international symbol.
D. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of the
automobile on a level paved surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
E. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
F. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from parking area to sidewalk.
§ 177-3 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 177-5
177:341
§ 177-6. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
A. Chief of Police to issue identification card. The Chief of Police shall
issue free of charge a Township special vehicle identification card to
any physically disabled person (resident or nonresident) who may not
qualify for such identification under N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 but does qualify
under § 177-1, definition of "physical handicap." A physician's
certification shall be necessary to establish the qualifying status of each
applicant.53
B. Chief of Police to issue temporary placard.
(1) The Chief of Police shall issue to any person who has temporarily
lost the use of one or more limbs or is temporarily disabled as to be
unable to ambulate without the aid of an assisting device or whose
mobility is otherwise temporarily limited, as certified by a
physician with a plenary license to practice medicine and surgery
in this state or a bordering state, a temporary placard of not more
than six months duration. Each temporary handicapped placard
issued under the provisions of this subsection shall set forth the
date upon which it shall become invalid.
(2) A physician's certificate shall be necessary to establish the
qualifying status of each applicant. The certification shall be
provided on the standard form approved by the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
(3) The placard may be renewed one time for a period of not more than
six months duration. It shall be displayed on the motor vehicle used
by the temporarily handicapped person.
C. Fee for issuance of temporary placard. The Chief of Police shall collect a
fee of as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, payable to the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles upon issuance of the temporary placard
pursuant to Subsection B.
A. An eligible handicapped person may request a law enforcement officer
to arrange for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle which is
parked unlawfully in a parking space or zone which is restricted for use
by a handicapped person. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the
motor vehicle to pay the reasonable costs for the removal and for any
storage which may result from the removal.
B. The assessment of removal and storage costs against a person under
this chapter shall be in addition to any other penalty assessed against
the person.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 177-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 177-7
177:342
§ 177-7. Handicapped parking enforcement unit.
There is hereby established within the Township of Freehold the
Handicapped Parking Enforcement Unit under the supervision of the Chief
of Police, members of which shall have the full power and authority to issue
warnings or summonses for violation of any provision of any law, regulation,
ordinance or resolution pertaining to illegal parking in restricted parking
spaces for the handicapped, within the Township of Freehold. Such unit
shall concentrate its enforcement activity at shopping centers and malls
within the Township; however, its powers as set forth herein shall not
be restricted to those areas. Members of the Handicapped Parking
Enforcement Unit shall:
§ 177-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-25-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-25]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses,
a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service on such terms
and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any combination
thereof.
A. Have no criminal record as a result of a state criminal history record
background check through the State Bureau of Identification, Division
of State Police, Department of Law and Public Safety.
B. Be a resident of Freehold Township.
C. Be at least 18 years of age.
D. Successfully complete a course of instruction designed to prepare such
person to properly fulfill his/her responsibilities, such course of
instruction to fulfill the requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.9 et seq.
E. Be provided, at the expense of the Township, with a distinctive uniform
on which shall be affixed a special patch designating the function of the
member of the Handicapped Parking Enforcement Unit.
F. Be subject to the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police or his/
her designee.
G. Receive such compensation as may be provided in the salary ordinance
of the Township.
§ 177-7 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 177-8
177:343
Chapter 182
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Fire and smoke detectors — See Ch. 162, Art.
III.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 245.
Nuisances — See Ch. 380.
§ 182-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
In accordance with the provisions of statutes, the New Jersey State Housing
Code as revised to date is hereby adopted as a standard governing supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
making dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation, occupancy or
use, and governing the condition of dwellings. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code is attached to and made a part of this chapter without
the text being included herein.54
§ 182-2. Copies on file.
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on
file in the office of the Clerk and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 182-3. Enforcing authority. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
The administrative and enforcing authority for the provisions of this chapter
shall be the Housing Official.
§ 182-4. Chapter to be considered guiding standards.
This chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the Housing Official in
determining the fitness of any dwelling, unit, rooming unit or premises for
human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 182-5. Rules and regulations.
The Housing Official may make rules and regulations which interpret or
amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of making the
provisions of this chapter more effective. No regulation, however, shall be
inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision of this chapter, and no
regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater
54.Editor's Note: The New Jersey State Housing Code is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 177-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 182-5
177:344
than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any
provision of this chapter. Rules and regulations shall be subject to the same
penalty as other violations of this chapter.
§ 182-6. Inspections.
The Housing Official or his agents or employees shall make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, units, rooming units and premises
located within the Township.
§ 182-7. Search warrant.
The Housing Official or his agents may, upon affidavit, apply to the judge
of the Municipal Court of the Township for a search warrant setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter exists on the
premises, and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in
the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance
or violation may exist. A search warrant may also be obtained in connection
with a general program of inspection.
§ 182-8. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Housing Official determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give
notice of the alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor
as hereinafter provided. The notice shall:
§ 182-9. Hearing provisions.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, or of any rule or
A. Be put in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require, provided that notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by
certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if
he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state. The notice may contain an outline
of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
§ 182-5 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 182-9
177:345
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Housing Official, provided that such
person shall file in the office of the Housing Official a written petition
requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor within 10 days after the day the notice is served. Upon receipt
of the petition, the Housing Official shall set a time and place for the
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the hearing
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
why the notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition is
filed, provided that upon application of the petitioner, the Housing Official
may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond the
ten-day period, if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good
and sufficient reason for the postponement. After the hearing the Housing
Official shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending upon his
findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the
Housing Official sustains or modifies the notice, it shall be deemed to be
an order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for hearing is not filed in the office
of the Housing Official within 10 days after the notice is served. The
proceedings at the hearings, including the findings and the decision of the
Housing Official, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as
a matter of public record in the office of the Township Clerk. The record
shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Housing
Official may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction,
as provided by the laws of the state. Whenever the Housing Official finds
that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect public
health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting
the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Housing Official shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Housing Official
shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 182-10. Unfit dwellings. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48; 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-21]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official by a public
authority as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of
the Township charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as
defined in the Housing Code, or whenever it appears to the Construction
Official on his own motion that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation,
he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of, and parties in interest in,
§ 182-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 182-10
177:346
such dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Construction Official at a
place therein fixed not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after
the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaints;
and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not
be controlling in hearings before the Construction Official.
§ 182-11. Order for abatement or demolition.
A. If after notice and hearing, as provided above, the Construction Official
determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human
habitation, as defined in the Housing Code, he shall state in writing his
findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an
order requiring: [Amended 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-21]
(1) The repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by
the owner, within a reasonable time, which shall be set forth in the
order, or at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time
specified in the order, that the owner shall remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of
removal.
(3) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve, or at the option of the owner to vacate and close the
building, the Construction Official may cause such building to be
repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the
Construction Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of any building so closed, a placard with the following words: "This
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use
or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
(4) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Construction Official may cause such building to
be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or
demolition thereof after advertisement and receipt of bids therefor.
(5) The amount of:
(a) The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees,
search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of
any proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor
of the Township.
§ 182-10 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 182-11
177:347
§ 182-12. Serving of complaints or orders on unfit dwellings.
[Amended 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-21]
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Construction Official in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the Construction Official shall make an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon such persons
(b) The cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amounts of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if
any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition
thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property
upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the Construction Official, he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits, or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax
liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Construction Official, shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by such Court and shall be disbursed according to the order or
judgment of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by
final order or judgment of such Court, provided that nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the
Township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party
in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to
contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs
set forth in the municipal lien certificate. [Amended 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-48; 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-21]
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor is anything in this act intended to limit the authority of
the enforcing agency or construction official under the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or
any rules or regulations adopted thereunder. [Added 12-27-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 182-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 182-12
177:348
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper having circulation in the Township. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of such complaint or order
shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the Monmouth County
recording officer.
§ 182-13. Actions using revenue from property tax. [Added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property tax shall be
taken only after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor, pursuant to
the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198 (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.), unless the action is necessary to prevent imminent
danger to life, limb or property.
§ 182-14. Powers of Construction Official. [Amended 8-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-21]
The Construction Official is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following, in
addition to others herein granted.
§ 182-15. Compliance with other property maintenance standards.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant, or rent to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the provisions of Chapter 245, Property
Maintenance, as established and amended hereby and as may be amended
from time to time hereafter, as the standard to be used in determining
whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Township in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
A. No agent of an owner, real estate broker, firm, company, partnership,
corporation or person shall rent, re-rent, lease, re-lease, sell, resell or
§ 182-12 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 182-15
177:349
suffer to allow any person or persons to live in or occupy as a tenant or
otherwise any multiple dwelling unit, manufactured/mobile home and/
or single-family residence or dwelling where there shall be a change
of occupancy, unless a certificate of occupancy certifying that said
manufactured/mobile dwelling unit or apartment and/or single-family
residence or dwelling is fit for human habitation and that said multiple
dwelling unit or apartment and/or single-family residence or dwelling
is in compliance with all other ordinances of the Township shall first be
obtained from the Code Administrator. Such a certificate of occupancy
shall be granted or denied within 10 days from the date of the
application for same. The Code Administrator shall cause to be
prepared appropriate application forms for such certificate of
occupancy which form shall be available to the applicant at the office
of the Code Administrator. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-36]
(1) Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.2(a), no certificate of occupancy for
initial occupancy of a low- or moderate-income unit created
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act shall be issued unless there is a
written determination by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency as the authority responsible for administering
affordability controls within the Township that the unit is to be
controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by
the Council on Affordable Housing.
(2) Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.2(c), no continued certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any occupancy of a low- or moderateincome
unit created pursuant to the Fair Housing Act unless there
is a written determination by the New Jersey Housing and
Mortgage Finance Agency as the authority responsible for
administering affordability controls within the Township that the
unit is to be controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as
adopted by the Council on Affordable Housing.
(3) Charges to cover the cost of administration in connection with said
application, as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be paid to the
Code Administrator at the time the application is filed and shall not
be refundable.
B. Multiple dwelling unit for the purpose of this chapter is the same as
defined in Chapter 245, Property Maintenance, Article III, this Code
with the exception that manufactured/mobile home lot (space) is not
included. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-36]
C. As a condition of fitness for human habitation in any of the residences
or dwellings referred to in Subsection A above, the Township
Committee does hereby deem that it shall be necessary that each such
residence or dwelling have installed therein and in operating order no
less than one smoke alarm in each area used for sleeping purposes
which shall be of a type and placed in such a location as approved by
the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 182-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 182-15
177:350
§ 182-16. Demolition permit required.
The owner of any building located within the limits of the Township who
desires to demolish the same shall first obtain a permit for that purpose
from the Housing Official and shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, for each building or structure to be demolished. The fee shall be paid
prior to the issuance of any such permit. A permit shall be required, but no
fee payable, for demolishing any structure less than 150 square feet in area.
55
Chapter 186
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 245.
Licensing — See Ch. 195.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 341.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 347.
§ 186-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Any old, discarded or unused waste iron or other metal or
substance, glass, papers, machines in whole or in part, unregistered motor
vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning or for sale for highway
transportation, used parts of motor vehicles and any material commonly
known and generally referred to as "junk" in the ordinary meaning of the
word acquired or collected commercially.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who buys or otherwise acquires junk for
commercial purposes within the Township or who collects or stores junk
therein, and includes any auto wrecking business, the sale of used
automobile parts and the sale or storage of used lumber, used plumbing
fixtures or other used or secondhand articles.
D. A certificate of occupancy issued hereunder for the rental of a property
shall be valid for a period not to exceed 60 calendar days from the date
of issuance or until there occurs a change in occupancy, whichever
occurs first. A certificate of occupancy issued hereunder for the resale
of a property shall be valid for a period not to exceed 120 calendar days
from the date of issuance or until there occurs a change of occupancy,
whichever first occurs. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-8]
55.Editor's Note: Original Sec.13-2.16, Fire and smoke detectors, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48.
§ 182-15 JUNK DEALERS § 186-1
186:351
JUNKYARD — Any land within the Township on which junk is placed,
collected, stored or kept.
§ 186-2. License required.
No person shall engage in the business or occupation of a junk shop keeper,
junk dealer or motor vehicle junk dealer in or on any premises located in
the Township without first having obtained a license in accordance with
Chapter 195, Licensing, Article I, General Licensing Requirements, and this
chapter.
§ 186-3. Application.
In addition to the information required in § 195-2, the application shall
include a statement of whether the applicant is the owner of the site where
the business is to be conducted, and if not, the owner's written consent to
the conduct of the business. Each application shall have attached a sketch
or drawing of the property at which the business is to be conducted showing
the names of all streets and the names of all property owners abutting or
adjoining the premises and showing the dimensions of the property, and the
zoning designation of such property.
§ 186-4. Approval and issuance of license.
Each application filed with the Township Clerk shall be presented to the
Zoning Officer for recommendation to the Township Committee not later
than the second regular meeting following the filing of the application, at
which meeting the Township Committee may act upon any application so
presented or defer action thereon to any subsequent meeting. No license
shall be issued by the Township Clerk until its issuance has been duly
approved by resolution adopted by the Township Committee, provided that
if the Township Committee does not take action on the application within 60
days of the date on which it is first submitted to the Township Committee
by the Clerk, it shall be deemed that the granting of the license has
been approved, and the Clerk shall be authorized to issue the license
upon compliance by the applicant with all the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 186-5. Fee.
The annual license fee shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees. If the
license is for part of the license year, the fee shall be prorated on a monthly
basis.
§ 186-6. Stolen goods.
Any licensee or agent who receives or is in possession of any goods, articles
or things which may have been stolen or lost shall, upon demand to view
the same, present the goods to any official of the Township, including police
officers, health inspectors, members of the Board of Health, or any other
law enforcement agency or agent.
§ 186-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 186-7
186:352
§ 186-7. Inspection.
All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection at all times by the
Township Committee, Board of Health or any duly authorized agent, servant
or employee.
§ 186-8. Written record.
Every junk dealer is required to keep a written book or record at the
licensed premises which shall at all times be open to the inspection of any
of the persons mentioned in § 186-6 or 186-7. The licensee shall currently
and daily record in the book the description of all articles purchased and the
name and address of the person from whom purchased. No licensee shall at
any time trade with or make a purchase from any person under the age of
17 years.
§ 186-9. Hours of operation; limitation on number of licenses.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
No junk dealer shall conduct his business or occupation at any premises in
the Township on a Sunday or at any time other than between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The number of junkyard licenses in the Township in
effect at the same time shall not be more than three.
§ 186-10. Junkyard rules and regulations.
No junk dealer shall operate or be granted a license to operate a junkyard
unless the following requirements are complied with:
A. No motor vehicle or junk shall be stored or dismantled within 500 feet
of any dwelling house, place of residence, house of worship, school,
auditorium, place of public gathering or like place, except such
dwelling house as may be situated on the licensed premises. [Amended
9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
B. No junk or refuse material shall be burned within 100 feet of any
building or adjacent property.
C. Precaution shall be taken by each licensee to safeguard all inflammable,
combustible or explosive materials from fire, and no licensee shall
stack, pile or place junk upon the licensed premises in such manner as
to create a fire hazard. In addition, all gasoline, fuel or other explosive
material shall be drained and removed from any motor vehicle within
eight hours after it is received on any premises licensed as a junkyard
conducted by a junk dealer located in the Township, and the gasoline,
fuel or other explosive material shall be either removed from the
premises or kept in a leakproof tank buried on the premises at a point
not closer than 100 feet from any dwelling house and to a sufficient
depth so that the top of the tank shall not be nearer to the ground level
than 2 1/2 feet. The tank shall be located within the permissible portion
§ 186-7 JUNK DEALERS § 186-10
186:353
§ 186-11. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 190
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.
Environmental impact statement — See
Ch.142.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 162.
Floodplains and watercourses — See Ch. 166.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 213.
Right to farm — See Ch.265.
Telecommunications licensing — See Ch. 319.
Water resource protection — See Ch. 355.
of the premises as hereinafter set forth at which the business is
conducted.
D. No junk shall be stacked, placed or stored in such fashion that it shall
be visible above the height of the fence surrounding the premises.
E. No junk dealer shall conduct his business in any junkyard at any point
on the premises which shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any street
or highway or nearer than 25 feet to any of the side lines of the
premises. The business may be so maintained and conducted in the
permissible area of the premises only so long as the same is enclosed by
a fence at least eight feet in height, which fence shall be a solid fence
and shall be so constructed that the business carried on within the
permissible area shall not be visible from the exterior except during the
time that junk is actually transported in the regular course of business
or the owner, operator or employees of the business are gaining access
to or making exit from the permissible area through an opening in the
fence. Openings in the fence shall not be in excess of 15 feet in width
and shall not exceed more than one opening on each side of the
permissible area of the premises.
§ 186-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 186-11
186:354
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the Freehold Township Land
Use Ordinance.
§ 190-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
A. To encourage action to guide the appropriate use or development of all
lands in Freehold Township in a manner which will promote the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. To ensure that the development of Freehold Township does not conflict
with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities, and regions and preservation of the
environment.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. To promote the conservation of open space, historic sites and districts,
energy resources and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban
sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of
land.
K. To encourage planned unit developments or similar uses which
incorporate the best features of design and relate the type, design and
§ 190-1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-2
186:355
§ 190-3. Definitions.
layout of residential, commercial, industrial and recreational
development to the particular site.
L. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction.
M. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
N. To promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning
practices designed to reduce energy consumption and to provide for
maximum utilization of the normal energy sources.
O. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from solid waste through the use of planning
practices designed to incorporate the state recycling plan goals and to
complement the Monmouth County and Freehold Township recycling
programs.
A. For the purpose of the chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
(1) The term "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and the term
"may" indicates a permissive action.
(2) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "premises."
(3) The word "used" includes the words "intended to be used,"
"designed to be used," or "arranged to be used,"
(4) The word "occupied" includes the words "intended to be occupied,"
"designed to be occupied," or "arranged to be occupied."
(5) The word "demonstrate" means to provide such visual, written or
oral information as will enable the designated reviewing agency or
board to ascertain the scope and nature of a proposed use and
operation, and to render an informed opinion or decision thereon.
(6) The phrase "adjacent to a residential zone district" shall not include
a residential zone district separated from a property by a highway
of four or more travel lanes. [Added 7-13-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-27]
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A freestanding building
or structure subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principal
building or structure on the same lot.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is subordinate to and customarily
incidental to the principal use located on the same lot; where an
§ 190-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:356
accessory use is contained in a structure which is attached to the
principal building, such building shall be considered part of the
principal building for the purpose of determining the required yard
dimensions.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The individual appointed to administer
the provisions of this chapter except when a matter has been appealed
to the Township Committee and/or is pending before the Township
Committee, then and in that event, the administrative officer shall be
the Clerk of the Township.
ADULT — Any person or persons who have attained the age of 18 years.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment, business or use having as a
predominant part of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, photographs,
pictures, films, devices or other periodicals which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
limiting the sale of such sexual matter to adults.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with the
capacity of one or more persons used predominately for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas presented for observation by patrons
therein.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Development designs, situations, or existing
features on a developer's property, or any nearby property, creating,
imposing, aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe, unsatisfactory
or noncomplying conditions such as layout inconsistent with the zoning
regulations, insufficient street width, unsuitable street grade,
unsuitable street location, inconvenient street system, inadequate
utilities such as water, drainage, shade trees, and sewerage, unsuitable
size, shape and location for any area reserved for public use or land
for open space in a planned development, infringement upon land
designated as subject to flooding, and the creation of conditions leading
to soil erosion from wind or water from excavation or grading.
AESTHETIC AND HISTORICAL QUALITIES — Those qualities
possessed by any building, set of buildings, site, area or parcel of land
which by virtue of its role in history or general appearance represents
a unique quality or feature in the Township.
AGRICULTURE — A use of substantially undeveloped land devoted to
the production of plants and/or animals useful to man and/or such
properties that are classified as agricultural by virtue of the Farmland
Use Taxation Laws.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change, relocation, or
rearrangement of any supporting members, exterior walls or roofs of an
existing building.
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:357
ALTERNATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE FUELING STATION — A facility for
the retail sale of alternative motor vehicle fuels from pumps to motor
vehicles. Alternative motor vehicle fueling stations may operate 24
hours per day.[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-16]
ALTERNATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE FUELS — Fuels other than gasoline,
gasohol, Ethanol 85, Methanol 85, diesel or kerosene that propel
vehicles. Alternative motor fuels include, but are not limited to, LPG
(propane, butane), compressed natural gas (CNG), biodiesel, hydrogen,
liquefied natural gas (LNG) or electricity.[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-16]
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a building having two or more
dwelling units therein and sharing services such as entranceways,
hallways, basements, attics, heating systems, plumbing, or other
similar shared services within the building singularly or in
combination.[Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-3]
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required for approval of a subdivision plan,
site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning variance, or
direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board unless a different
agency is designated when acting pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — An area where rainfall infiltrates the
ground to water-bearing geological formations for retention.
ARTIST'S BODY PAINTING STUDIO — An establishment or business
which provides the service of applying paint or other substances,
whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the human body when
such body is fully or partially nude.
AUCTION or AUCTION MARKET — A room, building or open air area
space regularly or periodically devoted to the sale of goods to the
highest bidder.[Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE
FACILITIES — Facilities operated by automobile dealerships located
in Freehold Township involved in providing repair and maintenance
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:358
services for new and used automotive vehicles, such as passenger
cars, trucks, vans, and trailers, that employ mechanics with specialized
technical skills to diagnose and repair mechanical and electrical
systems for automotive vehicles, repair automotive interiors; paint or
repair automotive exteriors including bodies and frames; and repair
and replacement of engines, exhaust systems, transmissions and glass;
and to provide automotive vehicle services including motor oil and
lubrication, car washes and detailing in accordance with Subsector 811
of the North American Industry Classification System.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or
long-distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground, but having less than 1/2 its
height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.56
BUFFER — A landscaped area designed to act as a visual screen
between a potentially unsightly or otherwise undesirable or
incompatible use and adjacent properties.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT —
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane and a vertical plane that coincides with the most projected
exterior surface of the building. All yard requirements are measured to
the building line.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Materials that can be arranged, united, or
joined to support, frame, enclose, sheath, or be otherwise fashioned
into a building or structure. Such materials include, but are not limited
to, rough or dressed lumber, millwork, roofing, shingles, wallboard,
molding, plywood, Sheetrock, bricks, doors, windows, paneling, or
concrete block.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, and to the
mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
(1)
ACCESSORY BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from
the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of
the building to the highest point of the roof.
(2)
56.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Board of Adjustment," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26.
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:359
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the site on which it is situated.
BUILDINGS — A combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having
a roof. A structure having a roof supported by columns, piers or walls,
including tents, lunch wagons, trailers, dining cars, camp cars or other
structures on wheels or other supports, and designed or used for
shelter, housing enclosure, or storage of persons, animals or chattel.
CABARET — An establishment or use which features topless dancers,
go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators
or similar entertainers.
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites
are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units
of the general public as temporary living quarters for children or adults,
or both, for a maximum of 15 days in any calendar year, for recreation,
education or vacation purposes.[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
CAMPSITE — Any plot of ground within a campground intended for
the exclusive occupation by camping unit or units under control of the
camper.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A public acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 its
height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF DEVELOPMENT CREDIT — A calculation of the
Planning Board indicating the existence of a certain specified number
of development credits as determined by the Township of Freehold.
CHANGE OF USE — Any alteration or modification which results in
a use which is not substantially of the same kind or purpose as the
original use.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for
the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage, or power by such
means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways,
pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such
means as terminals, stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings
or transshipment points.
CLEAR-SIGHT DISTANCE — A line of unobstructed vision from a point
4 1/2 feet above the center line of a street or alley to the nearest point
on the top of an object four inches high of the same center line.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS — An organization which teaches and
provides courses of study of value and benefit to the general populace
for a fee, which may include but not be limited to the following general
examples of commercial schools: aircraft, archery, arts and crafts,
barber, beauty, cooking, dancing, driving, modeling and reading.
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:360
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES FOR DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED;
COMMUNITY SHELTERS FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE;
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES FOR THE TERMINALLY III; AND
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES —
The foregoing terms shall be as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2 and
shall be deemed a permitted use in all residential zoning districts in
Article XIII (§ 190-125 et seq.) hereof.
COMPATIBLE USE — Two or more uses of land not in conflict with each
other.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application completed as specified
by the completeness checklists adopted pursuant to § 190-4B hereof,
provided that the Township agency may require such additional
information not specified in the section, or any revisions in the
accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents
so required by the Township agency. An application shall be certified
as complete upon the meeting of all requirements specified in the
completeness checklists adopted pursuant to § 190-4B hereof, and shall
be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative
officer for purposes of the commencement of the time period for action
by the Township agency.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the zoning provisions of this chapter, and upon the
issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership of real property which consists
of the building or buildings, common elements and other property
described in a master deed and as generally set forth in N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1
et seq.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY — Residential facilities containing
congregate kitchen, dining and living areas, but with separate sleeping
rooms. Such facilities shall not be used for persons in need of the skilled
care or structured care of a nursing home or institution.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY — A residential
facility for four or more elderly (age 60 or older) within which is
provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry
services, and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other
services such as transportation for routine social and medical
appointments and counseling.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:361
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the
physical development of Monmouth County, New Jersey, with the
accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory
matter adopted by the Monmouth County Planning Board pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and N.J.S.A. 40:27-4.
COVERAGE — A part of a lot covered by buildings.
CRITICAL AREA — Lands within the one-hundred-year floodplain;
wetlands and wetlands buffers; lands containing steep slopes of 15%
or greater; lands that are highly erodible as indicated by an erodibility
factor "k" computed by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service for soils of 0.40 or greater; lands which have a seasonal highwater
table of 24 inches or less; lands contained within conservation
easements.[Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-30]
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPABILITY — The capability of a parcel of land to accommodate
the uses intended or proposed for it at the density intended or proposed
for it based upon this chapter and the Environmental Impact
Ordinance.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alterations, relocation or enlargement of any building or other
structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A land use ordinance, zoning
ordinance, subdivision ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map
ordinance, or other Township regulation of the use and development
of land, or amendment thereto adopted and filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
DIVISION — The Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs.
DORMITORY (as applicable to Hospital Zone) — A residence hall
providing separate rooms or suites for individual nurses or individual
interns, or for groups of two, three or four nurses or interns with
common bathroom facilities, separate facilities being provided for both
sexes.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during
and after construction or development to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:362
culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where
practical, to lessen nonpoint pollution, to maintain the integrity of
stream channels for their biological functions as well as for drainage
and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention
or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with Chapter One of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY, or MULTIFAMILY HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT — A building designed for or occupied by three or
more families living independently of each other or a group of such
buildings.
DWELLING, ONE FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion thereof, providing complete
living facilities for one or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit in one or more rooms with cooking, living, sanitary
and sleeping facilities.[Amended 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
EARTH ANTENNA or GROUND TERMINAL — Any apparatus or device,
commonly known as an earth terminal antenna, earth terminal, earth
station, satellite communications antenna, satellite antenna, microwave
dish antenna, or dish antenna and including as part of such apparatus
or device the main reflector, subreflector, feed, amplifier and support
structure which is designed for the purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving microwave, television, radio, satellite or other
electromagnetic energy signals into or from space, but not including
conventional personal television and radio and amateur radio antennas.
EARTH TERMINAL, COMMERCIAL — Any type of earth terminal not
defined as a personal earth terminal.
EARTH TERMINAL, PERSONAL — An earth terminal intended solely
for the reception of radio and/or television signals from a satellite
being employed for only private, noncommercial purposes related to a
residential use containing fewer than 10 dwelling units.
EASEMENT — The grant of the right to use land for certain public or
quasi-public purposes.
ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof
that displays electronic, static images, static words, static graphics or
static pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small
number of matrix elements using different combinations of lightemitting
diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination
devices within the display area where the message change sequence
is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixalization or
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:363
dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer
programmable, microprocessor-controlled electronic or digital
displays.[Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-34]
EMERGENCY STANDBY GENERATOR FOR GASOLINE OR
ALTERNATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE FUELING STATIONS — A generator
which is powered by natural gas or liquid gas fuel and permanently
connected to the electrical system of a gasoline or alternative motor
vehicle fueling station and only operates in the event of a power outage
in order to provide backup power to the facility.[Added 5-28-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-16]
ENTERTAINMENT EVENT CENTER — A commercially operated
enterprise within an enclosed building that acts as a venue for concerts
and community events containing restaurants and other forms of
entertainment. Entertainment event centers shall contain a minimum
of 40,000 square feet of space.[Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-34]
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Freehold Township
Environmental Commission.
EROSION — Detachment and movement of rock or soil fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Facilities installed and/or maintained by a
public utility or governmental agency, including gas, electrical,
telephone, telegraph, water, sewage transmission and/or distribution
systems and other similar services, including mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, and normal aboveground appurtenances such
as fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, light standards, poles, traffic
signals, and hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by public utilities or municipal or other government
agencies necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the
public. Essential services shall not be deemed to include wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displayed or relocated.
EXTENSION SCHOOL — Institutions which are affiliated with
accredited colleges, universities or other institutions of higher learning
and which provide courses of study at locations separate and apart from
the main campus.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage,
adoption or by agreement and their domestic employees, living
together as a single housekeeping and domestic unit, and sharing
rooms and other housekeeping facilities in common.
FARM — A parcel of land containing at least five acres which is used for
gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, horses, poultry
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:364
and dairy products, but excluding the raising of fur-bearing animals and
swine, riding academies, livery stables or dog kennels.
FARM MARKET — Any establishment predominantly engaging in the
sale of agricultural products and not qualifying as a farm stand as
defined herein. The property owner and/or farm market operator must
apply for and receive a zoning permit and site plan approval.
FARM STAND — An establishment consisting of a stand, wagon,
structure or building, with a total gross floor area not exceeding 900
square feet located on and/or immediately adjacent to agriculturally
used property from which is offered for retail sale to the general public
farm produce for human consumption, flowers or plants, 90% of which
is grown within the State of New Jersey.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FENCE — A structure forming an enclosure of an open area and
designed to prevent straying from within or intrusion from without such
enclosure, or to provide a visual or physical barrier.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken
on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fullfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guarantees properly posted for their completion, or
approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees.
FLEA MARKET — A single location use wherein there are multiple
vendors who have paid a fee for the privilege of occupying the space
allotted to each vendor for the purpose of displaying and selling items
of tangible personal property. Said location may be either open,
enclosed or a combination of both. An enclosed "flea market" shall
mean a flea market at a single location enclosed in a building or
structure, rather than an open area not enclosed by a building or a
structure.[Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
FLOOR AREA — In any and all buildings, the total gross area of all
floors.
FLOOR AREA; GROSS HABITABLE OR GROSS LEASABLE; FLOOR
AREA RATIO — In any and all buildings, the total gross area of all
floors shall be calculated as follows for the corresponding types of
buildings:[Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-30; 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-10]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS HABITABLE — The sum of the areas of
the floor or floors of a building which are enclosed and suitable
for human occupancy and have a clear ceiling height of at least
seven feet, six inches, including closet space, attached garages
and hallways, and excluding cellars, attics, dead air space, open
porches, breezeways, and all accessory buildings. Such area shall
be measured from outside to outside of exterior walls or from the
center line of the wall separating two dwelling structures.
(1)
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:365
FORESTER — The Township employee holding the position of
"Supervisor--Trees." See Chapter 336, Trees, of the Code of the
Township of Freehold.
FUELING PRODUCT PRICE SIGN — A sign designed to advertise fuel
prices for gasoline and alternative motor vehicle fueling stations that
may be operated manually or electronically.[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-16]
FUNERAL HOME — A structure or facility in which deceased human
beings are prepared for ultimate burial or other disposition off site, and
in which reception areas for viewing and final rites are provided.
GARAGE — Any building other than a private garage, available to the
public, operated for gain and which is used for storage, repair, rental,
lubrication, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles
or other motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage, whether attached or freestanding, used
for storage purposes only and having a capacity of not more than
three automotive vehicles or not more than one automotive vehicle
per family housed in the building to which such a garage is accessory,
whichever is greater. Space between may be utilized for not more than
one commercial vehicle, and space may be rented for not more than two
vehicles of other than occupants of the building to which such garage
is accessory. Three-car garages shall not exceed 24 feet by 36 feet and
864 square feet, two-car garages shall not exceed 24 feet by 24 feet and
576 square feet and one-car garages shall not exceed 24 feet by 12 feet
and 288 square feet.[Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-30]
GARAGE SALE — Shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage
sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," “yard sale” or any
similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised or
displayed by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made
aware of the sale.[Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS LEASABLE — The sum of the areas of
the floor or floors of a building or buildings which are enclosed
and suitable for leasing to and utilized exclusively by commercial,
office or service businesses. Covered sidewalks and enclosed mall
open space areas, hallways, equipment rooms and entranceways,
loading areas and similar space used in common or for the benefit
of the shopping center or other areas not leased to tenants are
excluded. Such area shall be measured from inside to inside of
exterior walls or from a center line of the wall separating two
commercial/industrial structures.
(2)
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The sum of the floor area of all floors
of buildings or structures, as calculated using the definitions set
forth in “floor area,” compared to the developable total area of the
site.
(3)
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:366
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multiple family dwelling or dwellings
designed and constructed as a functional unit, not exceeding two
stories in height, providing a resident superintendent, and featuring the
extensive use of lawn areas and landscaping.57
GRADE, FINISHED — The elevation of the completed surface of lawns,
walks, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or
designs relating thereto, or already in existence.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development.[Added 12-23-2014 by Ord.
No. O-14-19]
HISTORIC COMMERCIAL VILLAGE — A planned commercial
development which contains a mixture of offices, retail stores, shops,
personal services, restaurants, and other nonresidential uses as
specified in this chapter. An historic commercial village shall be
designed in a manner such that the architecture of the new buildings
as well as the layout of the site are designed to complement the historic
buildings and structures on the site as well as the historical character
of Freehold Township.
LED — Light-emitting diode, an electronic semiconductor device that
emits light when an electrical current is passed through it.[Added
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-16]
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in history, architecture, archeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation, and which may be so designated by the
Township Committee.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building containing guest sleeping bedrooms used,
rented out or hired out for sleeping purposes, where separate cooking
or kitchen facilities are not provided in individual rooms, but where
ancillary facilities, including restaurants, cocktail lounges, guest
services shops (for newspapers, magazines, personal goods, souvenirs,
sundries and similar types of items customarily provided in a motel or
hotel facility), exercise rooms, swimming pools and computer rooms are
provided within the building. In hotels or motels which provide suites
or guest rooms with two or more bedrooms, each bedroom shall be
deemed to be a separate guest sleeping bedroom for purposes of this
chapter.[Amended 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-23; 11-1-2016 by
Ord. No. O-16-15]
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — Any structure or building that is used as the
regular site for traditional services, meetings and/or gatherings of an
organized religious body or community, which services, meetings and/
or gatherings are presided over by the ordained or otherwise officially
recognized leader of that body or community. Exempted are incidental,
ancillary, temporary or sporadic meetings attended by a small number
57.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “golf training center,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 11-29-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-39.
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:367
of persons such that the character of the zone district in which it
is located is not compromised for occupants of properties in that
area[Added 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
INTERESTED PARTY —
JUNKYARD — The use of more than 200 square feet of any lot for
the storage, keeping, or abandonment of automobiles or boats not in
operating condition or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
LIFE CARE FACILITY — Any residential development providing
efficiency, one-bedroom and/or two-bedroom dwelling units with
common dining, recreation, and medical or nursing home facilities
for persons 60 years of age or older. A life-care facility must: 1) be
licensed and staffed for skilled care; 2) contain common kitchen and
dining facilities; 3) have call button monitoring systems and a medical
file system; 4) have on-premises physical therapy; 5) have on-premises
personal services, library, educational, social, and occupational
facilities, and available transportation.
LIFE CARE RETIREMENT FACILITY — A condominium/cooperative
that has nursing home services as part of the facility.
LONG-TEAM-CARE FACILITY — A facility or distinct part of a facility
licensed by the New Jersey State Department of Health and Senior
Services as a long-term-care facility in accordance with Title 8, Health,
Chapter 39, Standards for Licensure of Long-Term-Care Facilities, of
the New Jersey Administrative Code.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-25]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plan
or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The size of a lot measured between the lot lines and
expressed in terms of acres or square feet, but excluding that part of a
lot included in a street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the intersection of and fronting
on two or more streets, the front yard thereof shall be that area of
the lot between a street and the main entrance to any building located
thereon.
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State
of New Jersey; and
(1)
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a Township agency, any person, whether
residing within or without the Township, whose right to use,
acquire, or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action
taken under this chapter or whose rights to use, acquire, or enjoy
property under this chapter, or under any other law of this state or
of the United States have been denied, violated, or infringed by an
action or a failure to act under this chapter.
(2)
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:368
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot occupied by buildings.
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
LOT LINE — Any line dividing one lot from another lot or from a public
thoroughfare.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot extending along a street line.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to its depth at the building line.
LOT YIELD PLAN — A subdivision layout plan indicating the number of
conforming lots possible using the conventional zoning requirements of
the zone district in which the property is located. The lot yield plan shall
be prepared to include a lot or lots for stormwater detention or provide
a realistic alternative for meeting the site's stormwater management
needs. The lot yield plan shall be utilized to determine the number
of lots that may be created in accordance with § 190-161, Variable lot
option and cluster regulations, and the number of density bonus lots
that may be permitted in accordance with § 190-141.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by the Township Attorney for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MASSAGE SHOP — An establishment, business or use which provides
the service of massage and body manipulation including exercises,
heat, and light treatments of the body and all forms and methods of
physiotherapy unless operated by a medical practitioner or professional
physical therapist licensed by the State of New Jersey.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the Township as set forth in and
adopted pursuant to § 190-23 et seq. of this chapter.
MINOR SITE PLAN —
A site plan for construction of an addition or modification to an
existing building, which addition or alteration: [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-4]
(a) Shall not exceed 1,500 square feet in floor area.
Shall not result in the addition of more than five parking
spaces.
(b)
Shall not involve any change of use or require a use variance,
encroach into any required front, side or rear yard or exceed
minimum or maximum design standards contained in this
chapter.
(c)
(1)
No development, including parking spaces, shall encroach into
any buffer, landscape area, drainage area, wetlands area or open
space required by this chapter or designated for such purpose(s)
(2)
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:369
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision. Any proposed subdivision which would otherwise qualify
as a minor subdivision shall be classified as a major subdivision if the
subdivision under consideration represents a further subdivision of an
original tract of land for which a previous minor subdivision has been
approved by the Planning Board and the combination of the proposed
and approved minor subdivision shall constitute a major subdivision.
The original tract of land shall be considered any tract in existence on
July 10, 1967.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than
two lots plus the remainder fronting on an existing street approved
to Township standards, not involving any planned development, a new
street or road, the extension of a street or road and/or municipal
facilities or an extension of any off-tract improvement the cost of which
shall be pro rated pursuant to this chapter and not adversely affecting
the development of the remainder of the parcel of adjoining property.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable
materials to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place,
and aid in established plant cover.
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL — Commercial uses located within a
planned development which do not exceed 5% of the developed site
thereof and which are designed to be compatible with and primarily
provide service for the accompanying residential uses of the planned
development.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension, or location of
which was lawful prior to adoption of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension,
or location which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
on a previously approved site plan or subdivision plan or other
approved by the Planning Board. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
There shall be no alterations of the existing drainage involving
construction of, addition or modification to, site grading or addition
of parking spaces and/or aisles which, in the written opinion of
the Township Engineer, would substantially change the direction or
quantity of storm drainage or surface water flow;
(3)
The proposed addition or alteration shall not violate any
requirements of this chapter or other ordinances of the Township
nor any condition of a previously approved site plan.
(4)
The total disturbed area of the site shall not exceed 5,000 square
feet or require Freehold Soil Conservation Service approval.
(5)
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:370
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS)
— The NAICS is an industry classification utilized by the United States,
Canada and Mexico that groups establishments into industries based on
the activities in which they are primarily engaged, covering producing
and nonproducing economic activities. The NAICS manual is published
by the U.S. Government Printing Office, Superintendent of Documents,
Mail Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328 (ISB 0-16-049698-5) or
through the National Technical Information Service, Springfield,
Virginia 22161 (NTIS Order Number: PB98-127293INO)
(ISBN-0-934213-56-9). Web site information about the NAICS including
printed and CD ROM versions of the NAICS Manual can be found at:
NOTICE — Whenever notice is required by this chapter and a specific
method for giving same is not set forth, then and in that event, notice
shall be required to be given by certified mail and/or in person. If
notice is given personally, the person giving same shall retain a receipt
acknowledging the fact that notice was given.
OBSCENE MATERIAL — As defined by N.J.S.A 2C:34-2, includes any
description, narrative account, display, or depiction of sexual activity
or anatomical area contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other
representation, publication, sound recording, live performance, or film,
which by means of posing, composition, format or animated sensual
details:[Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-34]
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions
thereto, adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of Monmouth County pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted pursuant to § 190-27 et seq.
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER — The newspaper and/or newspapers officially
designated by the Township Committee for publication of legal notices.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
(1) http://www.census.gov/pub/epcd/www/naics.html.
(2) http://www.ntis.gov/product/naics.htm.
(3) http://www.naics.com.
Depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation,
excretory functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals;
(1)
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value, when
taken as a whole; and
(2)
Is a part of a work which, to the average person applying
contemporary community standards, has a dominant theme, taken
as a whole, which appeals to the prurient interest.
(3)
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:371
development application or a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designed, or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets, and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designated to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and
all owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice
pursuant to this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, which may be accepted
by the Township Committee, including cash, in lieu of the installation
of specified required improvements before approval of a final map,
provided that the Township shall not require more than 10% of the total
performance guarantee in cash.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Services provided by establishments and/or
individuals primarily engaged in providing services generally involving
the care of the person or his apparel, such as barbershops, beauty
shops, nail salons, photographic studios, shoe repair, shoe shine
parlors, beauty spas, tailor shops, seamstress, and dry cleaning and
laundry including pickup facilities, but excluding industrial laundries
and dry-cleaning plants, and services similar to or related to these types
of services.
PLANNED ADULT COMMUNITIES — One or more contiguous parcels
of land having a total land area of 75 or more acres under common
ownership or control which is planned for development with residential
dwelling units and other structures and facilities and which has been
approved by the Township prior to the adoption of this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster (variable lot), planned
commercial development, planned industrial development, or planned
adult community.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or more
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:372
residential clusters or planned unit residential developments and one
or more public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such
ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be
specified in the zoning ordinance.[Added 12-23-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-19]
PLANNING BOARD — The Township Planning Board established
pursuant to this chapter.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE STRUCTURE — Includes any
container, storage unit, shedlike container or other portable structure
that can be or is used for the storage of personal property or materials
of any kind on a temporary basis and is located on a residential property
outside an enclosed building other than an accessory building or shed
complying with all Township construction code and land use
requirements.[Added 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-31]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant
to this chapter prior to final approval after specific elements of a
development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and
the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS — Architectural drawings prepared
during early and introductory stages of the design of a project
illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to its
site and immediate environs.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or main purpose for which a lot or
building is being utilized.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Includes offices by professional, executive,
engineer or for other administrative purposes, including but not limited
to doctors, lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects and other
similar professions which require a comparable degree of training,
education and experience.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital
improvement program or other proposal for land development adopted
by the appropriate Township agency or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required
along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, and other recreational
areas;
(1)
(2) Other public open spaces;
(3) Scenic and historic sites; and
(4) Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:373
well as drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of
water to safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and
erosion and to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts
and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where practical,
and to lessen nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township, Township agency, board of education, State
or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of any
Township agency.
RECEIVING AREA — An area or parcel of land to which development
credits generated within a sending area may be transferred and in
which increased development is permitted in connection with the
possession of such rights.
RECYCLING AREA — A space allocated for collection and storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre
of residential land area before requirements for streets, easements, and
open space portions of a development.
RESTAURANT — An establishment at which food is sold for
consumption on the premises to patrons seated within an enclosed
building.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An eating establishment at which food
and nonalcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises
to patrons seated within or outside an enclosed building and also
available for consumption in motor vehicles parked at the premises or
by pedestrian patrons and for takeaway by pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
RESUBDIVISION —
RETAIL — Relating to the sale of goods in small quantities to ultimate
consumers for personal or household consumption and not bulk sale of
goods to customers engaged in the business of reselling goods. A retail
use is open to the general public, and its patronage is not restricted by
a membership requirement.
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according
to law; or
(1)
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new
streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as
to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
(2)
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:374
RETAIL STACK STORAGE — A retail use that stocks an inventory of
goods in large quantities for the purpose of selling retail from a building
in which the goods are held and which utilizes warehouse stack storage
technique on the sales floor area. A retail stack storage use is open to
the general public, and its patronage is not restricted by a membership
requirement. This type of use includes the term "big box retail."
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported
from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural
means as a product of erosion.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building consisting of
individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the
storage of business or household goods and supplies.
SENDING AREA — An area or a parcel of land from which development
credits are transferred to a receiving area and in which subsequent
development is not permitted by deed restriction except or by
dedication for agricultural use, aesthetic and historic use, public open
space or other public use.
SHOPPING CENTER — An integrated commercial development
planned, constructed, and operated as single unit consisting of such
uses as retail stores and shops, personal service establishments,
professional and business offices, banks, post offices, restaurants,
theatres and auditoriums, housed in an enclosed building or buildings
and utilizing such common facilities as customer parking, pedestrian
walkways, truck loading and unloading space, utilities, and sanitary
facilities.
SITE DEVELOPMENT AREA — The area of a site within which proposed
development is permitted pursuant to the approved general
development plan (GDP) approved by the Freehold Township Planning
Board on June 9, 2003, in conjunction with P.B. Application 697-02
for Blocks 69.01, Lots 18.01, 18.02, 18.04, 18.05, 18.06, 18.07, 18.08
and 18.11 all of which are within the Regional Mall RMZ-1, RMZ-2
and RMZ-2A Zones. Within a site development area, steep slopes and
heritage trees may be affected as provided for in the general
development plan as approved for P.B. Application 697-02.[Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-9]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots depicting the
proposed layout of a property and its relationship to the surrounding
area upon which is shown:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
floodplains, marshes and waterways;
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures, and signs, lighting,
screening devices; and
(2)
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:375
SLOPE — A measurement of the rise or descent of the surface of land
determined on a percentage basis where the vertical distance is divided
by the horizontal distance. (Example: A rise of five feet over a horizontal
distance of 100 feet would be five divided by 100 which equals 0.05 or
5%).
SPECIAL-NEEDS HOUSING — A housing development, or such portion
of a housing development, that is permanent supportive housing or
a community residence that is primarily for occupancy by individuals
with special needs as a result of one or more cognitive, physical or
developmental disabilities who shall occupy such housing as their usual
and permanent residence, together with any structures or facilities,
appurtenant or ancillary thereto, as defined in “Special Needs Housing
Trust Fund Guidelines” approved by the New Jersey Housing and
Mortgage Finance Agency Board on August 17, 2006, (See: http://www
.nj.gov/dca/hmfalbiz/devel/specneed/guidelines.pdf.), including but not
limited to the following:[Added 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-32]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — For the purpose of this chapter,
specified anatomical areas are defined as:
Any other information that may be required in order to make an
informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
(3)
"Permanent supportive housing" providing for a range of
permanent housing options such as apartments, condominiums,
townhouses, single- and multifamily homes, single-room occupancy
housing, shared-living and supportive-living arrangements that
provide access to on-site or off-site supportive services for
individuals and families who can benefit from housing with services
because of one or more cognitive, physical or developmental
disabilities. Permanent supportive housing has as its primary
purpose assisting the individual or family to live independently in
the community and to meet the obligations of tenancy. Tenants may
have individual or shared apartments, and there is no limitation
for length of tenancy. Participation in services is not a condition of
tenancy.
(1)
"Community Residences" including group homes, supervised
apartments, and other types of shared living environments that
provide housing and treatment or specialized services needed to
assist individuals with special needs to live in community settings.
For purposes of this chapter, community residences do not include
assisted-living facilities, nursing homes, transitional housing
facilities, or shelters.
(2)
A special-needs housing development may contain "units" and/or
"beds." A "unit" refers to a single living unit that contains at a
minimum a bedroom with a bathroom. A unit may contain one or
more beds. A "bed" is for a single individual receiving housing and
services. Each unrelated adult must have his or her own bedroom.
(3)
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:376
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — For the purpose of this chapter,
specified sexual activities are defined as:
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE —
STATIC SIGN — Signs which include no animation or effects simulating
animation.[Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-34]
STORE — An individual business establishment where goods or
merchandise are kept and displayed for sale. Goods or merchandise
may include retail or wholesale goods or merchandise.[Added
11-29-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-39]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it;
except that a cellar shall not be considered as a story.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are no more than
two feet above the floor surface of such story. The habitable area shall
be from a point perpendicular from the floor joist to the intersection of
the roof rafter a distance of four feet.
STREAM — Any natural course of running water whether improved,
unimproved, enclosed, or realigned which, presently or prior to any
improvement, enclosure, or realignment, had cut, by the erosion of
running water, a channel with well defined banks and a bottom and
through which water flows ordinarily and frequently but not necessarily
continuously.
Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
regions, buttocks, or the female breast area.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly rigid or aroused state, even if
completely and/or opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus or sodomy.
(2)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or breasts.
(3)
Standards regulating noise levels, glare, earthborne or sonic
vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic
matters, explosive and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne
particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or
conditions and such other similar matters as may be required by
the Township; or
(1)
Standards required by applicable federal or state laws or Township
ordinances.
(2)
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:377
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive, or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal
roadway, or is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or approved by official action of the Township Committee or the
Planning Board, or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in
the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of
a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review
plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The line determining the limit between the highway of
the public and adjoining private property.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials forming a construction,
assembly or erection, the use of which require location upon the ground
or attachment to something having a location upon the ground,
including, among other things, buildings, fences, walls, signs, radio
towers, swimming pools, light stanchions, platforms, and mobile homes.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created:
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of three members of the
Planning Board appointed annually by the Chairman of the Planning
Board subject to approval by a majority of the members of the Planning
Board for the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, and such other duties relating to land
subdivision which may be conferred on the Committee by the Planning
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size;
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument, provided each lot to be combined does not contain a
principal structure; and
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the Zoning Officer to conform to the
requirements of the Township development regulations and/or
shown and designated as separate lots on the Tax Map of the
Township. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
(5)
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-3
186:378
Board. The Chairman of the committee shall be appointed by the
Chairman of the Planning Board for a term of one year.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A structure erected upon a property or
an accessory to a residential building on the same lot therewith, and
providing recreational facilities for swimming or wading from the use
of the persons residing on the premises and their nonpaying guests.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC; SWIM CLUB — A public or privately
owned structure providing recreational facilities for swimming or
wading for the use of the membership of any private or quasi-public
group, club or organization.
TATTOO SHOP — An establishment, business or use which provides the
services of applying a tattoo more specifically described as an indelible
mark or figure etched on the surface of the body by the insertion of
pigment into the skin.
TOWER — See definition of "wireless telecommunications tower" below.
TOWER HEIGHT, WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER —
When referring to a wireless telecommunications tower or other
structure, tower height is the distance measured from the finished
grade to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the
base pad and any antenna. (See also the definition of "building height.")
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit in a line of four or more attached
dwelling units with each dwelling unit extending from the ground to
the roof and having individual outside access and no interior facilities,
conveniences or services shared with other dwelling units making up
the overall building.
TOWNSHIP AGENCY — The Township Planning Board or the Township
Committee when acting pursuant to this chapter as well as any agency
which is created by or responsible to one or more municipalities when
such agency is acting pursuant to this chapter.[Amended 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-26]
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings
or reproduction thereof.
USABLE AREA — The gross lot area minus lands classified as critical
areas.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the
zoning provisions of this chapter.
WAREHOUSE — A building used for the storage of manufactured
products, supplies, equipment, and other goods and materials. A
warehouse shall not mean a self-service storage facility.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that
is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication
purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
§ 190-3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-3
186:379
§ 190-4. Administrative procedures; completeness checklists.
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes the
structure and any support thereto.
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
principal building, extending the width of the lot and situated between
the street line and the front building line. The depth of the front yard
shall be measured at right angles to the street line. (See also definition
of “lot, corner.”) In all circumstances, other than a front porch, the front
yard setback shall be the greater of the distance established by the
location of the existing principal building or the distance set forth in
Schedule C at the end of this chapter. Although it may intrude beyond
the front building line, a front porch may not intrude into the front yard
area measured and established pursuant to Schedule C.[Amended
10-24-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-36]
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the rear lot line and the rear building line. The depth of the
rear yard shall be measured at right angles to the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
principal building extending from the front yard to the rear yard and
situated between the side lot lines and the side building line. The side
yard shall be measured at right angles to the side lot line.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer or
Assistant Zoning Officer which acknowledges that a use, structure, or
building complies with the provisions of the zoning provisions of this
chapter or of any variance therefrom duly authorized by a Township
agency.[Amended 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-26]
C. All of the definitions set forth in Chapter 336, Trees, are incorporated
by reference herein.
A. Every Township agency shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules
and regulations not inconsistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or with
this chapter, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties,
and shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and the
charge for such copy shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.
Copies of all such rules and regulations and amendments thereto shall
be maintained in the office of the administrative officer. All fees
required pursuant to this chapter are summarized in Schedules A and B
in § 190-10.
B. In determining the completeness of applications, the Township agency
shall utilize the following completeness checklists which shall be
available from the administrative officer and are hereby adopted:58
58.Editor's Note: The Completeness Checklists (referred to as Exhibits A through I) are on
file in the office of the administrative officer.
§ 190-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-4
186:380
§ 190-5. Meetings of Township agencies.
(1) Informal Review Checklist (Exhibit A).
(2) Site Plan Waiver Completeness Checklist (Exhibit B).
(3) Site Plan Completeness Checklist (Exhibit C).
(4) Minor Subdivision Completeness Checklist (Exhibit D).
(5) Preliminary Major Subdivision Completeness Checklist (Exhibit E).
(6) Final Major Subdivision Completeness Checklist (Exhibit F).
(7) Variance Application Completeness Checklist (Exhibit G).
(8) Minor Site Plan completeness Checklist (Exhibit H).
(9) General Development Plan Checklist (Exhibit I).
(10)Wireless Communication Facilities Modification (Exhibit J). [Added
6-28-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-6]
A. Scheduling of meetings. Every Township agency shall by its rules fix the
time and place for holding its regular meetings for business authorized
to be conducted by such agency. Regular meetings of a Township
agency shall be scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held
as scheduled unless canceled for the lack of development applications.
The Township agency may provide for special meetings at the call of the
Chairperson, or on the request of any two of its members, which shall
be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with
municipal regulations and N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. No action shall be
taken at any meeting without a quorum being present. All actions shall
be taken by a majority vote of the members of the municipal agency
present at the meeting except as otherwise specifically set forth in this
chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to contravene any statute
providing for procedures for governing bodies.
B. Meetings open to public. All regular meetings and all special meetings
shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in
accordance with municipal regulations and N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
C. Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and
shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Township agency and of the persons appearing by their attorney, the
action taken by the Township agency, the findings, if any, made by it and
reason therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
Township Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party
shall be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction of the minutes in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.
§ 190-4 JUNK DEALERS § 190-6
186:381
§ 190-6. Hearings.
A. Hearing on applications. The Township agency shall hold a hearing on
each application for development, or adoption, revision, or amendment
of the Master Plan.
B. Rules governing hearings. The Township agency shall make the rules
governing such hearings. Any maps and documents for which approval
is sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection
at least 10 days before the date of the hearing during normal business
hours in the office of the administrative officer. The applicant may
produce other documents, records, or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
C. Presiding officer. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as
he may designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the
parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law, P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
D. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. Technical rules of evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be
applicable to the hearing, but the agency may exclude irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
F. Transcript. The Township agency shall furnish a verbatim transcript, or
duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at
his expense.
G. Decisions.
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be in
writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon. If and in the event a final decision has been made by a
Township agency on an application for land use, minor changes
affecting same may be processed by the Township agency by way of
an amendment to the original application rather than the filing of a
new application; said determination to be within the discretion of
the Township agency.
(2) Failure of a motion to approve an application for development, to
receive the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed
an action denying the application. Any such action resulting from
failure to adopt a motion to approve shall be memorialized by a
§ 190-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-6
186:382
§ 190-7. Notice.
resolution of the municipal agency. All municipal agencies are
empowered to adopt resolutions of memorialization pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10(g). Such resolution shall, however, be adopted
by a vote of the majority of the members of the municipal agency
who voted for the action previously taken, and no other member
shall vote thereon. The vote on a resolution of memorialization shall
be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the agency and
not to be an action of the agency. Whenever such a resolution is
adopted, the date of such adoption shall constitute the date of the
decision for purposes of mailing, filing and publication, etc.
H. Copy of decision. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the
administrative officer within 10 days of the date of decision to the
applicant, or if represented then to his attorney, without separate
charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision for a charge in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed by the Township agency in the office of the administrative officer.
The administrative officer shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party for a reasonable fee in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, and available for public inspection at this office
during reasonable hours.
I. Publication of notice of decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be
published in an official newspaper of the municipality within 10 days of
the receipt by the applicant of the decision. Such publication shall be
arranged by the administrative officer and shall be paid for by the
applicant. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may be
made shall run from the first publication of the decision.
A. Contents of notice of hearing on application for development or
adoption of Master Plan. Notices pursuant to §§ 190-7B and C shall
state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters
to be considered, and in the case of notices pursuant to Subsection B of
this section, and identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Township Tax
Assessor's office, and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available pursuant to
§ 190-6B.
B. Notice of applications. Notice pursuant to Subsection B(1), (2), (4), (5)
and (7) of this section shall be given by the applicant and shall be given
at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(1) Public notice shall be given of the hearing on an application for
development except for minor subdivisions, minor site plans and
final approval of any application; on an appeal pursuant to
§ 190-242A; on an application for an interpretation pursuant to
§ 190-242B; or on an application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
§ 190-6 JUNK DEALERS § 190-7
186:383
Public notice shall be given in any event if relief pursuant to
§§ 190-19, 190-41C(2), 190-49F and 190-50G of this chapter is
sought as part of an application for development even though
otherwise exempt from public notice requirements. Public notice
shall be given by publication in an official newspaper of the
Township.
(2) Notice to real property owner, partnerships and corporate owners.
(a) Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to
Subsection B(1) of this section shall be given to the owners of
all real property as shown on the current Township tax
duplicate, located in New Jersey and within 200 feet in all
directions of the particular parcel of property which is the
subject of such hearing, provided that this requirement shall
be deemed satisfied by notice to the (1) condominium
association in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit
above or below it or; (2) horizontal property regime in the case
of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or
below it. Notice shall be given by: (1) serving a copy thereof on
the property owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate,
or his agent in charge of the property; or (2) mailing a copy
thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his address
as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
(b) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary, or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium
association, horizontal property regime, community trust or
homeowners' association because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which
is the subject of the hearing may be made in the same manner
as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners,
or homeowners on account of such common elements
or areas.
(3) Upon the written request of an applicant with a pending application
before a Township agency or a municipal agency of an adjoining
municipality, the administrative officer shall, within seven days,
make and certify a list from said current tax duplicates of names
and addresses of owners residing in Freehold Township to whom
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to Subsection
B(2)(a) of this section. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon
the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to
any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
(4) Notice of hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
§ 190-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-7
186:384
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality. If the property is located within 200 feet of parcels of
realty located outside of Freehold Township, the applicant shall be
responsible for service upon the individual owners thereof as well
as the Clerk.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Monmouth County Planning Board of a hearing on an application
for development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a Township boundary.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(7) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning of the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the administrative officer.
(8) The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
Township agency holding the hearing on the application for
development in the event that the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this section.
C. Notice concerning Master Plan. The Planning Board shall give:
(1) Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision, or amendment of
the Master Plan shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township, at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing.
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of an
adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision, or
amendment of the Master Plan involving property situated within
200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the
date of any such hearing.
(3) Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Monmouth
County Planning Board of: 1) all hearings on the adoption, revision,
or amendment of the Township Master Plan at least 10 days prior to
the date of the hearing; such notice shall include a copy of any such
proposed Master Plan, or any revision or amendment thereto; and
2) the adoption, revision, or amendment of the Master Plan not
more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision, or
amendment; such notice shall include a copy of the Master Plan or
revision or amendment thereto.
§ 190-7 JUNK DEALERS § 190-7
186:385
§ 190-8. (Reserved)59
§ 190-9. Enforcement.
D. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice to be made by certified mail by the
administrative officer pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
E. Notice of hearing on ordinance or capital improvement program; notice
of action on capital improvement or Official Map.
(1) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
Clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption,
revision, or amendment of a development regulation involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at
least 10 days prior to the date of any such hearing.
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
Monmouth County Planning Board of: 1) all hearings on the
adoption, revision, or amendment of any development regulation at
least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing; and 2) the adoption,
revision, or amendment of the Township capital improvement
program or Official Map not more than 30 days after the date of
such adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice provided
hereunder shall include a copy of the proposed development
regulation, the Official Map or the capital program, or any
proposed revision or amendment thereto, as the case may be.
(3) Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to
be considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section
shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
F. Filing of ordinances.
(1) The zoning, subdivision, site plan review ordinances or any revision
or amendment thereto shall not take effect until a copy thereof
shall be filed with the Monmouth County Planning Board.
(2) The Official Map of the Township shall not take effect until filed
with Monmouth County.
(3) Copies of all development regulations and any revisions or
amendments thereto shall be filed and maintained in the office of
the Township Clerk and administrative officer.
A. The Township Committee shall enforce this chapter and any regulation
made and adopted hereunder. To that end, the Township Committee
hereby requires the issuance of certain applicable permits, certificates,
59.Editor's Note: Former § 190-8, Appeal to Township Committee; notice; modification; stay of
proceedings, was repealed 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-14.
§ 190-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-9
186:386
§ 190-10. Fees. [Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-32]
See Chapter 150, Fees, § 150-15, Land use.
§ 190-11. Exclusive authority of Planning Board. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
Any power expressly authorized by this chapter to be exercised by the
Planning Board shall not be exercised by any other body, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 190-12. Tolling of running of period of approval.
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by any
state agency, political subdivision, or other party to protect the public health
and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision, or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health
or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing, and able to proceed
with said development, the running of the period of approval under this
or authorizations as specified herein or in other Township ordinances
as a condition precedent to:
(1) The erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling,
conversion, removal, or destruction of any building or structure;
(2) The use or occupancy of any building, structure or land; and
(3) The subdivision or resubdivision of any land.
B. The Township Code Administrator (Construction Official and Zoning
Officer) and Code Administration Department are hereby expressly
designated for purposes of issuing such permits, certificates and
authorizations, and the issuance of such permits, certificates or
authorizations is further conditioned upon the submission of such data,
materials, plans, plats, and information as is authorized hereunder and
upon the express approval of the appropriate state, county, or Township
agencies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure,
or land is used in violation of this chapter or other regulation made
under authority conferred hereby, the Township and/or through its
officers and employees or an interested party, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or restrain, correct,
or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building,
structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use
in or about such premises.
§ 190-9 JUNK DEALERS § 190-12
186:387
chapter or under any ordinance repealed by this chapter, as the case may
be, shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or
such directive or order is in effect.
§ 190-13. Conditional approvals.
A. Compliance with regulations; process applications. In the event that a
developer submits an application for development proposing a
development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a
legal action instituted by any state agency, political subdivision, or
other party to protect the public health and welfare, the Township
agency shall process such application for development in accordance
with this chapter and development regulations, and if such application
for development complies with Township development regulations, the
Township agency shall approve such application conditioned on
removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. Approval of governmental agency. In the event that development
proposed by an application for development requires an approval by a
governmental agency other than the Township agency, the Township
agency shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the
subsequent approval of such governmental agency; provided that the
Township shall make a decision on any application for development
within the time period provided in this chapter or within an extension of
such period as has been agreed to by the applicant unless the Township
agency is prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of law.
§ 190-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-13
186:388
ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 190-14. Membership.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq.,
there is hereby established and created a Planning Board consisting of
nine members.
B. Membership classes.
(1) The membership shall consist of the four following classes:
(a) Class I: The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of
the Mayor. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(b) Class II: One of the officials of the Township other than a
member of the Township Committee to be appointed by the
Mayor. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(c) Class III: A member of the Township Committee to be
appointed by it.
(d) Class IV: Six citizens of the Township to be appointed by the
Mayor.
(2) The members of the Class IV shall hold no other Township office,
except that one Class IV member may be a member of the Board of
Education. The member of the Environmental Commission, who is
also a member of the Planning Board (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1), shall be a
Class IV Planning Board member. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
C. Term; appointment and removal. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the
Mayor's official tenure or if the member is the Mayor's designee in
the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure.
(2) The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be
for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective
terms of office, whichever occurs first.
(3) The term of the Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first. The term of
Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of Education
shall terminate whenever he/she is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his/her Class IV term, whichever
occurs first. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed
§ 190-14 JUNK DEALERS § 190-14
186:389
§ 190-15. Additional voting restrictions on certain members.
[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-2660]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c(2), Class I and Class II members, as well
as any designees or alternates who may be serving in their place, shall
not participate in the consideration of applications for development which
involve relief pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
§ 190-16. Organization. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
Each year in the month of January, the Planning Board shall elect a
Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class IV, select a
Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Planning Board or a
under this chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest
practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first four years after their appointment; provided
that the initial Class IV term of no member shall exceed four years.
Thereafter, the Class IV term of each such member shall be four
years, except as provided above.
D. Alternate members.
(1) The Township Committee shall appoint four alternate members
who shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate
members shall serve for a term of two years; provided, however,
that the term of not more than two alternate members shall expire
in any one year. Such alternate members shall be designated by the
Mayor as Alternate No. 1, Alternate No. 2, Alternate No. 3 and
Alternate No. 4. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote, then,
if needed, Alternate No. 2, then, if needed, Alternate No. 3, and
then, if needed, Alternate No. 4. [Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-10]
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a
regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
(3) If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
the Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above
provided, for the unexpired term. No member of the Planning
Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Any
member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the Township Committee for
cause.
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 190-15, Lack of quorum, added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48.
§ 190-14 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-16
186:390
Township employee, and create and fill such other offices as established
by ordinance. It may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of
legal counsel, other than the Township Attorney, and experts and other staff
and services as it may deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Committee for its use.
All such appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the Township
Committee as professional appointments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq. In the interest of uniformity of treatment for development, the
Township Engineer shall serve the Planning Board in his respective field of
expertise.
§ 190-17. Powers.
A. Powers specified. The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of this
chapter and shall accordingly exercise its power in regard to:
(1) The Master Plan.
(2) Subdivision control and site plan review.
(3) The Official Map.
(4) The zoning provisions including conditional uses.
(5) Any capital improvements program.
(6) Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval.
(7) To the same extent and subject to the same restrictions, all the
powers of a board of adjustment as set forth in §§ 190-242,
190-244, 190-246, 190-247 and 190-248. [Added 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
B. Additional duties. The Planning Board may:
(1) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation upon request by the
Township Committee.
(2) Assemble data on a continuing basis as a part of a continuous
planning process.
(3) Perform such other advisory duties as may be assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Township Committee for the aid and
assistance of the Township Committee or other agencies or officers.
(4) Waive all or part of the requirements of the provisions of Chapter
336, Trees, and this chapter relating to tree preservation if the
developer applies for such waiver and proves by a preponderance
of the evidence that: a) the intent and purpose of Chapter 336 as
contained in § 336-2 would not be detrimentally affected by such a
waiver; b) that it would be unreasonable to require the developer to
§ 190-16 JUNK DEALERS § 190-17
186:391
§ 190-18. Referrals to Planning Board.
§ 190-19. (Reserved)61
§ 190-20. Time periods.
comply because the detriment of compliance would substantially
outweigh the benefit. In deciding upon the waiver request, the
Planning Board shall give substantial weight to the opinion of the
Forester.
(5) To hear appeals pursuant to § 190-161.2, Riparian Zone. [Added
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-13]
C. Powers to approve planned developments. The Planning Board shall
have the power to approve planned developments in order to encourage
and promote flexibility and economy in layout and design in accordance
with this chapter and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39
and to grant approvals to general development plans consistent with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4 and § 190-36 of this chapter.
A. Report of recommendations. Prior to the adoption of a development
regulation, revision, or amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall
make and transmit to the Township Committee within 35 days after
referral a report including recommendations concerning the proposed
development regulation, revision or amendment. The Township
Committee, when considering the adoption of a development
regulation, revision, or amendment thereto, shall review the report of
the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation
by vote of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall record
in its minutes the reasons for not following such recommendations.
Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirtyfive-
day period provided herein shall relieve the Township Committee
from the requirements of this subsection in regard to the proposed
development regulation, revision or amendment thereto referred to the
Planning Board.
B. Matters referred by Township Committee. The Township Committee
may refer any matter or class of matter to the Planning Board before
final action thereon by any body or officer of the Township. Such
reference by the Township Committee shall not extend the time for
action by either municipal body or officer whether or not the Planning
Board has submitted its report. Whenever the Planning Board shall
have made a recommendation regarding a matter authorized by this
section, such recommendation may be rejected only by a majority of the
full authorized membership of such Township body.
61.Editor's Note: Former § 190-19, Planning Board in lieu of Board of Adjustment, as
amended, was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26.
§ 190-17 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-20
186:392
§ 190-21. Simultaneous review of conditional use applications.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
A. Applications for approval. Whenever an application for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan or conditional use includes a request for relief
pursuant to § 190-19 of this chapter, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 95 days of the date upon which
the application is deemed complete or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the time period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or
other evidence of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by
the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
B. County Planning Board review or approval. Whenever review or
approval of the application by the County Planning Board is required by
Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a
subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the
case of a site plan, the Township Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
C. Exercising "Board of Adjustment" powers. [Added 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
(1) Whenever the Planning Board is exercising "Board of Adjustment"
powers, it shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the
date:
(a) An appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer; or
(b) Upon which an application is deemed complete.
(2) Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the
applicant.
D. Inquiries as to whether a proposed land use is permissible under the
zoning provisions of this chapter or official Zoning Map shall be
submitted in writing to the Planning Board, which shall issue a written
response within 45 days after the next meeting following receipt of the
request or within such additional time as may be consented to by the
inquirer. [Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
§ 190-20 JUNK DEALERS § 190-21
186:393
to the Planning Board, or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether
it be for subdivision, conditional use, or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer
pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 190-22. Advisory committees.
A. Citizen's Advisory Committee. After the appointment of a Planning
Board, the Mayor may appoint one or more person as a Citizen's
Advisory Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in
its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or
take other action required of the Board. Such person or persons shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
B. Environmental Commission. Whenever the Environmental Commission
has prepared and submitted to the Planning Board an index of the
natural resources of the Township, the Planning Board shall make
available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of
every application for development submitted to the Planning Board.
Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy available
to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
C. Sign Review Subcommittee. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(1) A Sign Review Subcommittee consisting of three members of whom
two shall be appointed by the Planning Board and one shall be
appointed by the Architectural Review Board. One professional
member of the Township staff shall be appointed by the Mayor as
an Administrative Coordinator of the Committee. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(2) The Sign Review Subcommittee may review and make
recommendations on applications for variances from sign design
requirements and for the number and location of signs upon
request of the Zoning Officer or Planning Board. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(3) The Sign Review Subcommittee shall consider the following in its
review and recommendations pertaining to proposed signs based
upon the conditions of the site and the surrounding area:
(a) The size, scale, color and materials of the sign or signs, and
their relationship to the size, scale, color, materials and
proportions of the building.
(b) The compatibility of the sign with the architectural style of the
building (i.e., Colonial, Victorian, Early American, etc.). Signs
are to be designed to complement the architectural style and
scale of the building and are to be designed as an integral
§ 190-21 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-22
186:394
architectural element of the building and site to which it
principally relates.
(c) The character of neighboring properties in the same zoning
district or in the immediate vicinity.
(d) Unusual and exceptional conditions relating to the land or the
building situated upon the land which unreasonably limits or
restricts the presentation of the advertising message on the
sign to the general public from adjacent public rights-of-way
such as interference by topographic features, natural
vegetation, historic trees, structures on adjacent properties or
unusual configuration of streets.
D. Recommendations by the Sign Review Subcommittee shall be in writing
to the approving authority and copies shall be provided to the Zoning
Officer, Construction Official and the applicant. [Added 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3]
§ 190-22 JUNK DEALERS § 190-22
186:395

ARTICLE III
Master Plan
§ 190-23. Preparation.
The Planning Board shall prepare and after public hearing adopt or amend
a Master Plan, or component parts thereof, to guide the use of lands within
the Township in a manner which protects public health and safety and
promotes the general welfare.
§ 190-24. Contents.
The Master Plan shall generally comprise a report or statement and the
land and development proposals, with maps, diagrams, and text, presenting
where appropriate, the following elements:
A. A statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies, and
standards upon which the constituent proposals for the physical,
economic and social development of the Township are based;
B. A land use plan element:
(1) Taking into account the other Master Plan elements and natural
conditions, including but not being necessarily limited to
topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage, floodplain
areas, marshes, and woodlands;
(2) Showing the existing and proposed location, extent and intensity of
development of land to be used in the future for varying types of
residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational,
educational and other public and private purposes or combination
of purposes; and
(3) Including a statement of the standards of population density and
development intensity recommended for the Township.
C. A housing plan element, including but not limited to, residential
standards and proposals for the construction and improvement of
housing;
D. A circulation plan element showing the location and types of facilities
for all modes of transportation required for the efficient movement of
people and goods into, about, and through the Township;
E. Utility service plan element analyzing the need for and showing the
future general location of water supply and distribution facilities,
drainage and flood control facilities, sewerage and waste treatment,
solid waste disposal and provision for other related utilities;
F. A community facilities plan element showing the location and type of
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals,
firehouses, police stations, and other related facilities, including their
relation to the surrounding areas;
§ 190-23 JUNK DEALERS § 190-24
186:397
§ 190-25. Division into subplans.
The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and
subplan elements projected according to periods of time or staging
sequences.
§ 190-26. Policy statement.
The Master Plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the
relationship of the proposed development of the Township as developed in
the Master Plan to:
G. A recreation plan element showing a comprehensive system of areas
and public sites for recreation;
H. A conservation plan element providing for the preservation,
conservation, and utilization of natural resources, including to the
extent appropriate, open space, water, forests, soil, marshes, wetlands,
harbors, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife and other natural
resources;
I. Appendices or separate reports containing the technical foundation for
the Master Plan and its constituent elements;
J. An energy conservation plan that would systematically analyze the
impact of each other component and element of the Master Plan on the
present and future use of energy in the Township, detail specific
measures contained in the other plan elements designed to reduce
energy consumption and proposes other measures that the Township
may take to reduce energy consumption and to provide for the
maximum utilization of renewal energy sources.
A. The Master Plans of contiguous municipalities.
B. The Master Plan of Monmouth County.
C. Any comprehensive guide plan promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 190-24 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-26
186:398
ARTICLE IV
Official Map
§ 190-27. Adoption or amendment.
The Township Committee may by ordinance adopt or amend an Official
Map of the Township which shall reflect the appropriate provisions of the
Township Master Plan, provided that the Township Committee may adopt
an Official Map or an amendment or revision thereto which, in whole or
in part, is inconsistent with the appropriate designations in the subplan
elements of the Master Plan, but only by the affirmative vote of a majority
of its full authorized membership with the reasons for so acting recorded
in the minutes when adopting the Official Map. Prior to the hearing on
the adoption of any Official Map or any amendment thereto, the Township
Committee shall refer the proposed Official Map or amendment to the
Planning Board pursuant to § 190-18 of this chapter.
§ 190-28. Official Map deemed conclusive.
The Official Map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location
and width of streets and public drainageways and the location and extent
of flood control basins and public areas, whether or not such streets, ways,
basins, or areas are improved or unimproved or are in actual physical
existence. Upon receiving an application for development, the Township
may reserve for future public use the aforesaid streets, ways, basins, and
areas in the manner provided in this chapter.
§ 190-29. Changes or additions.
The approval by the Township Committee by ordinance under the provisions
of any law other than this chapter of the layout, widening, changing the
course of or closing of any street, or the widening or changing the course of
any public drainageway or changing the boundaries of a flood control basin
or public areas are deemed to be matters within the provision of land use
and shall be subject to relevant provisions of this chapter.
§ 190-30. Issuance of permits for buildings or structures in conflict
with Official Map.
A. For purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map of the
Township, no permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the
bed on any street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public
area reserved on the Official Map, or shown on a plat filed pursuant to
this chapter before adoption of the Official Map, except as herein
provided. Whenever one or more parcels of land, upon which is located
the bed of such a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control
basin, or public areas reserved pursuant to this chapter cannot yield a
reasonable return to the owner unless a building permit is granted, the
Planning Board may, in a specific case, by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board, direct the
§ 190-27 JUNK DEALERS § 190-30
186:399
§ 190-31. Building lot to abut street.
§ 190-32. Appeals from the requirements of § 190-31.
issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of such
mapped street or public drainageway or flood control basin or public
area reserved pursuant to this chapter, which will as little as
practicable increase the cost of opening such street, or tend to cause
a minimum change of the Official Map, and the Board shall impose
reasonable requirements as a condition of granting the permit so as to
promote the health, morals, safety and general welfare of the public.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
B. Sections 190-244 through 190-247 of this chapter shall apply to
applications or appeals pursuant to this section.
A. No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued
unless the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or
structure. Such street shall have been duly placed on the Official Map
or shall be:
(1) An existing state, county, or municipal street or highway.
(2) A street shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board.
(3) A street on a plat duly filed in the office of the Monmouth County
recording officer prior to the passage of this chapter or prior law
which required prior approval of plats by the Township Committee
or Planning Board.
B. Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been
certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Township
Committee, or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by
means of a performance guarantee, in accordance with standards and
specifications for road improvements approved by the Township
Committee, as adequate in respect to the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the special circumstance of the particular street.
(Also see § 190-108, Front yards.)
A. Where the enforcement of § 190-31 hereof would entail practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the circumstances of the
case do not require the building or structure to be related to a street,
the Planning Board may, upon application or appeal, vary the
application of § 190-31 of this chapter and direct the issuance of a
permit subject to conditions that will provide adequate access for firefighting
equipment, ambulances, and other emergency vehicles
necessary for the protection of health and safety and that will protect
any future street layout shown on the Official Map or on a general
circulation plan element of the Township Master Plan. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
§ 190-30 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-32
186:400
B. Sections 190-244 through 190-247 of this chapter shall apply to
applications or appeals pursuant to this section.
§ 190-32 JUNK DEALERS § 190-32
186:401

ARTICLE V
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures
§ 190-33. Approval by Planning Board. [Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
§ 190-34. Informal review.
At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept/plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The developer shall
be required to submit application fees for such an informal review; however,
any such amount paid shall be credited against fees to be paid when
formal application is made. In the event no formal application is made, the
nonrefundable fees provided for in § 190-10 of this chapter shall not be
refunded. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which
review is requested, and the Planning Board shall not be found by any such
review. The Forester may participate in this informal review to assist the
developer in minimizing the number of trees removed from the site.
A. Planning Board approval. The Planning Board shall approve subdivision
plats by resolution as a condition for filing such plats with the
Monmouth County recording officer, and the approval of site plans by
resolution of the Planning Board is deemed a condition for issuance for
a permit for any development except that subdivision or individual lot
applications for detached one- or two-family dwelling unit buildings
shall be exempt from site plan review and approval.
B. Referral to Planning Board. Prior to the hearing on adoption of an
ordinance providing for Planning Board approval of either subdivisions
or site plans or both or any amendment thereto, the Township
Committee shall refer any such proposed ordinance or amendment
thereto to the Planning Board pursuant to § 190-18 of this chapter.
C. Referral to County Planning Board. Each application for subdivision
approval, and each application for site plan approval for land
development along a county road shall be submitted to the Monmouth
County Planning Board for review or approval, as required, and the
Township Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
Monmouth County Planning Board or approval by the Monmouth
County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within 30 days of
submittal.
D. New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards. The New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards approved on January 6, 1997,
and effective June 3, 1997, prepared in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-40.4 and contained in the New Jersey Administrative Code
under N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq. are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 190-33 JUNK DEALERS § 190-35
186:403
§ 190-35. Procedures and standards. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
When reviewing an application for residential development, the Planning
Board shall comply with the procedures and standards contained in the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards prepared in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.4 and contained in the New Jersey Administrative
Code under N.J.A.C. 5:21 effective June 3, 1997, which are hereby adopted
by reference. When reviewing any other type of application for
development, the Planning Board shall ensure:
A. That the layout or arrangement of the subdivision or land development
is consistent with the requirements of the zoning provisions of this
chapter;
B. Streets within the subdivision or land development are of sufficient
width and suitable grade and location to accommodate prospective
traffic and provide access for fire-fighting and emergency equipment to
buildings and so coordinate it as to compose a convenience system
consistent with the Official Map and the traffic circulation elements of
the Master Plan; provided, however, that no street of a width greater
than 50 feet within the right-of-way line shall be required by any
developer unless said street constitutes an extension of an existing
street of the greater width or has already been shown on the Master
Plan or the Official Map at a greater width;
C. That there is adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage
facilities and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents
and occupants; that areas reserved for public use are of suitable size,
shape and location; that requirements of floodplain ordinances and
statutes are met; that the provisions of Township ordinances relating to
protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or rain or
from excavation or grading are complied with; that there is the
preservation of existing natural resources including trees, on the site;
screening, that there is appropriate landscaping and location of
structures, exterior lighting needed for safety reasons in addition to any
requirements for streetlighting.
D. Off-tract water, sewer, drainage and street improvements which are
necessitated by a subdivision of land development shall be installed by
the developer or contribution made therefor in accordance with
§ 190-64 et seq. and the municipal Master Plans adopted in regard
thereto.
E. The Planning Board shall not approve any application unless there is
proof that there are not taxes or assessments for local improvements
due or delinquent or any other Township liens on the property for which
any subdivision, site plan or planned development application is made.
F. Compliance with any consumer protection ordinance related to the sale
of property or homes by conditioning any approvals upon such
compliance.
§ 190-35 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-35
186:404
§ 190-36. General development plan.
G. The Forester, in consultation with the Shade Tree Commission, shall act
in an advisory capacity to the Planning Board on all applications. The
Forester shall advise the Planning Board as whether the developer has
taken the steps necessary to preserve existing trees on the site to the
maximum extent practicable.
H. The development conforms with requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection in terms of freshwater
wetlands and wetlands transition areas, stream encroachment and
floodplains.
A. Applicability. These provisions shall apply to any development of a
parcel of land greater than 100 acres in size for which the developer is
seeking approval of a planned commercial or industrial development
and to developments within zone districts which specifically provide for
general development plan approval as a condition of approval. Site
plans for planned developments shall conform to the requirements for
conventional site plans as well as to the requirements for planned
developments. In the event of a conflict, the planned development
requirements shall supersede the site plan requirements.
B. General review provisions.
(1) The Planning Board shall review all applications for approval of a
general development plan, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et seq.
(2) Approval of a general development plan shall be by resolution of
the Planning Board.
(3) The Planning Board shall not approve a general development plan
unless the Planning Board makes the following findings of fact and
conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning standards of this Chapter 190.
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light, air, and visual
enjoyment are adequate.
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established.
§ 190-35 JUNK DEALERS § 190-36
186:405
(e) That, in the case of a proposed development, which
contemplates construction over a period of years, the terms
and conditions intended to protect the interests of the public
and of the occupants and owners of the proposed development
in the total completion of the development are adequate.
(4) The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development plan
approval within 95 days after submission of a complete application
to the administrative officer, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within said ninety-five-day period prescribed shall constitute
general development plan approval of the planned development.
(5) The Planning Board shall, in connection with the approval of a
general development plan, determine the duration of the effect of
such approval, said duration not to exceed seven years, based upon
the following considerations, regarding which the Planning Board
shall make specific findings of fact:
(a) The amount of floor area to be constructed;
(b) Prevailing economic conditions;
(c) The timing schedule to be followed in completing the
development and the likelihood of its fulfillment;
(d) The developer's capability of completing the proposed
development;
(e) The contents of the general development plan; and
(f) The conditions attached to the approval of the general
development plan.
(6) In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved
general development plan is completed before the end of the term
of the approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of
the development. For the purposes of this section, a development
shall be considered complete on the date upon which a certificate
of occupancy has been issued for the final structure in the last
section of the development in accordance with the timing schedule
set forth in the approved general development plan and the
developer has fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the
approval.
C. Submittal procedure. The applicant shall submit a complete application
to the administrative officer. An application for development shall be
complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for
action by a municipal agency when so certified by the municipal agency
or its authorized committee or designee. In the event that the agency,
committee or designee does not certify the application to be complete
within 45 days of the date of its submission, the application shall be
§ 190-36 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-36
186:406
deemed complete upon the expiration of the forty-five-day period for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period unless:
(1) The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted
by ordinance and provided to the applicant; and
(2) The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application.
D. Public hearings.
(1) A public hearing shall be held on all applications for general
development plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall provide notice of all public hearings in
accordance with the requirements of § 190-7.
E. Amendments to approved general development plans.
(1) In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or
not to grant approval of the modification, take into consideration
prevailing economic and market conditions, anticipated and actual
needs for space within Freehold Township and the region, and the
availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the
proposed development.
(2) In the event that the developer wishes to make any variation in the
location of land uses within the planned development or to increase
the floor area ratio of the planned development or any section of
the planned development, such modification shall require the
approval of the Planning Board. Any variation in the location of land
uses or increase in floor area ratio proposed in reaction to a
negative decision of, or condition of development approval imposed
by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq., shall be approved by the Planning Board if
the developer can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board, that the variation being proposed is a direct result of such
determination by the Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) A developer may, without further application to the Planning Board,
in undertaking any section of the planned development, reduce the
amounts of floor space by no more than 15% or reduce the floor
area ratio by no more than 15% in the section. In no event shall the
total floor area for the general development plan, as approved, be
increased without Planning Board approval.
F. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) Upon the completion of each section of the development as set
forth in the approved general development plan, the developer
§ 190-36 JUNK DEALERS § 190-36
186:407
shall notify the administrative officer, by certified mail, as evidence
that the developer is fulfilling his obligations under the approved
plan. For the purposes of this section, "completion" of any section
of the development shall mean that the developer has acquired
a certificate of occupancy for each structure, as set forth in the
approved general development plan. If the administrative officer
does not receive such notification at the completion of any section
of the development, the administrative officer shall notify the
developer, by certified mail, in order to determine whether the
terms of the approved plan are being complied with. If a developer
does not complete any section of the development within eight
months of the date provided for in the approved plan, or if at
any time the administrative officer has cause to believe that the
developer is not fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved
plan, the administrative officer shall notify the developer, by
certified mail, and the developer shall have 10 days within which
to give evidence that he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to
the approved plan. The Planning Board thereafter shall conduct a
hearing to determine whether or not the developer is in violation
of the approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the Planning Board
finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall provide written
notice of same to the developer and the approval shall be
terminated 30 days thereafter.
(2) In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
commercial or planned industrial development which is the subject
of that general development plan approval within five years of the
date upon which the general development plan has been approved
by the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall have cause to
terminate the general development plan approval.
(3) Application for subdivision or site plan approval within the property
for which general development plan approval has been obtained
shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter 190,
Land Use, of the Code of the Township of Freehold.
§ 190-36 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-36
186:408
ARTICLE VI
Site Plan Procedure
§ 190-37. Applicability.
A. Site plan review and approval shall be required before:
(1) Any change of use, or
(2) Any of the following actions taken in contemplation of or in
preparation for development of land for any use or purpose not
exempted by § 190-37C:
(a) Excavation.
(b) Removal of soil.
(c) Clearing of site.
(d) Modifying the natural condition of any land.
(e) Placing of any fill on the land.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or zoning permit shall be
issued for any building or use or structure, or reduction or enlargement
in size or other alteration of any building or structure or change in use
of any building including accessory structures and outdoor storage and
sales areas unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by the
Planning Board, and no certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all
construction and development conforms to the plans as approved by the
Planning Board.
C. Site plan approval shall not be required for any detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings or any uses accessory thereto, such as a private
garage or storage shed incidental to residential uses; farm stands (as
defined in § 190-3) or accessory nonresidential buildings less than
1,000 square feet in floor area and the construction of which results in
less than a ten-percent increase of lot coverage, but this shall not limit
the requirements for submission and approval of plats as otherwise
required by chapter.
D. Conceptual site plan approval may be granted by the Planning Board
for nonresidential buildings or uses which are located on sites of 50
acres or more within the ROL, B-10, CMX-4, VC and M-2 Zones and
which have a floor area of more than 200,000 square feet; such
approval shall be for limited purposes and shall entitle the developer to
initiate construction of building foundations as well as temporary
construction facilities such as roadways, parking areas, office facilities,
sanitary facilities, utilities, indoor and outdoor material and equipment
storage facilities and rough grading at the building area. Conceptual
site plan approval shall not constitute full site plan approval as set forth
above. Conceptual site plan approval is limited to the building
foundation and rough grading for the building area.
§ 190-37 JUNK DEALERS § 190-37
186:409
§ 190-38. Submittal procedure for minor site plans.
E. Applications for conceptual site plan approval shall comply with
§ 190-38. Requests for waiver of specific items shall be made in writing
to the Planning Board. The Township may require a developer's
agreement and/or the posting of performance guarantees when
temporary site improvements located on site affect off-tract uses,
drainageways and facilities, roadways and/or community facilities and
services. Reasonable fees for conceptual site plan review, interim site
improvement inspections and coordination with Township, county, state
and federal agencies may be assessed as part of the developers
agreement.
F. Minor site plan approval may be granted for plans that can be defined
as such in § 190-3; applications for minor site plan approval shall
comply with § 190-38.
A. The applicant shall submit a complete application for minor site plan to
the administrative officer. The time for review shall not begin to run
until the submission of an application with the required fees and
supporting documents has been deemed complete, unless the applicant
is informed in writing by the administrative officer within 45 days of the
actual and timely receipt of approval by the County Planning Board or
other agencies as may be required.
B. A complete application for preliminary approval shall consist of the
following:
(1) A properly completed site plan information form available from the
administrative officer;
(2) Three copies of the paper print of the site plan for purposes of
determining completeness by the administrative officer. Upon
determination of completeness, 15 copies of the paper print of the
site plan on which the following is set out:62
(a) Scale, written and graphic not to exceed one inch equals 30
feet;
(b) North arrow, locator map showing all road intersections and
municipal boundaries if applicable within 500 feet;
(c) Wooded areas and topography with two-foot intervals, except
where the slope exceeds 15%, in which case contour intervals
may be five feet, freshwater wetlands, wetlands transition
areas, one-hundred-year floodplains;
(d) All lot lines, approximate location of all structures, and owners
of lots within 200 feet of the site;
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 190-37 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-38
186:410
(e) Streets, easements, watercourses and rights-of-way;
(f) Utility and drainage plans and information;
(g) Preliminary plans for elevations and locations of structures;
(h) Preliminary plans for parking, lighting, loading, signs,
landscaping, and buffers, ingress, egress and circulation plan
for vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(i) An extension of off-tract improvements necessitated by the
proposed development;
(j) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and Township
ordinances adopted pursuant thereto;
(k) The lot and block number, Tax Map sheet number, exact
dimensions and acreage of property to be built upon;
(l) A survey prepared by a licensed surveyor of the State of New
Jersey shall accompany the site plan;
(m) A tree saving and tree clearing plan which shall indicate the
following:
[1] Specie, location and caliper of all living deciduous trees
having a trunk diameter of four inches or more at a height
of four feet above the ground within the tree delineation
area as defined by § 336-3 in Chapter 336, Trees.
[2] Specie location and caliper of all living coniferous trees
having a trunk of four inches or more in diameter at a
height of four feet above the ground within the tree
delineation area as defined by § 336-3 in Chapter 336,
Trees.
[3] Location and caliper of all living dogwood (Cornus florida)
or American holly (llex opaca) trees having a trunk
diameter of one inch or greater at a height of four feet
above the ground within the tree delineation area as
defined by § 336-3 in Chapter 336, Trees.
[4] Location of all native laurel (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs
having a root crown of three inches or greater measured at
the soil or surface level within the tree delineation area as
defined by § 336-3 in Chapter 336, Trees.
[5] Designation of all existing wooded areas on the site.
[6] Designation of all wooded areas to remain after
development of the site.
§ 190-38 JUNK DEALERS § 190-38
186:411
[7] Designation of all items identified in numbers Subsection
B(2)(m)[1] through [4] above which shall be:
[a] Saved;
[b] Relocated; or
[c] Removed.
[8] Calculation of:
[a] Total acreage of existing wooded area.
[b] Total acreage of existing wooded area to remain.
[c] Total acreage of existing wooded area to be removed.
[9] If in the opinion of the Forester any of the foregoing
required information is not necessary and would represent
the unnecessary expenditure of funds to the developer, the
Forester shall, after visiting the site, make a written
recommendation of waiver to the Planning Board which
shall give substantial weight to the Forester's opinion.
(n) The following legends shall be on the site plan map:
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
SITE PLAN OF
LOT _____ BLOCK _____ ZONE _____
DATE _____ SCALE
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
I CONSENT TO THE FILING OF THIS SITE PLAN WITH THE
PLANNING BOARD
(Owner) (Date)
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I HAVE PREPARED THIS SITE
PLAN AND THAT ALL DIMENSIONS AND INFORMATION
ARE CORRECT.
(Name) (Title and License No.)
I HAVE REVIEWED THIS SITE PLAN AND CERTIFY THAT
IT MEETS ALL CODES AND ORDINANCES UNDER MY
JURISDICTION.
(Date) (Municipal Engineer)
§ 190-38 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-38
186:412
To be signed before issuance of a building permit:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL THE REQUIRED
IMPROVEMENTS HAVE BEEN INSTALLED OR A BOND
POSTED IN COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE CODES
AND ORDINANCES.
(If Improvements Installed)
(Township Engineer) (Date)
(If Bond Posted)
(Township Clerk) (Date)
Building Permit Issued (Date)
APPROVED BY THE PLANNING BOARD/(Preliminary )
__________
(Final __________
(Chairman) (Date)
(3) Architect's certification setting forth the gross floor area
categorized according to the following categories of nonresidential
structures and additions to nonresidential structures:
(a) Office, including banks and savings institutions.
(b) Research, laboratory and education.
(c) Retail commercial, including hotels and motels, and light
industry.
(d) Warehouse/storage and parking garages.
C. Other information. The Planning Board may require other information
and data for specific site plans. These data may include but are not
limited to geologic information, water yields, flood data, environmental
information, traffic counts, road capacities, market information, and
similar material. A site plan application shall not be deemed complete
until such additional information is received. [Amended 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-26]
D. Compliance with other ordinances. Information and documents
required for other Township codes and ordinances, such as
environmental impact statements, soil erosion and sedimentation plans,
stormwater management plans, shall be submitted as part of site plan
approval and may be used to comply with site plan submission
requirements where applicable.
§ 190-38 JUNK DEALERS § 190-38
186:413
§ 190-39. Time for decision.
E. No application for site plan approval shall be deemed complete in the
absence of proof that a plan for soil erosion and sedimentation control
has been submitted to the reviewing authority pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. or proof that such a plan is not
required by said statute for the particular application. If the reviewing
authority has failed to grant or deny certification of the erosion plan at
the time of preliminary approval of applicant's site plan, preliminary
approval shall be conditioned on certification of applicant's erosion
plan.
F. Distribution of site plan. The administrative officer shall distribute the
site plan for review and report and where required, approval, as
follows: [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Planning consultant: one copy.
(2) Township Engineer: one copy.
(3) Zoning Officer or Assistant Zoning Officer: one copy. [Amended
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-26]
(4) Township Board of Health: one copy.
(5) Shade Tree Commission: one copy.
(6) Environmental Commission: one copy.
(7) Planning Board Secretary: nine copies. [Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
(8) The Forester: one copy.
(9) Such other agencies as may be directed by the Board.
G. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval.
A. Upon the receipt by the administrative officer of a complete application
for a site plan which involves 10 acres of land or less, and 10 dwelling
units or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 45 days of the date upon which the application is
deemed complete or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer, except that if the application for site plan approval also
involves an application for a relief pursuant to § 190-19, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the
date upon which application is deemed complete or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 190-38 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-39
186:414
§ 190-40. Public hearing.
A public hearing shall be held on all applications for site plan approval.
§ 190-41. Final approval.
B. Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan which
involves more than 10 acres, or more than 10 dwelling units, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days
of the date upon which the application is deemed complete or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Otherwise,
the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary
approval.
C. (Reserved)63
D. Failure of the Planning Board to reach a decision within the specified
time periods or extensions thereof shall result in the approval of the site
plan as submitted. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
E. If the reviewing board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application
for development. The reviewing board shall, if the proposed
development complies with this chapter, grant preliminary site plan
approval.
F. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a developer to
submit a sketch plan to the reviewing board for informal review, and
neither the reviewing board nor the developer shall be bound by any
discussions or statements made during such review, provided that the
right of the developer at any time to submit a complete application for
site plan approval shall not be limited by his submittal of a sketch plan
and the time for the reviewing board's decision shall not begin to run
until the date upon which the application is deemed complete.
G. Effect of preliminary approval. The effect of preliminary site plan
approval shall be the same as that set forth in § 190-51.
A. The reviewing board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established hereunder for final approval and
the conditions of preliminary approval.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the date
upon which the application is deemed complete or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the time limit for approval of site plan
applications by the Board of Adjustment, was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26.
§ 190-39 JUNK DEALERS § 190-41
186:415
§ 190-42. Guarantees required.
As a condition of final site plan approval, the reviewing board may require
and shall accept guarantees in accordance with the standards adopted by
§ 190-52 for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of ontract
improvements.
§ 190-43. Design standards.
The design standards and improvements for site plan review shall be as
set forth in Article VIII (§ 190-64 et seq.), Article IX (§ 190-70 et seq.) and
Article X (§ 190-86 et seq.).
§ 190-44. Review of capital projects. [Amended 10-28-2014 by Ord.
No. O-14-13]
C. A complete application for final approval shall consist of the following:
(1) A completed final site plan approval form, one translucent Mylar
film, 15 site plan black-on-white copies, a copy of the resolution
granting preliminary site plan approval, payment of final site plan
application fees and the payment of all site plan inspection fees; the
final plat, final plans and final as-built plans on a CD (compact disk)
in a .dxf CADD format or other format approved by the Township
Engineer. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(2) The reviewing board, when acting upon application for site plan
approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions or waivers
from the requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable
and within the general purpose and intent of this chapter, if the
literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question and the project is
minimal and would continue to reflect overall conformity to the
Master Plan. Any exception granted pursuant to this section shall
be certified to the Zoning Officer in writing.
D. Each final approval of a major site plan shall be conditioned upon
submission, review and approval of the sales map requirement set forth
in § 190-63, prior to the issuance of any construction permits.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31, whenever any public agency as defined
in said statute shall propose a project to which the statute applies, it
shall submit such project to the Planning Board of the Township for
review and recommendations which shall include such information as
shall be required in order for the Board to conclude its review and take
action in accordance with the statute regarding compatibility of the
project with the Master Plan of the Township of Freehold.
B. Such submittal by any public agency shall not be deemed to be a
development application, and notice of the public hearing associated
§ 190-41 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-44
186:416
§ 190-45. Sales map.
Any developer who has obtained a final approval of a site plan which
includes residential units shall comply with the sale map requirement set
forth in § 190-63.
with development as set forth in this ordinance and the statute shall not
apply.
§ 190-44 JUNK DEALERS § 190-45
186:417

ARTICLE VII
Land Subdivision Procedures
§ 190-46. Informal conference with Planning Board.
The Planning Board will be available at any regularly scheduled meeting for
informal conferences with any subdivider or owner as herein defined who
desires to subdivide land. The Planning Board may, if it desires, schedule
specific meeting nights for such informal conferences at its discretion.
§ 190-47. Submission of minor subdivision plat.
§ 190-48. Distribution.
Copies of the minor subdivision plat, prior to consideration by the Planning
Board and after payment of the fee, shall be forwarded by the
administrative officer to each of the following:
A. Any owner of land within the Township, prior to subdividing or
resubdividing land as defined in this chapter, shall submit to the
administrative officer, at least 10 working days prior to the next regular
workshop meeting of the Planning Board, the following: [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
(1) One cloth copy together with 10 copies of the plat prepared in
accordance with the requirements of § 190-63 of this chapter.
(2) Three completed application forms for minor subdivision.
B. The owner shall, simultaneously with filing, pay the fee based on the
total number of lots in the subdivision, submitted to the administrative
officer to cover the cost of processing the application. The
administrative officer shall issue an application number, and such
number shall appear on all documents, maps, plans, and other
documentation submitted in conjunction with the subdivision plat.
A. Township Engineer: one copy.
B. Zoning Officer or Assistant Zoning Officer: one copy. [Amended
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-26]
C. Planning Board members: three copies.
D. Tax Assessor: one copy.
E. Environmental Commission: one copy.
F. Township Forester: one copy. [Added 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-5]
G. Such other Township, county or state officials as directed by the
reviewing board.
§ 190-46 JUNK DEALERS § 190-49
186:419
§ 190-49. Minor subdivision action.
A. The reviewing board shall not grant approval of a minor subdivision
until such time as a written report in respect to the subdivision has
been received approving same from the following:
(1) Township Engineer.
(2) Zoning Officer or Assistant Zoning Officer. [Amended 10-13-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-26]
(3) Township Forester. [Added 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-5]
(4) Monmouth County Planning Board, where applicable.
(5) Department of Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey
where any stream in the proposed subdivision is under the
jurisdiction of this agency. The subdivider shall present a document
of adequate proof to that effect from the Department of
Environmental Protection prior to approval. The reviewing board
may, at its discretion, grant conditional approval of a minor
subdivision pending the above referred to proof from the
Department of Environmental Protection, provided that the
applicant demonstrates that he has made diligent efforts to obtain
same.
(6) Before approval, the Planning Board shall condition approval on
receipt of a deed of dedication, with the subdivider as grantor and
the Township of Freehold as grantee, conveying those lands
abutting the lot or lots which are the subject of the subdivision and
which are necessary for road widening or other public purposes as
determined by the Master Plan of the Township of Freehold. Any
dedication shall be subject to acceptance by the Township
Committee.
B. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date upon which the application is deemed complete or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
minor subdivision approval and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant; and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and shall
be so accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plat. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the Monmouth
County Planning Board is required, the Township Planning Board shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by
the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
§ 190-49 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-49
186:420
D. Expiration; changing conditions
(1) Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date
of the Township Planning Board approval unless within such period
a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions of the
Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960 c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9), or a deed
clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the
developer with the Monmouth County recording officer, the
Township Engineer and the Township Tax Assessor. Any such plat
or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the
application for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the
Planning Board shall be permitted to accept a plat not in
conformity with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided that if the developer chooses to file the
minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than deed, such
plat shall conform with the provisions of said Act. Where a minor
subdivision applicant was granted a waiver or variance in
conjunction with the approval, the minor subdivision must be
perfected by the filing of the plat. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
(2) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided that
the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided in this section.
E. Before any approved minor subdivision plat is returned to the
subdivider, the administrative officer shall have sufficient copies,
retained one copy for the administrative officer file, and forwarding
such copies as follows:
(1) Township Engineer: one translucent copy and one print.
(2) Zoning Officer: one copy.
(3) Tax Assessor: one copy.
(4) Monmouth County Planning Board: one print.
(5) Environmental Commission: one copy.
F. The Planning Board when acting upon application for minor subdivision
approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions or waivers from
the requirements for approval as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question and the project is minimal and would continue to reflect
§ 190-49 JUNK DEALERS § 190-49
186:421
§ 190-50. Preliminary procedure for major subdivision.
overall conformity to the Master Plan. Any exception granted pursuant
to this section shall be certified to the Zoning Officer in writing.
A. Any subdivider of land within the Township, prior to subdividing or
resubdividing land as defined in this chapter, shall submit to the
administrative officer in accordance with the Planning Board
procedures (a copy of which is available from the administrative officer)
the following: [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Three copies of the preliminary plat and application form for
purposes of determining completeness by the administrative
officer.
(2) Upon determination of completeness, 15 copies of said preliminary
plat, together with 15 completed application forms for approval.
B. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the administrative
officer in accordance with the administrative procedures of the
reviewing board and shall be submitted to the following: [Amended
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Monmouth County Planning Board: one copy.
(2) Township Engineer: one copy.
(3) Board of Health: one copy.
(4) Shade Tree Commission: one copy.
(5) Zoning Officer or Assistant Zoning Officer: one copy. [Amended
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-26]
(6) Tax Assessor: one copy.
(7) Planning Board Secretary: nine copies. [Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
(8) Freehold Township Environmental Commission: one copy.
(9) Department of Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey
where any stream in a proposed subdivision is under the
jurisdiction of that agency and for certification of the adequacy of
water supply and sewage facilities in accordance with N.J.S.A.
58:11-23 et seq.: one copy.
(10) The Forester: one copy.
(11) Such other staff, consultants, and municipal, county or state
agency as may be directed by the Planning Board. [Amended
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-26]
§ 190-49 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-50
186:422
C. The plat and any other engineering documents to be submitted shall be
required in tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary
approval. If the application for development is found to be incomplete,
the developer shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies therein by
the administrative officer within 45 days of submission of such
application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
D. If the Planning Board shall require any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for
development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed subdivision
complies with this chapter, grant preliminary approval to the
subdivision.
E. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for the subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date
upon which the application is deemed complete or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days
of the date upon which the application is deemed complete or within
such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise,
the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary
approval to the subdivision.
F. Following submission of a completed application, the Planning Board
shall set the date of public hearing.
G. The Planning Board when acting upon application for major subdivision
approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions or waivers from
the requirements for approval as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question and the project is minimal and would continue to reflect
overall conformity to the Master Plan. Any exception granted pursuant
to this section shall be certified to the Zoning Officer in writing.
H. (Reserved)64
I. The Board of Health shall recommend approval only if all lots in the
subdivision can be served by existing water and sewage systems. In
order to assist the Board of Health and/or the Township Engineer in
determining the adequacy of the utilities, the applicant shall provide
adequate proof in accordance with a form known as "FORM A" which is
attached hereto and included by reference.65 In the event there are less
64.Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, regarding the time limit for approval of applications
for relief by the Board of Adjustment, was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26.
65.Editor's Note: Form A is on file in the Health Office.
§ 190-50 JUNK DEALERS § 190-50
186:423
§ 190-51. Effect of preliminary approval.
than 50 lots contained in the subdivision map submitted for approval,
septic tanks may be installed in conformance with the requirements
of the Freehold Township Board of Health and the Township Engineer,
who may require any test or data that they determine necessary and
further subject to such regulations made and provided by the State
Department of Health. In the event that septic tanks are installed
under this section, the subdivider shall install a dry sanitary sewerage
collection system for use when public sewerage becomes available.
Approval shall be noted on the master copy of the preliminary plat.
Copies of the signed preliminary plat shall be furnished to each of the
following: [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Township Clerk: one copy.
(2) Township Engineer: two Mylars.
(3) Planning Board: one copy.
(4) Local Board of Health: one copy.
(5) Construction Official: one copy.
(6) Zoning Officer and Building Inspector: one Mylar and two copies.
(7) Subdivider for compliance with the final approval requirements.
A. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall, except as provided in
Subsection B of this subsection, confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs, and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Township from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they relate to
public health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case
may be.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
§ 190-50 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-51
186:424
§ 190-52. Performance guarantees as condition to final approval.
B. Subsequent to approval of the preliminary plat of a major subdivision
and prior to the commencement of construction of any of the
improvements required by the provisions of this chapter, the owner or
subdivider shall obtain from the Township Engineer an estimate of the
costs of construction of streets and other improvements, in accordance
with the requirements and specifications of this chapter and tender to
the Township Committee a fee to cover costs of field inspection by the
Township Engineer.
C. The applicant or owner shall furnish performance guarantees to the
extent that public areas or adjacent properties shall be affected for all
improvements which would affect the health, safety and/or general
welfare of the public including but not limited to roadway
improvements, drainage, grading, sanitary sewer, public water,
detention basins, shade trees or other improvements within or affecting
public rights-of-way, easements, drainageways, improvements and
adjacent property or other off-tract properties in accordance with
§ 190-52 if improvements are to be installed prior to final approval.
A. As a condition of final subdivision approval, the Planning Board may
require that the owner or subdivider:
(1) Submit a financial statement setting forth the assets and liabilities
of the owner or subdivider and net worth, which statement shall be
certified by a certified public accountant or a registered public
accountant, and in the case where the owner or subdivider is a
corporation, such financial statement shall be as of the last annual
or fiscal audit prepared in the preceding 12 months. The statement
shall contain the names and addresses of the officers and directors
and of each stockholder holding 10% or more of the capital stock.
(2) Provide the names and locations of developments completed by the
owner or subdivider and the names and addresses of at least five
business references.
(3) Furnish performance guarantees for the installation of
improvements pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a in an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost thereof as estimated by the Township
Engineer according to law.
B. The performance guarantee shall consist of a developer's agreement;
the terms of which shall concern the general development of the tract,
plus 10% of the performance guarantee amount in cash and the
remaining 90% by any of the following:
C. A performance bond issued by a bonding or surety company approved
by the Township Attorney as to form; cash, a certified check, an
irrevocable standby letter of credit issued by a financial institution
whose latest rating by Sheshunoff Financial Rating Service is a B or
§ 190-51 JUNK DEALERS § 190-52
186:425
better, in a form prepared by the Township Attorney, or such other
security as may be approved by the Township Committee. All
guarantees posted herein shall be in addition to and not in substitution
for the developer's primary responsibility to install improvements and
complete the subdivision in accordance with all rules, regulations,
standards, specifications, and ordinances of the Township. All
performance guarantee amounts shall be computed, not only on the
cost of installation of the particular improvements, but also on the
cost of repair for any damage caused by the owner or subdivider to
existing streets, for soil protection, for protection against removal of
trees, and for repair of areas damaged by the owner or subdivider
which remain incomplete and detrimental to the community after and
in the event of abandonment of the project by the owner or subdivider.
Nothing herein shall require that the Planning Board require all onsite
improvements to be bonded. In appropriate circumstances, to be
determined by the Planning Board upon advice from the Township
Engineer, it is permissible as to on-site improvements which will not be
dedicated to the public for the Planning Board to require performance
guarantees in an amount sufficient to stabilize the site and protect the
public health, safety and welfare in the event of abandonment of the
project.
D. Any and all performance guarantees posted by the developer hereunder
may be subject to recalculation annually by the Township Engineer as
to the amount thereof based on current costs of labor and materials at
120%. Upon written notification of the new amount, the developer shall
provide the Township with a new guarantee or an addendum to the
existing guarantee showing the new amount. If and in the event, the
performance guarantee shall consist of a performance bond, it shall be
90% in the form of a performance bond executed by a surety company
authorized to issue such performance bonds in the State of New Jersey
and 10% cash or certified check. Said bond shall be approved as to form
by the Township Attorney for which the owner or subdivider shall pay a
fee to cover the approval of the performance guarantee.
E. Any cash or certified check shall be held in escrow by the Township
Treasurer and deposited or invested in the manner prescribed by law
for municipal funds; the principal amount and interest, where required
by law, to be refunded to the subdivider upon satisfactory completion of
all said improvements and upon posting maintenance guarantees as
provided for in this chapter.
F. The condition of the performance guarantee shall be that the subdivider
or owner fully complete the required improvements on or before a
certain time as fixed by the developer's agreement which date, in no
case, shall be later than three years from the day of approval of the final
plat; provided, however, that upon application being made prior to the
expiration of said initial three-year term by the subdivider or owner
with the consent of the surety, the Township Committee may extend the
term of such performance guarantee for such additional time period as
§ 190-52 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-52
186:426
it shall deem reasonable under the circumstance. The amount of the
performance guarantee may be reduced by the Township Committee
by resolution when portions of the required improvements have been
installed. No forbearance from strictly enforcing the timely installation
of improvements shall be deemed a waiver by the Township of the
subdivider or owner's obligation hereunder.
G. When improvements are completed in stages, the amount of the
reduction in the performance guarantee for improvements installed
shall accurately reflect the pro rata cost of such improvements.
H. If the required improvements shall not have been installed in
accordance with the performance guarantee or if the subdivider or
owner shall abandon the project in such a condition that it constitutes a
hazard and a nuisance, the obligator and surety, if any, shall be liable
thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of improvements not
installed, and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Township shall
install such improvements.
I. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53d, when improvements have been
completed, the obligator shall notify the Township Committee in writing
by certified mail of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and
shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Township
Engineer shall inspect all of the aforesaid improvements and file a
report pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53d with the Township Committee
within 45 days of the receipt of the notice from the obligator.
J. Within 45 days after receipt of the Township Engineer's report, the
Township Committee, by resolution, shall accept or reject the
improvements, grant partial approval or withhold approval as provided
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53e(1). Where partial approval is granted, the
obligator shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
bond except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure the
improvements not yet approved provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion
and acceptability of all improvements.
K. If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Township Committee, the obligator shall cause the same
to be completed or corrected, and upon completion or correction of
same, the same procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be
followed.
L. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
obligator's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise any determination of the Township Committee or the
Township Engineer. The obligator shall be responsible for all the
inspections fees the Township Engineer incurred in making the
foregoing inspections as per the fee schedule and in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53h.
M. Maintenance guarantees.
§ 190-52 JUNK DEALERS § 190-52
186:427
(1) Following final acceptance of an improvement, the developer shall
post a maintenance guarantee for a period of two years in an
amount not exceeding 15% of the cost of the improvement. The
maintenance guarantee shall consist of any form of security
acceptable to the Township Attorney within the general guidelines
set forth for performance guarantees.
(2) In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by
the Township for such utilities or improvements.
(3) Prior to the release of any performance guarantees, the obligator
shall file with the Township Engineer an as-built plan and profiles of
all utilities and roads constructed in the development, with a
certification signed and sealed by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer as to the actual construction as approved by
the Township Engineer. Three black-and-white prints and a Mylar
copy shall be filed. The obligator shall also file with the Township
Engineer the surveyor's monument certification; signed and sealed
as-built construction plans; and, if not previously provided, deed(s)
of dedication for roads, detention basin lots, open space areas,
easements or other land areas to be dedicated to the Township all
of which shall be subject to review and approval by the Township
Engineer and Township Attorney.
(4) Whenever the Township is requested to accept dedication of
properties to be maintained for detention or retention basin
purposes which will result in the Township having to expend funds
in the future for the maintenance of such properties, the Township
shall, unless otherwise determined by the Township Committee,
require that the property owner dedicating such property post with
the Township funds which will defray the estimated costs of
maintenance for a ten-year period.
(5) The Township Engineer shall calculate the maintenance cost.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(6) The estimated maintenance cost contribution for the ten-year
period shall be deposited with the Township Clerk at the time other
maintenance guarantees are posted for the project or acceptance
of the lot by the municipality, whichever shall occur first.
N. If the property or any part of same is sold, or otherwise conveyed to a
successor developer prior to the completion and acceptance of all
improvements, an assignment of developer’s agreement, and new
performance or maintenance guarantees shall be required from the
new owner or successor developer. Upon the transfer of ownership of
property that is the subject of a construction permit, and prior to
§ 190-52 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-52
186:428
§ 190-53. Final approval of major subdivision.
beginning or continuing work authorized by the construction permit,
the new owner or successor developer shall file with the Building
Department an application for a permit update to notify the Building
Department of the name and address of the new owner or successor
developer and of all other changes to information previously submitted
to the Building Department. The Building Department shall not approve
the application for a permit update until it receives notification from
the governing body or its designee that the new owner or successor
developer has furnished adequate replacement performance or
maintenance guarantees and assignment of developer’s agreement.
[Added 7-29-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-9]
A. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established for final approval, the conditions
or preliminary approval, and the standards prescribed by the Map
Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided that in
the case of a planned unit development, the Planning Board may permit
minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval
necessitated by change of conditions beyond the control of the
developer since the date of preliminary approval without the developer
being required to submit another application for development for
preliminary approval. Before consideration of the final subdivision plat
by the Planning Board, the subdivider or owner shall submit a plat
entitled "Final Construction Plans and Profiles," showing all utilities
and construction, their exact location and elevation based upon USCG
data. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the date
upon which the application is deemed complete or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Township
agency to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final
approval and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure
of the Township agency to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or
other evidence of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by
the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the Monmouth
County Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3) the Township agency shall condition any approval
that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the Monmouth County Planning Board or approval by the
County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
D. The subdivider shall submit the following to the administrative officer
for final approval at least 45 days prior to the expiration date of the
§ 190-52 JUNK DEALERS § 190-53
186:429
§ 190-54. Effect of final approval of major subdivision. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer therefrom,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval, provided that in the case of major
subdivision the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has
not been duly recorded within the time period provided. If the developer
has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and in the case
of subdivision has duly recorded the plat, the Planning Board may extend
such period of protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three
three-year period following preliminary approval by the Township
agency and within the appropriate time prior to the next regular
meeting of the Township agency that granted preliminary approval in
accordance with the regulations and rules of that agency:
(1) Three completed application forms for final plat approval.
(2) Two translucent tracing cloth copies of such final plat, prepared in
accordance with the requirements of § 190-61 of this chapter.
(3) Two opaque cloth plats thereof and 12 black-on-white copies.
(4) Three copies of the proposed sales map required by § 190-63.
(5) The final plat, final plans and final as-built plans on a three-andone-
half-inch disk(s) in a .dxf CADD format.
E. The administrative officer shall transmit the final plat copies four weeks
prior to the next regular meeting of the reviewing board to the
following: [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Township Engineer: two Mylars.
(2) Township Clerk: one copy.
(3) Construction Official: one copy.
(4) Tax Assessor: one copies.
(5) Such other municipal, county, or state agencies as may be directed
by the reviewing board.
F. The subdivider may request final approval of the plat by section and/or
sections wherein the performance guarantee posted therefor. The
Planning Board shall approve each section if same complies with this
chapter. An approved section plat shall give the subdivider all those
rights in regard to the section as if the entire plat has been approved.
G. Each final approval of a major subdivison shall be conditioned upon
submission, review and approval of the sales map requirement set forth
in § 190-63, prior to the issuance of any construction permits.
§ 190-53 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-54
186:430
extensions. Requests for extensions shall be filed at least 60 days prior to
the expiration date. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
the granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary
approval for the section granted final approval.
§ 190-55. Recording of final approval of major subdivision; filing of
all subdivision plats.
§ 190-56. Selling before approval; penalty; suits by Township.
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The
Planning Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
B. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer until it has been approved by the reviewing board as indicated
on the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of
the reviewing board. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of
the reviewing board shall not be affixed until the developer has posted
the guarantees required by this chapter and executed the developer's
agreement. If the county recording officer records any plat without
such approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon
request of the Township, the plat shall be expunged from the official
records.
A. If before final subdivision approval has been granted any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
Township approval is required by this chapter, such persons shall be
subject to a penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty,
and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation
[Amended 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-16]
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Township Committee may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief; and
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with this chapter.
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser, or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land, from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made
or purchase price paid, and also, a reasonable search fee, survey
§ 190-54 JUNK DEALERS § 190-56
186:431
§ 190-57. Certificates showing approval; contents.
§ 190-58. Right of owner of land covered by certificate.
expense, and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years, if unrecorded.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which
formed part of such subdivision three years preceding the effective date
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. may apply in writing to the administrative
officer for the issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not such
subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board. Such application
shall contain a diagram showing the location and dimension of the land
to be covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
B. The administrative officer shall make and issue such certificate within
15 days after the receipt of such written application and the fees
therefor. The administrative officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each
certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee
charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "Certificate as to Approval of
Subdivision of Land," and shall certify:
(1) That there exists in the Township a duly established Planning Board
and that there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of land
adopted under the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
(3) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirements of approval as provided
in this act.
D. The administrative officer shall be entitled to demand and receive for
such certificate issued a fee equal to those provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14
and 54:5-15. The fees so collected and all other fees collected by the
administrative officer shall be paid by him or her to the Township
Treasurer.
A. Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by any such certificate of approval of a subdivision in
reliance upon the information therein contained shall hold such interest
free of any right, remedy, or action which could be prosecuted or
§ 190-56 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-58
186:432
§ 190-59. Condominiums and cooperative structures and uses.
§ 190-60. Plat details.
maintained by the Township pursuant to the provisions of § 190-56 of
this chapter.
B. If the administrative officer fails to issue the same within 15 days after
receipt of an application and the fees therefor, any person acquiring an
interest in the lands described in such application shall hold such
interest free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted
or maintained by the Township pursuant to § 190-56 of this chapter.
C. Any such application addressed to the Clerk of the municipality shall be
deemed to be addressed to the administrative officer and the Township
shall be bound thereby to the same extent as though the same were
addressed to the administrative officer.
A. This chapter and all development regulations pursuant thereto shall be
construed and applied with reference to the nature and use of a
condominium or cooperative structures or uses without regard to the
form of ownership.
B. All requirements of this chapter are equally applicable to all buildings
and improvements of the same kind under the condominium or
cooperative corporate form of ownership. No approval pursuant to this
chapter shall be required as a condition precedent to the recording of a
condominium master deed or the sale of any unit therein unless such
approval shall also be required for the use or development of the lands
described in the master deed in the same manner had such lands not
been under the condominium form of ownership. Any condominium
development, however, shall be subject to N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq. and
46:8B-1 et seq.
A. No plat shall be accepted for consideration unless it fully conforms to
the following requirements as to form, content, and accompanying
documentation and complies with all provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.1 to
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.8.
B. All plats submitted for review and approval shall be neatly bound in
order and shall conform with one or more of the following standard
sheet sizes: 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches, 15 inches by 21 inches, 24 inches
by 36 inches, 30 inches by 42 inches, except for final construction
profiles which shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
C. Plat maps shall be drawn at a scale as follows:
(1) Subdivisions with lots 80,000 square feet or larger: not less than
one inch equals 100 feet except where sanitary sewer and water
are provided, then the minimum scale shall be one inch equals 50
feet.
§ 190-58 JUNK DEALERS § 190-60
186:433
§ 190-61. Preliminary plat.
The details of the preliminary plat shall conform with the requirements and
specifications set forth in the Preliminary Major Subdivision Completeness
Checklist as adopted by § 190-4B(5).
§ 190-62. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on Mylar or tracing cloth at a scale
in accordance with § 190-60 and in compliance with all the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.1 to 46:23-9.8. The final plat to be titled "Final Plat,"
shall show, be accompanied by, and conform to the requirements and
specifications set forth in the Final Major Subdivision Completeness
Checklist as adopted by § 190-4B(6).
§ 190-63. Sales map.
(2) Subdivisions with lots 20,000 to 80,000 square feet: not less than
one inch equals 50 feet.
(3) Subdivisions with lots less than 20,000 square feet: not less than
one inch equals 40 feet.
(4) Site plans shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 30 feet
except that the Township Engineer may recommend to the board a
scale greater than one inch equals 30 feet where the Engineer
deems that such scale will not impair proper review of required site
plan details.
(5) Construction/grading details shall be at a scale of one inch equals
50 feet or less as directed by the Township Engineer.
A. Items to be on file.
(1) Except for minor site plan and minor subdivision, a developer who
has obtained final approval shall maintain a sales office upon the
issuance of the first construction permit and display therein in a
prominent fashion the following:
(a) Officially approved preliminary plat.
(b) The final plat.
(c) A sales map prepared in accordance with and containing the
information required by Subsections B through G below.
(d) Complete current copy of Freehold Township Master Plan,
Zoning Map and Land Use Regulations.
(e) Current copies of an informational pamphlet prepared by the
Freehold Township Planning Office.
§ 190-60 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-63
186:434
(2) All of the foregoing items must be available to be observed and
reviewed by any and all persons calling at such office. A copy of
item in Subsection A(1)(e) above must be given to each prospect
prior to signing an offer to purchase or contract.
B. The sales map shall be based upon the final plat as well as official Tax
Map information at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch. The map
shall show the development plan and all land contiguous thereto for a
distance of 2,000 feet within or without the Township.
C. The sales map shall clearly show and include for that area within 2,000
feet of the development unless a farther distance is set forth herein the
following information:
(1) The location of connector streets to the proposed streets within the
development.
(2) The location of all state, county, and municipal roads, both in
existence and/or proposed by any governmental agency having
jurisdiction to establish such roads. If any such roads are evidenced
upon the Township Master Plan or Monmouth County Master Plan
or State Transportation Master Plan, the same shall be indicated
upon the sales map.
(3) The location of all railroads rights-of-way, airports, and airport
runways, overhead easements for transmission of power or
otherwise, rights-of-way for public utilities, and location of public
utility plants.
(4) The location of all sanitary land fill operations within 3,000 feet of
the development which are in existence, proposed or which have
been closed.
(5) The location of all schools, parks, playgrounds, open space and
public buildings.
(6) The location of all streams, ponds, floodplains and watercourses.
D. All zoning restrictions or improvements applicable to the development
shall be shown with notation as to which restrictions have been waived,
relaxed or varied by a Township agency.
E. All contiguous property to the tract shall have prominently displayed
thereon the zoning district classification, whether such property is
within or without the Township as well as any Township restrictions on
construction of accessory structures.
F. There shall be displayed upon said sales map a reasonable estimate of
the amount of municipal taxes to be levied upon the proposed property
to be sold in the upcoming year.
G. The location of all detention and/or retention basin areas; a notation
concerning whether or not fencing will enclose the area and, if so, the
§ 190-63 JUNK DEALERS § 190-63
186:435
type and location of the fencing; a notation concerning what entity shall
have responsibility for maintaining the area.
§ 190-63 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-63
186:436
ARTICLE VIII
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 190-64. Purpose.
This article is intended to ensure a pro rata share allocation of the costs for
off-tract improvements necessitated by new development.
§ 190-65. Principles of required improvements.
§ 190-66. Cost allocation.
A. As a condition of final subdivision or site plan approval, the Planning
Board may require an applicant to pay his/her pro rata share of the cost
of providing reasonable and necessary circulation improvements, and
water, sewerage, and drainage facilities, including land and easements,
located off tract of the property limits of the subdivision or development
but necessitated or required by the development. "Necessary"
improvements are those clearly, directly, and substantially related to
the development in question. The Planning Board shall provide in its
resolution of approval the basis of the required improvements. The
capacity and design of proposed improvements shall be based upon the
circulation plan element and utility service plan element of the adopted
Master Plan. The proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of such
facilities within a related or common area shall be based on the
following criteria.
B. All cost allocations provided to the developer at the time of final
approval shall be estimates only. Such estimate(s) may change as exact
costing details become available, provided that they become available
before the developer makes the payment. Once payment in accordance
with the estimate has been made, the cost allocation to the developer
shall not be increased. If subsequent costing details reveal that the
estimates exceed the costing details, the difference shall be refunded to
the developer.
C. The extent of all future improvements shall be determined by the
Township Committee.
A. Full allocation. In cases where off-tract improvements are necessitated
by the proposed development, and where no other property owner(s)
receive(s) a special benefit thereby, the applicant may be required at his
sole expense and as a condition of approval, to provide and install such
improvements.
B. Proportionate allocation.
(1) Where it is determined that properties outside the development
will also be benefited by the off-tract improvement, the following
criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of
the cost of such improvements to the developer.
§ 190-64 JUNK DEALERS § 190-66
186:437
(2) Allocation formula:
(a) Sanitary sewers. The applicant's proportionate share of
distribution facilities including the installation, relocation or
replacement of collector, trunk and interceptor sewers,
appurtenances, any land acquisition, and other related costs
associated therewith, shall be computed as follows:
[1] The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system
shall be based on the standards specified in applicable
portions of Articles IX and X (§ 190-70 et seq.).
[2] The Municipal Engineer shall provide the applicant with
the existing and reasonably anticipated peak hour flows as
well as capacity limits of the affected sewer system.
[3] If the existing system does not have adequate capacity to
accommodate the applicant's flow given existing and
reasonably anticipated peak hour flows, the pro rata share
shall be computed as follows:
(b) Water supply. The applicants proportionate share of water
distribution facilities including the installation, relocation, or
replacement of water mains, hydrants, valves, appurtenances,
any land acquisition, and other related costs associated
therewith shall be computed as follows:
[1] The capacity and the design of the water supply system
shall be based on the standards specified in applicable
portions of Articles IX and X (§ 190-70 et seq.).
[2] The Municipal Engineer shall provide the applicant with
the existing and reasonably anticipated capacity limits of
the affected water supply system in terms of average
demand, peak demand, and fire demand.
[3] If the existing system does not have adequate capacity as
defined above to accommodate the applicant's needs, the
pro rata share shall be computed as follows:
§ 190-66 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-66
186:438
(c) Roadways. The applicant's proportionate share of street
improvements, alignment, channelization, barriers, new or
improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees,
utility improvements covered elsewhere, the construction or
reconstruction of new or existing streets, other associated
street or traffic improvements, any land acquisition, and other
related costs shall be as follows:
[1] The Municipal Engineer shall provide the applicant with
the existing and reasonably anticipated future peak hour
flows for the off-tract improvement.
[2] The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvement which shall include the estimated peak hour
traffic generated by the proposed development and the
proportion thereof which is to be accommodated by the
proposed off-tract improvement. The ratio of the peak hour
traffic generated by the proposed development which is to
be accommodated by the off-tract improvement shall form
the basis of the proportionate share. The proportionate
share shall be computed as follows:
[3] Existing roads contiguous to the property are the sole
responsibility of the developer which shall reconstruct
§ 190-66 JUNK DEALERS § 190-66
186:439
such roadway to the center line and extend all related
utilities through the improved section.
[4] Reconstruction of existing Township roads on the opposite
side of the center line deemed necessary by the Township
Engineer to assure roadway safety shall be the
responsibility of the developer along undeveloped
frontage. If the adjoining property is developed within a
period of 10 years, the developer shall be reimbursed for
cost of the widening beyond the center line.
(d) Drainage improvements. The developer's proportionate share
of stormwater and drainage improvements including the
installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, improved drainage
ditches and appurtenances thereto, and relocation or
replacement of other storm drainage facilities, appurtenances,
any land acquisition, and other related costs associated
therewith, shall be determined as follows:
[1] The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on the
standards specified in Articles IX and X (§ 190-70 et seq.),
computed by the developer's engineer and approved by
the Municipal Engineer.
[2] The capacity of the enlarged, extended, or improved
system required for the subdivision and areas outside of
the developer's tributary to the drainage system shall be
determined by the developer's engineer subject to
approval of the Municipal Engineer. The plans for the
improved system shall be prepared by the developer's
engineer and the estimated cost of the enlarged system
calculated by the Municipal Engineer. The prorated share
for the proposed improvement shall be computed as
follows:
§ 190-66 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-67
186:440
§ 190-67. Escrow accounts.
Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be undertaken at some
future date, the monies required for the improvement shall be deposited in
an interest-bearing account to the credit of the municipality in a separate
account until such time as the improvement is constructed. If the off-tract
improvement is not begun within 10 years of deposit, all monies and interest
shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 190-68. Regional stormwater detention option.
The developer may request to participate in a regional detention system
instead of meeting the stormwater detention obligation on site. If the
Township Engineer recommends approval of the request and the governing
body grants such approval, the developer shall contribute a nonrefundable
amount equal to the cost of providing on-site detention. Such contribution
shall include costs for land, design, construction and maintenance as
approved by the Township Engineer. Said amount shall be posted with the
Township at final approval.
§ 190-69. Developer's agreement.
As a condition of final approval, the developer shall enter into a developer's
agreement with the municipality which shall include the conditions, formula
and costs for the proposed off-tract improvement.
§ 190-67 JUNK DEALERS § 190-69
186:441

ARTICLE IX
Improvement Standards
§ 190-70. General requirements.
A. Except for minor site plan and minor subdivision the developer shall
guarantee the installation of the following improvements:
(1) Grading;
(2) Streets;
(3) Gutters, curbs and sidewalks;
(4) Streetlighting;
(5) Street signs;
(6) Landscaping and shade trees;
(7) Utilities, including the installation of water mains or other means of
water supply, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, and all
appurtenances to such facilities properly connected with approved
systems of water supply, sewerage and stormwater drainage, as the
case may be and adequate to handle all present and probable
future development;
(8) Fire hydrants;
(9) Monuments;
(10) Sedimentation and erosion control practices; and
(11) Public improvements of open space.
B. The installation of all improvements throughout the development shall
be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and subject to
inspection by the Township Engineer. The cost of said inspections by the
Township Engineer shall be at the expense of the developer, in
accordance with the terms and provisions of an agreement to be
executed and delivered by the developer to the Township, prior to
approval of the final plat of the subdivision.
C. Such improvements as required by this chapter, shall take into
consideration the characteristics of potential development of various
areas of the Township as reflected in the Master Plan and zoning
ordinances.
D. The standards in this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum
standards necessary for any particular subdivision in the Township of
Freehold. The Planning Board may waive or reduce any and all
requirements; provided, however, that such waivers or reductions by
the Planning Board shall be given only for special reasons by resolution
§ 190-70 JUNK DEALERS § 190-70
186:443
§ 190-71. Grading.
§ 190-72. Streets.
of the Planning Board, setting forth in such resolution that the waiver
or reduction of any requirements shall be in the best interest of the
Township of Freehold and for the general health, safety, and welfare of
the Township of Freehold. The Planning Board shall in no event have
the power or authority to waive or reduce the requirements relating to
utilities.
E. When homestead houses, or more commonly referred to as
"farmhouses," or lots have been subdivided from a tract for which
approval is subsequently requested, the developer shall install the
improvements required in the surrounding subdivision in front of the
homestead lots previously approved as a minor subdivision.
F. All improvements shall be installed in complete accordance with
current Township specifications and shall comply with all applicable
ordinances, county regulations, state laws and regulations, and shall
meet the following requirements.
A. Grades and cross sections shall be such as to provide for the disposal of
stormwater and such groundwater seepage as may be encountered, all
in accordance with the plans therefor, approved at the time of approval
of the preliminary plat and as may be required in the field by the
Township Engineer as the work progresses.
B. All construction stakes and grades thereon shall be set by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed land surveyor employed by the
developer.
A. Residential projects are subject to the New Jersey Administrative Code,
Title 5, Chapter 21, known as the “Residential Site Improvement
Standards.”66
B. All underground utilities, drains or other facilities located within the
roadway portion of the street shall be installed prior to the placing of
any road surfacing material.
C. All streets shall be constructed and graded and provided with surfacing
in keeping with the following standards and specifications: 1.
Subgrades: All top soil shall be stripped from the proposed subgrade.
The subgrade, when completed, shall be true to the lines, grades and
cross sections given on the plan accompanying the road profile. The
subgrade for road construction shall be brought to a firm, unyielding
surface by rolling the entire area with an approved three wheel power
roller weighing not less than 10 tons. All soft and unyielding materials
and other portions of the subgrade which do not attain the required
66.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 190-70 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-72
186:444
stability or which will not compact readily where rolled or tamped shall
be removed. All loose rock or boulders found in the subgrade earth
excavation shall be removed or broken off to a depth of not less than six
inches below the surface of the subgrade. All holes or depressions made
by the removal of unstable material shall be refilled with soil aggregate
conforming to the requirements of the Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as amended,
and the New Jersey Department of Transportation Supplemental
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as amended, or as
directed by the Township Engineer. Where required by the Township
Engineer, a system of porous wall concrete pipe subsurface drain shall
be constructed beneath the surface of the paving and connected to
a suitable drainage system. Where, in the opinion of the Township
Engineer, subgrade conditions of proposed streets are wet, springy or
of such nature that surfacing would be inadequate without first treating
the subgrade, the minimum treatment of the subgrade shall be made
in the following manner; the street shall be excavated to a minimum
depth of 12 inches below the proposed finished subgrade elevation.
Soil aggregate and material shall be installed to replace unsuitable
subgrade materials and shall be installed in six-inch layers measured
after compaction. The subbase for road construction shall be brought
to a firm, unyielding surface by rolling the entire area with an approved
three wheel power roller weighing not less than 10 tons. All soft and
yielding material and other portions of the subgrade which do not
attain the required stability or will not compact readily when rolled or
tamped shall be removed. All loose rock or boulders found in the earth
excavation shall be removed or broken off to a depth of not less than
six inches below the surface of the subgrade. All holes or depressions
made by the removal of material shall be refilled with suitable material
and the whole surface compacted uniformly. When subbase material
is needed to replace unsuitable subgrade materials, it shall consist of:
field stone not more than five inches in the largest dimension; steam
cinders; crushed rock or slag, varying in size from one to three inches
in diameter; sand; or gravel.67
D. Where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer subbase conditions of
proposed streets are wet, springy or of such nature that surfacing
would be inadequate without first treating the subbase, the minimum
treatment of the subbase shall be made in the following manner: The
street shall be excavated to a minimum depth of 12 inches below the
proposed finished elevation. Sand, gravel or crushed stone shall be
placed to a depth which, after thorough rolling, shall be not more than a
six-inch layer.
E. The minimum requirements for the construction of any street shall be:
a) six inches thick of one-and-one-half-inch dense graded aggregate
base course; b) three inches of bituminous concrete stabilized base
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 190-72 JUNK DEALERS § 190-72
186:445
course, NJDOT Mix I-2; c) 1 1/2 inches of bituminous concrete surface
course, NJDOT Mix I-5. For roadways 40 feet or greater the minimum
requirements shall be: a) six-inch thick dense graded aggregate base
course; b) six inches bituminous concrete stabilized base course,
NJDOT Mix I-2; c) two inches of bituminous concrete surface course,
NJDOT Mix I-5. In lieu of six inches dense graded aggregate base
course, six inches thick recycled concrete conforming to NJDOT
standards may be used. All bituminous concrete shall be laid with a selfpropelled
paving machine approved by the Township Engineer.
F. Any road repair shall be done with bituminous concrete NJDOT Mix I-5
and sealed unless directed otherwise by the Township Engineer.
G. Embankments (fills). Fill for subgrade shall be placed in layers not more
than six inches thick and subgrade on grade shall be compacted by one
of the following alternative types of equipment and number of passes
each:
(1) Smooth-faced power rollers, either solid surface or pad type,
weighing not less than 10 tons and having a load of not less than
330 pounds per square inch of width of roller surface when all
wheels are in contact with a level surface. The load requirements
for solid surface rollers apply to the rear wheels. There shall be a
minimum of four passes per layer. A pass is defined as one passage
of a compacting wheel over the entire surface of the layer.
(2) Pneumatic tire rollers having a load of not less than 225 pounds per
square inch of width of tire surface in contact with the ground, with
the tires on the front and rear axles staggered with respect to each
other so that they cover the entire strip over which the roller
travels. There shall be a minimum of five passes per layer. A pass is
defined as one passage of one tire over the entire surface of the
layer.
(3) Tamping type or sheepsfoot roller, each unit of which shall consist
of one or more cylindrical sections having studs or feet projecting
not less than 6 1/2 inches from the surface of the drums, and
developing a load of not less than 200 pounds per square inch of
bearing surface when a complete row of tampers is in contact with
a level surface. There shall be a minimum of eight passes per layer.
A pass is defined as one passage of such a unit over the entire
surface of the layer.
(4) Fifty-ton compactor. A pneumatic tire-type roller capable of being
loaded in increments to a gross weight of 50 tons. The tires shall be
spaced so that the clear width between adjacent tire treads on the
same axle shall be not more than the width of the tire. When
operating at a gross weight of 50 tons, the tire inflation shall be not
less than 90 pounds per square inch and the load on each tire shall
be not less than 25,000 pounds. There shall be a minimum of five
passes per layer by the compactor loaded to a gross weight of not
§ 190-72 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-72
186:446
less than 50 tons. A pass is defined as one passage of a wheel of the
compactor over the entire surface of the layer.
(5) Dynamic compactor.
(a) A vibratory compactor, acceptable to the engineer, capable of
operating at the optimum frequency of vibration required for
the size and type of the compactor in use and the material
being compacted. There shall be not less than two and not
more than five passes per layer and the actual number, within
this range, shall be as directed by the Township Engineer
depending upon the type of material being compacted. A pass
is defined as one passage of the vibrating unit over the entire
surface of the layer.
(b) If the embankment material be sand, or sand and gravel,
pneumatic tire rollers or dynamic compactors shall be used as
specified in Subsection F(1), (2) or (5) above. If the
embankment material be other than sand, or sand and gravel,
three-wheel rollers, tamping-type rollers, or pneumatic tire
rollers shall be used as specified in Subsection F(1), (2), (3) or
(4) above. The compacting effect of equipment other than as
specified in the foregoing requirements will not be considered
as part of the required compaction when the rolling or
vibrating method is specified to be used.
(c) Where the conditions are such that access with compacting
equipment specified above is not possible the embankment
shall be placed in six-inch layers and shall be compacted to a
density of not less than 95%.
H. Underdrains. French underdrains shall be installed where the
character and composition of the roadbed itself or adjacent terrain
renders such installation necessary, in the opinion of the Township
Engineer. These underdrains shall consist of perforated metal pipe or
porous wall concrete pipe to be a minimum diameter of six inches and
to be laid in the bottom of a trench at such depth and width as shall be
necessary in view of the conditions involved. The joints of the pipe shall
be left open and covered with salt hay or burlap and the pipes laid with
the hub upgrade. The trench shall then be filled with clean washed
gravel or broken stone or other equivalent material approved by the
Township Engineer. The stone shall be covered with a layer of salt hay a
minimum of one inch thick, and the remainder of the trench filled with
suitable earth properly compacted.
I. Storm drains; cross drains (pipe culverts).
(1) These drains or culverts shall consist of sections of reinforced
concrete pipe. All pipe shall comply with the requirements of the
current New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specifications governing materials and unless otherwise specified,
Class 3-Wall B shall be used for standard strength when installed
§ 190-72 JUNK DEALERS § 190-72
186:447
off streets and Class 4-Wall B shall be used for extra-strength
reinforced concrete culvert when installed in streets. Minimum
diameter (pipe) shall be 15 inches for cross drains and 18 inches
for main runs.
(2) Culverts or drains shall be constructed as specified hereinbelow.
The location, length, depth, grade, type and size of pipe therefor
shall be designated on the plans indicated herein except where
unusual or exceptional soil or other conditions are discovered at
the time of construction, which are not provided for in the plans, in
which case such construction shall be as the circumstances shall
demand as determined by the Township Engineer. Trenches shall
be bridged at all street crossings, intersecting streets, public and
private entrances in such a manner that traffic will not be
interrupted.
(3) The contractor shall have a sufficient quantity of timber and plank
constantly on hand for planking, sheet piling, fencing or shoring;
also, adequate pumping apparatus to meet all requirements of
construction for use in case of accident or emergency.
(4) All trenches for culverts or drains shall be excavated at least 12
inches wider than the external diameter of the pipe to be used
therein.
(5) When rock is encountered it shall be removed to at least six inches
below the grade line, the trench then being filled with earth to the
grade and form of the pipe and thoroughly tamped.
(6) The pipe shall be laid on a firm bed and the bottom of the trench
shall be excavated to the line and grade given or directed by the
Township Engineer. The bottom of the excavation shall have the
shape and dimensions of the lower half of the pipe, the earth
underneath being excavated sufficient to admit the bell. When rock
is encountered and removed from the trench as specified, this
excess depth shall be refilled with suitable materials and tamped
thoroughly.
(7) The pipe shall be laid with the hubs upgrade, spigot ends fully
entered into the adjacent hub, and true to line and grade. All joints
shall be filled with a cement mortar unless unusual or exceptional
conditions shall require otherwise as determined by the Township
Engineer. Such cement shall be composed of one part of portland
cement and two parts of approved clean sand, mixed with sufficient
water to form a plaster mortar.
(8) The filling around the pipe shall be made in layers with approved
materials free from rock, and each layer shall be tamped
thoroughly around and over; the trench shall then be filled with
subsequent layers of not over one foot in depth thoroughly tamped,
and if ordered by the Township Engineer, when the filling is within
one foot of the top of the trench, it shall be flooded with water.
§ 190-72 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-72
186:448
(9) Where indicated or directed, old pipe culverts shall be removed and
relaid, extended or renewed in the same manner as specified above
for new pipe culverts or drains.
(10) Easement of width sufficient to allow proper maintenance, not less
than 25 feet shall be provided for the outletting of all drains, pipe
lines, and the like to streams, existing storm drains, or other
approved drainage courses.
(a) The easements contemplated herein shall be by way of grant to
the Township in writing, duly acknowledged before a person
authorized to take oaths pursuant to statute made and
provided in order that such grant of easement, that it can be
recorded in the Monmouth County Clerk's office. The grant of
easement shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Attorney as to form and substance.
(b) The easement(s) shall also be noted on the plat with the
following typical language of transferal subject to approval by
the Township Attorney: Drainage easement(s), location as
noted in this plat, to the Township of Freehold for the purpose
of maintaining surface drainage and/or installing and
maintaining surface and subsurface drainage facilities; said
easement is intended to be an uninterrupted and unobstructed
easement, under, across and over the area described,
consisting of the right to erect, construct, install, use, inspect,
repair, replace, remove, maintain, and preserve drainage
facilities of any kind, and any other appurtenances which are
existing or proposed on this site plan/subdivision plat and/or
which may, in the opinion of the Township of Freehold, become
necessary in the future. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing,
the Township of Freehold shall, in the event it disturbs any real
estate improvements in the easement, only be responsible for
restoration of fencing and landscaping improvements,
excluding mature trees.
(11) Conservation easements.
(a) Where the Master Plan of the Township of Freehold delineates
conservation and drainage easements to protect streams from
siltation and adjoining banks from erosion, conservation
easements shall be furnished to the Township by the developer.
The conservation easement shall include the property between
the drainage easement as established on the Official Map and a
line approximately parallel to the top of the bank 25 feet
distant back from it. This conservation easement shall contain
provisions to restrict the removal of trees and ground cover
except for the following purposes: the removal of dead or
diseased trees, thinning of trees and growth, and the removal
of trees to allow for structures designed to impound water or in
areas to be flooded in the creation of ponds or lakes.
§ 190-72 JUNK DEALERS § 190-72
186:449
(b) The easements shall be set forth on the preliminary and final
plat and shown in such a manner that the boundaries thereof
can be accurately determined should the necessity arise. The
boundary line of the conservation easement shall be
monumented at its intersection with all existing or proposed
street lines. Conservation easement(s) deeds in a form
sufficient for recording in the Monmouth County Clerk's office
shall be submitted to the Township Attorney and Township
Engineer for approval as to sufficiency and form and to the
Township Committee for approval and acceptance.
(c) The easement(s) shall be noted on the plat with the following
typical language of transferal: Conservation easement,
location as noted on this plat, to the Township of Freehold for
the purpose of protecting streams from siltation and adjoining
banks from erosion; said easement is intended to be an
uninterrupted and unobstructed easement, under, across and
over the area described, consisting of the right to restrict the
removal of trees and ground cover except for the purposes of
removing dead or diseased trees, thinning of trees and growth,
and the removal of trees to allow for structures designed to
impound water or in areas to be flooded in the creation of
ponds or lakes.
J. Width of pavement. Pavement shall be installed from curb to curb on all
proposed streets. On all existing roads abutting a development,
pavement in accordance with Article X (§ 190-86 et seq.) shall be
installed from edge of concrete curb to edge of curb or to the furthest
edge of existing pavement. The junction between the existing and the
proposed pavement shall be finished in a neat and workmanlike manner
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. If the developer owns
property on both sides of an existing Township road, the subdivider or
owner shall construct a full bituminous macadam pavement 10 1/2
inches in depth as specified in Article X (§ 190-86 et seq.) of this chapter
from curbline to curbline or gutter line to gutter line on each street. If
the developer owns property on one side of a street he shall pave all of
that area within the public right-of-way from the middle of the street. If
a development abuts an unimproved road (unpaved street), the
developer shall improve same up to a point where it intersects an
improved road. Roadway pavement widths shall have a constant width
throughout any proposed new street; provided, however, on turns of
approximately 90°, an additional six feet or more of paving may be
required by the Township Engineer for purposes of snow removal and
maintenance. New roadways shall not be developed with "bubble,"
"eyebrow" or "hairpin" configuration.
K. Materials, inspection and general requirements.
(1) All material and appurtenances, unless otherwise specified herein,
shall comply with the requirements set forth in the current New
Jersey State Highway Specifications.
§ 190-72 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-72
186:450
§ 190-73. Curbs and sidewalks.
(2) When, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, materials require
testing, such materials shall be tested by an approved testing
laboratory at the expense of the property owner.
(3) All work in respect to the improvements required to be installed in
the subdivided lands shall be subject to inspection by the Township
Engineer or his duly authorized representative. The owner or
developer shall notify the Township Engineer at least 48 hours
prior to actual construction, in order that the Township Engineer
inspect the work as it progresses. Failure to so notify the Township
Engineer shall justify the Township Engineer to require such
installation to be uncovered or removed in order that the Township
Engineer be able to certify to the Township Committee that the
work is in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
(4) The standards insofar as this section of the chapter is concerned
shall be considered as minimum standards for street
improvements. Where special circumstances or conditions of
terrain, character of soil or otherwise require different
construction or materials, such construction or materials shall be in
accordance with the requirements as shall be determined by the
Township Engineer.
L. All streets in the development tract shall be properly maintained by the
owner or subdivider in good serviceable condition satisfactory for
normal vehicular traffic use, which maintenance shall include snow
removal service when necessary, until such streets are accepted by the
Township.
A. Concrete curbs shall be installed on both sides of all streets unless the
Planning Board approves the installation of Belgian block. The width at
the base of the curb shall be a minimum of eight inches in width and 18
inches in depth and six inches in width at the top. The curb shall show a
face above the finished pavement of eight inches for roadways with a
pavement width of 40 feet or greater and six inches for roadways with a
pavement width of less than 40 feet. The concrete shall be NJDOT Class
B concrete. The minimum length of block shall be 10 feet with a
preform bituminous expansion joint filler 1/2 inch thick installed every
40 feet. The finish shall be a float finish with corners rounded. The curb
shall be laid in a workmanlike manner as directed and approved by the
Township Engineer. The curb at all driveway openings shall be
depressed to a point two inches above the finished pavement. The rear
top corner of such a curb shall have a radius of 1 1/2 inches. Curb
openings shall be in such widths as shall be determined by the
Township Engineer. Belgian block shall be consistent with and installed
according to the standard detail set forth in Schedule D attached.68
68.Editor's Note: Schedule D is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 190-72 JUNK DEALERS § 190-73
186:451
B. Where development takes place adjoining existing streets, concrete
curb shall be installed in accordance with Subsection A above, and the
area between such gutter and the existing road shall be paved in
accordance with specifications in § 190-94 and care shall be taken that
a proper joint is made with the existing street.
C. Sidewalks shall be required in all areas and constructed on both sides
of all streets; except streets where governmental regulations deny
access to pedestrians, or those streets within new major subdivisions,
residential or nonresidential, in which case sidewalks shall be
constructed on one side of the street only. However, the Planning Board
may waive the construction requirement where, in its opinion, it is to
the best interest of the Township. Upon granting such a waiver, the
developer shall be required to pay the Township of Freehold an amount
equal to 60% of the reasonable cost of installing said sidewalks, said
amount to be determined by the Township Engineer upon submission
and consideration of various estimates and other documentation from
the developer, other interested parties, and the office of the Township
Engineer itself. All funds collected by the Township from developers as
a result of waivers granted in accordance with this subsection, shall be
maintained in a sidewalk construction account, the proceeds of which
shall be available to install sidewalks throughout the Township where
and as authorized by the Township Committee. Nothing contained
herein shall affect the right of the Township to enact ordinances
requiring assessments for sidewalks from property owners as
authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:65-2 or pursuant to other ordinances in
the Township of Freehold. However, the Planning Board may waive the
construction requirement where, in its opinion, it is to the best interest
of the Township. Upon granting such a waiver, the developer shall be
required to pay the Township of Freehold an amount equal to 60% of
the reasonable cost of installing said sidewalks, said amount to be
determined by the Township Engineer upon submission and
consideration of various estimates and other documentation from the
developer, other interested parties, and the office of the Township
Engineer itself. All funds collected by the Township from developers as
a result of waivers granted in accordance with this subsection, shall be
maintained in a sidewalk construction account, the proceeds of which
shall be available to install sidewalks throughout the Township where
and as authorized by the Township Committee. Nothing contained
herein shall affect the right of the Township to enact ordinances
requiring assessments for sidewalks from property owners as
authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:65-2 or pursuant to other ordinances in
the Township of Freehold. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-34]
D. Sidewalk shall have a minimum width of four feet and four inches in
thickness except at driveways and aprons where the sidewalk and
aprons shall be reinforced concrete six inches thick with a number sixgauge
six-by-six mesh steel wire reinforcement placed four inches
below the finished sidewalk surface. Sidewalk shall be constructed at
§ 190-73 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-73
186:452
the locations and to the prescribed lines and grades as approved in
a preliminary plat. All sidewalks shall have a cross slope of 1/4 inch
per foot toward the street. Sidewalks shall be constructed only after
the adjacent curb has first been installed. The sidewalk subgrade shall
be smooth and unyielding and be thoroughly compacted by approved
tamping and vibratory methods. Where, in the opinion of the Township
Engineer, the subgrade conditions of the proposed sidewalk installation
is wet, spongy and unyielding, the yielding subgrade material shall be
removed as directed by the Engineer and replaced with bank-run gravel
regraded and compacted to subgrade elevation. Concrete for sidewalk
and apron shall be acquired from a ready mixed concrete plant and
shall be NJDOT Class B concrete manufactured in accordance with
the New Jersey State Highway standard specifications, latest revision.
Coarse aggregate proportions shall conform to American Society for
Testing and Materials, Concrete Aggregates C 33, Size No. 57 or 67.
Concrete will be air-entrained, and the amount of air shall be 5% plus
or minus 1%. NJDOT Class B concrete shall be placed to a thickness
of four inches tamped, screened and finished to true grade. The finish
shall be with a wood float, followed by brushing with a set of softhaired
brushes to a neat workmanlike surface. Expansion joints 1/2 inch
wide shall be provided at minimum intervals of 12 feet and filled with
preformed bituminous expansion joint filler. Surface grooves shall be
cut perpendicular to the line of the sidewalk at intervals equal to its
width. Exposed edges shall be neatly rounded to a radius of 1/2 inch.
Developments may provide contiguous asphalt bike/pedestrian ways in
lieu of concrete sidewalks subject to approval by the Planning Board
and subject to minimum specifications prescribed by the Township
Engineer.
E. Location of sidewalks.
(1) The sidewalks will be located within the street right-of-way a
distance of one foot from the property line as measured toward the
face of the curb.
(2) For residential development, a standard sidewalk pattern may
consist of one six-foot wide sidewalk on one side of a roadway
which does not have residential structures instead of four-foot wide
sidewalks on both sides. The Planning Board may waive sidewalks
in areas where it is not desirable to have pedestrian access.
(3) Curbing may be waived along roadway segments which traverse
open space areas where the slope is less than 5% and provided
drainage swales can be installed in accordance with specifications
prescribed by the Township Engineer.
F. In residential developments a concrete walk shall be constructed to
connect the front entrance of the dwelling to the street, parking lot or
driveway. Such sidewalks shall have a minimum width of three feet. The
Township Engineer may permit the use of brick or similar paving
materials in lieu of concrete.
§ 190-73 JUNK DEALERS § 190-74
186:453
§ 190-74. Streetlighting.
§ 190-75. Street signs.
§ 190-76. Site preparation.
A. Streetlighting shall be of a type and at locations approved by the
Township Committee and the electric utility company.
B. Streetlights shall be installed prior to certificates of occupancy being
issued and the cost of electricity for streetlighting in all streets within
the development shall be paid for by the developer until such streets
are accepted by the municipality, or upon the developer complying with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.6.
C. For all development projects which require board approval, the
developer shall arrange and pay for streetlighting service upon the
appropriate tariff and prevailing government rules and regulations. The
developer shall pay all costs for the installation of streetlighting,
including, but not limited to, wiring, poles, and fixtures. The payment
made by the developer to the utility shall include the amount set by the
approved tariff for capital contribution for fixture costs. Accordingly,
the appropriate tariff is hereby defined as the "contribution fixture"
tariff or its equivalent.
A. Township approved four-way street signs shall be installed within the
street right-of-way wherever two or more streets intersect.
B. The sign shall be firmly placed on a two-and-one-half inch outside
diameter, two-inch inside diameter, galvanized steel pipe. The pipe shall
be a minimum length of 13 feet and shall be firmly set in a concrete
footing, eight inches diameter, to a depth of three feet.
C. Signs shall be installed in accordance with the USDOT Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices following review and recommendation
by the Township Police Chief and Township Engineer.
A. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed on the
surface to a minimum depth of six inches and so as to provide an even
cover and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
B. Any tree on the site having a trunk diameter of more than four inches at
a height of two feet from the ground shall not be removed unless such
removal is in accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Board.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
C. All tree stumps shall be removed from the site. No tree stumps shall be
buried on any lots or streets.
§ 190-74 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-77
186:454
§ 190-77. Soil removal.
In the event of large-scale commercial development, such as shopping
centers, service stations, or any other development where large areas will
be covered with either bituminous macadam pavement or buildings and it
is in the best interest of the Township for the existing topsoil on the site
not to be used as fill or subbase on the site, the developer may apply to the
Planning Board for a topsoil removal permit pursuant to Chapter 286, Soil
Removal and Soil Fill. Such application may be made contemporaneous with
the application for development.
§ 190-78. Water.
§ 190-79. Sewage disposal and treatment.
A. A developer may make application to the Planning Board for a topsoil
removal permit to remove topsoil from said premises beyond the
geographical boundary lines of the Township of Freehold.
B. The application for a topsoil removal permit shall be in writing
addressed to the Planning Board, and the Planning Board may grant
such permit upon written application made or at its discretion, conduct
a hearing thereon with a date to be set by the Planning Board at which
time testimony shall be received for the purpose of determining
whether or not there is in fact excess topsoil to be removed from said
lands and premises and the effect that said removal will have upon the
lands and premises to be developed as well as the effect thereof upon
the community at large.
A. Where the development is to be served by a private utility company or a
municipal water supply system, the developer shall provide for the
installation of service lines with a minimum diameter of eight inches
ductile iron pipe in the street right-of-way. Each lot shall be served by a
one-inch minimum size Type K copper service line from the nearest
available street water main installed in the street right-of-way in
accordance with the regulations of the private utility company,
municipal ordinances and regulations of the State Department of
Health. All such service lines shall be installed at the expense of the
developer.
B. The developer shall be obligated to obtain water from a central water
system whether it be a private water utility company or a municipal
water system, provided that the private water utility company or the
municipal water system agrees that it will extend its mains to the lands
of the developer. The cost of the extension of the mains for the purpose
of supply of water shall be pursuant to agreement entered into between
the developer and the supplier of water.
A. Septic tanks may be installed subject to conformity with the health
ordinance of the Board of Health of the Township of Freehold, where
the subdivision is less than 50 homes, as provided by statute.
§ 190-77 JUNK DEALERS § 190-79
186:455
§ 190-80. Stormwater management. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-30; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; 2-28-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-10]
B. Where the subdivision plat submitted for approval contains 50 or more
lots or the land area covered and delineated by said plat is part of a
larger tract which, when the remainder thereof is added together with
the land area sought to be subdivided contains sufficient area to permit
the layout and subdivision of a total of 50 or more lots, or where said
land area covered by said plat has heretofore been previously
subdivided, then in such an event, the subdivider or owner shall provide
for the connection of said lots into an existing central sewage treatment
system or, in the alternative, construct, maintain and operate a system
of sewage treatment.
C. If public sewage disposal is not available to the development, the
Planning Board may require the installation of dry lines for future
connections provided it is probable that such service shall be available
within a reasonable time.
A. General intent.
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low impact
stormwater management techniques shall be explored before
relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be integrated
with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that
prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being
exposed to stormwater. Source control plans must be developed
based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the
anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the
established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge. Stormwater management BMP's shall be
designed based upon the studied physical site conditions and not
just randomly placed on site in order to comply with this section,
more particularly refer to Subsection I of this section for the
detailed requirements.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in Subsection B.
(3) Applicability. This section shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
§ 190-79 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:456
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. This section is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this section imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
BOARD — The Planning Board.[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the Monmouth
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance in the Monmouth
County Planning Board.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment
Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as
urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:457
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, "development" means any activity that requires
a state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the state Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving
waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by
the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with"
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes (slopes of 15% or greater); and well head protection
and groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or
threatened species are identified using the Department's Landscape
Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame
Species Program. (See also "critical areas" definition at § 190-3B.)
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Freehold.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:458
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future
redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:459
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
C. General standards.
(1) Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major development
shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality standards in Subsection D. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the
design, where applicable. If these strategies alone are not
sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards
shall be incorporated into the design.
(b) The standards in this section apply only to new major
development on all properties, whether vacant or not, that
requires Board approval and is intended to minimize the
impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water
quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater
recharge. For properties with existing development, these
standards may be applied to the area of disturbance, subject to
Board approval. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or Water Quality Management
Plan adopted in accordance with Department rules.
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with Subsection M.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:460
13:1B-15.147 through 13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsections D(6) and
D(7):
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections D(6) and D(7) may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternative analysis,
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of Subsections D(6)
and D(7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates, that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsections D(6) and D(7), existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates, that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsections D(6) and D(7) that were not
achievable on-site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Subsections D(6) and D(7) shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:461
Subsection D(5) into the design. The applicant shall identify
the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for
engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate
any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection D(5)(b)below into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and
grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
vegetative open channel conveyance systems shall be
constructed within 300 feet of a private residence, either
existing or proposed.
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy Subsection D(5)(c) below;
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:462
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)(9)[b]
above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard, see below.
[1] Design engineers shall use the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to
collect stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or
surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); with a Type "N" head with the
letters "DUMP NO WASTE - DRAINS TO WATERWAY"
cast into the head.
[2] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where it is determined that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection D(7)(a) are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could
not pass through one of the following:
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:463
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection D(7)(a); or
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
[e] Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance
standards in Subsections D(6) and D(7) shall be
dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed in the Monmouth County
Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent
restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent
stormwater management measure is maintained in
perpetuity.
[f] Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual
may be obtained from the address identified in
Subsection G, or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org.
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:464
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Subsection E, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection D(6)(c)[3][c] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[c] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:465
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water
table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation
of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or down gradient
of the groundwater recharge area. No stormwater
recharge facilities shall be constructed within 75 feet
of a subsurface sewage disposal system. No
stormwater recharge facilities shall be constructed
within 50 feet of the basement area of an existing and/
or proposed structure.
[4] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection E,
complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site,
postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff is
deminimus, and will not increase flood damage at the
discharge point, or at a discharge point immediately
downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing
zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, tenand
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the
postconstruction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed.
The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood
hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:466
runoff will not increase flood damages below the point
of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(6)(c)[4][a],
[b] and [c] above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
[5] Any application for a new agricultural development that
meets the definition of major development at Subsection B
shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation
District for review and approval in accordance with the
requirements of this section and any applicable Soil
Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff
quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses
normally associated with the production of food, fiber and
livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and
the manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the postconstruction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures.
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:467
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G, or found
on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The
BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed
in Subsection G. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on
the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:468
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may
be used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall
utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R =A + B -(AXB)/100
Where:
R =total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A =the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B =the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment
device
See Subsection F(3)
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the sub areas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:469
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in Subsections D(6) and D(7).
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection G.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established
along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated
HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for the
protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession is provided.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:470
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
"Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,"
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a 95% TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:471
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) has been approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan
shall be the applicable special water resource protection
area requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in Subsection D(7)(h)[1][a]
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan
allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Subsection D(7)(h) does not apply to the construction of
one individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a
larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
E. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff
Equation, Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, and published
runoff depths as described in the NRCS National
Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, latest edition; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations. When
utilizing the Rational Method, the inflow hydrograph shall
utilize a tail of at least 2 x Tc, which will result in a total
hydrograph duration of 3 Tc (Tc + (2 x Tc)) thus resulting
in a more realistic runoff volume.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
Subsection E(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at Subsection E(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:472
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover
has existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good
cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff
rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately (generate impervious hydrograph and wooded/open
space separately and then route through drainage structures)
to accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater
runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected
impervious cover, urban impervious area modifications as
described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may be
employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
not take into account the volume of storage below this
elevation in the design of structural stormwater management
measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is
available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at
New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427,
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
F. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:473
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high
water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns.
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one
inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In
addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(2).
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and
corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at Subsection H.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Subsection D of this section, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:474
G. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections G(1)(a) and (b) below,
which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street,
P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609)
777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone
number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained
from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306;
and
(c) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540.
H. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:475
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape
provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six-inch spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes of this Subsection H(2)(c), escape provisions
means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or
other features that provide easily accessible means of egress
from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in Subsection H(3) a freestanding outlet
structure may be exempted from this requirement.
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:476
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2
feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent
water surface. See Subsection H(4) for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(a) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for
stormwater management basins may be granted only upon a
written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency
(municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
(4) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management
basin.
I. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks Board approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the Checklist for the Site Development
Stormwater Plan at Subsection I(3) below as part of the
submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site
plan approval.
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:477
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed
in the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with Subsection I(3) of this section.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision
or site plan review process. The Board shall consult the Township
Engineer to determine if all of the checklist requirements have
been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards
set forth in this section.
(3) Checklist requirements. The following information shall be
required:
(a) Topographic base map. The Township Engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of a Category One water, wetlands and floodplains
along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and
other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing manmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property
lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions shall be provided.
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:478
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Subsections C through F are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
J. Calculations.
(1) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for
the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design
storms specified in Subsection D of this section.
(2) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties of
soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall
be based on on-site boring logs or soil profile pits. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined
based on what is required to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure.
K. Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection M.
L. Waiver from submission requirements. The Board reviewing an
application under this section may, in consultation with the Township
Engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements in Subsections
I(3)(a) through (f) of this section when it can be demonstrated that the
information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a
hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
M. Maintenance and repair.
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-80
186:479
(1) Applicability.
(a) Projects subject to review as in Subsection A(3) of this section
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections M(2) and
M(3).
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in
a residential development or project, unless such owner or
tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection M(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection M(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection M(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
§ 190-80 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-80
186:480
§ 190-81. Driveways. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders. A copy of
all of this information shall be sent to the Township Engineer's
Office at least once every year or at an interval specified by the
Township Engineer's Office.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection M(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of
the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection M(2)(b) above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsections M(2)(f) and (g) above.
(i) The requirements of Subsections M(2)(c) and (d) do not apply
to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guaranty in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. Driveways in rural residential and rural environmental zones shall have
a minimum width of 12 feet for a one-car garage and 18 feet for a twocar
garage. The subgrade shall be smooth and even and shall be
compacted by rolling with a two-wheel, five- to eight-ton roller. There
shall then be constructed:
(1) Base course of two three-inch thick lifts of one-inch dense graded
aggregate base course or six inches of recycled concrete
conforming to New Jersey State Department of Transportation
§ 190-80 JUNK DEALERS § 190-81
186:481
§ 190-82. Inspection.
All improvements required under Article X (§ 190-86 et seq.) shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Township Engineer who shall be
notified by the developer at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction.
No underground installation shall be covered until it has been inspected and
given approval by the Township Engineer.
§ 190-83. Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed at locations and of such type and
specifications as approved by the Township Engineer and consistent with
the standards of the Insurance Service Organization.
Specifications 8:81 for a total compacted depth of six inches.
Compaction shall be performed after placing each of the three-inch
lifts with a two-wheel, five- to eight-ton roller. The surface course
pavement, conforming to Article 3.10.3 shall consist of two inches
(after compaction) of NJDOT Mix 1-5 bituminous concrete surface
pavement. The surface pavement shall be rolled with a five- to
eight-ton roller; or
(2) Base course consisting of three inches of bituminous concrete
stabilized base course, NJDOT Mix 1-2 conforming to and installed
in accordance with the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest
revision). The base course shall be constructed in one lift to a total
compacted thickness of three inches by rolling with a two-wheel,
five- to eight-ton roller. Surface course pavement shall be as
designated in Subsection A(1) above; or
(3) Six inches of concrete surface pavement conforming to and
installed in accordance with the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction (latest edition). Concrete shall be NJDOT Class B
concrete with six-by-six No. 6 gauge welded steel mesh
reinforcement placed four inches below the finished surface.
Exposed edges shall be neatly rounded to a radius of 1/2 inch.
Transverse and/or longitudinal expansion joints shall be directed
by the Engineer or concrete brick pavers and base material as
approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) Driveways in rural residential zones shall have a minimum of
twenty-foot paved driveway extending from the edge of pavement
of the existing roadway.
B. All driveways will be of adequate length and width to provide off-street
parking for a minimum of two cars.
§ 190-81 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-84
186:482
§ 190-84. Monuments.
The developer shall install surveyor's monuments of a size and shape
required by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.4. Such monuments shall be
placed in accordance with the above provisions, certified by a New Jersey
licensed professional land surveyor and shall be subject to approval of the
Township Engineer.
§ 190-85. Installation of survey markers for freshwater wetlands
and transition areas.
The developer shall have permanent markers to delineate freshwater
wetlands and wetlands transition areas which have been approved by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:7A-1 et seq. The survey markers shall be consistent with the metes and
bounds deed descriptions of the wetlands lines and wetlands transition
areas approved as part of the freshwater wetlands permit granted by the
NJDEP.
§ 190-84 JUNK DEALERS § 190-85
186:483

ARTICLE X
Design Standards
§ 190-86. General principles.
Developments shall conform to the following requirements and principles of
design:
§ 190-87. Streets; sidewalks; private drives.
A. The design of the development shall be in harmony with and in
furtherance of the purposes set forth in § 190-63 of this chapter and
shall in all respects be subject to approval by the Township agency in
accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter. The design of
the development shall conform in general to the Master Plan of the
Township and the Official Zoning Map of the Township.
B. The designated park or recreation area as set forth on the preliminary
plat shall be graded in accordance with the requirements of the
Township Engineer. The developer shall apply good grade topsoil on the
finished grade and the entire area shall be seeded in the same
workmanlike manner as residential lawns. The cost of all improvements
relating to said park or recreation area as established by the Township
Engineer shall be included in the performance guarantee required for
the first section in respect to any map submitted for final approval and
that contours and curves of said area be accepted and approved by the
Township Engineer prior to final acceptance of the dedication by the
Township Committee. In the event the park or recreation area abuts a
street, the developer shall be obligated to continue the improvements
along such street including but not limited to the installation of
sidewalks, curbs, streetlighting, and the like as provided in Article IX,
§ 190-70 et seq., of this chapter.
C. The developer may be obligated to convey the recreation or park area
to the Township upon final approval. The conveyance thereof shall in no
way reduce, lessen, or affect the performance guarantee of the owner
or subdivider to improve said lands and premises so conveyed.
A. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the extension
of existing streets where appropriate.
(1) Relation to adjoining street system. The arrangement of streets in a
new development shall make provision for the continuation of
existing streets in adjoining areas where appropriate.
(a) Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not
subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new developments
shall make provision for the proper projection of streets.
(b) Streets to be carried to property lines. When a new
development adjoins undeveloped land susceptible of being
subdivided then the new streets shall be carried to the
§ 190-86 JUNK DEALERS § 190-87
186:485
boundaries of the tract proposed for development. The street
arrangement shall be such as not to cause hardship to owners
of such adjoining property in platting their own land and
providing convenient access to it.
B. In general, minor streets (local access and marginal access streets)
shall be designated as to discourage through traffic.
C. In any development, it shall be the duty of the Planning Board to
classify proposed streets, according to their types. The Planning Board,
in making its decisions shall refer to the Master Plan and shall consider
conditions within the development and surrounding area.
D. In a development abutting an existing or proposed arterial or collector
street either:
(1) A marginal service shall be provided along such street but
separated from it by a raised strip at least five feet wide at the
discretion of the Planning Board; or
(2) The frontage shall be reversed so that the lots contiguous to such
major street will front on an internal street, with a buffer strip for
planting provided along the arterial street; or
(3) In no case shall a vehicle be permitted to back into an arterial or
collector street. The developer or owner shall provide a turnaround
in the driveway in order that vehicles shall enter the above
mentioned type of streets in a forward position.
E. Widths.
(1) Right-of-way widths, measured from lot line to lot line, graded
widths and paving widths shall be not less than the following,
unless otherwise indicated on the Master Plan or the Official Map:
(a) Arterial roads: 50 feet (paved 46 feet).
(b) Collector streets: 60 feet (paved 40 feet).
(c) Local access streets: 50 feet (paved 30 feet).
(d) Marginal access streets: 40 feet (paved 24 feet).
(2) The widths of internal streets in a multifamily, business or
industrial development designed as a whole in accordance with a
comprehensive site plan shall be determined by the Planning Board
in each case in light of the circumstances of the particular situation
and with a view of assuring the maximum safety and convenience of
access for traffic and fire-fighting equipment, circulation and
parking, including provisions for the loading and unloading of
goods.
(3) For development in the ML II Zone, the paving widths shall be not
less than the following:
§ 190-87 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-87
186:486
(a) Collector streets: 30 feet within a fifty-foot right-of-way.
(b) Local access streets:
[1] With parking on both sides: 30 feet.
[2] With parking one side: 27 feet.
[3] With no parking: 22 feet.
F. There shall be no reserved strips controlling access to streets.
G. Developments that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to the widths as shown on the Master Plan, the Official Map or
the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate the
required additional width along either one or both sides of such street
as the Planning Board may deem necessary, in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 to 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-44.
H. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1%.
I. Street intersections shall be designed according to the following
standards:
(1) No more than two streets shall cross at the same point. Street
intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible, and
intersections of less than 70° (measured at the center line of
streets) shall not be permitted.
(2) Streets shall not enter into the same side of major streets at
intervals of less than 800 feet. Minor streets which enter a major
street from opposite sides should be directly opposite to each
other; or if necessary, they may be separated by at least 200 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the major
traffic street.
(3) Maximum grades within any intersection shall not exceed 3%, and
approaches to any intersection shall follow a straight line course
within 100 feet of the intersection.
(4) Minimum lengths.
(a) Minimum lengths for property and curb radii at intersections
shall be as follows:
[1] Local access streets: property line 25 feet; curbline 35
feet.
[2] Collector streets: property line 30 feet; curbline 40 feet.
[3] Arterial streets: property line 35 feet; curbline 52 feet.
[4] Marginal access: property line 20 feet; curbline 28 feet.
§ 190-87 JUNK DEALERS § 190-87
186:487
(b) Where streets of different categories intersect, requirements
for the more important one shall hold. The street right-of-way
line shall be parallel to the curbline.
(c) In zones where buildings are permitted to abut the right-of-way
line, a diagonal cutoff may be employed, provided that
sidewalk width and corner visibility are unimpaired.
J. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided
where possible.
K. In general, tangents of at least the following lengths shall be introduced
between reverse curves:
(1) On arterial streets: 300 feet.
(2) On collector streets: 100 feet.
(3) On minor streets: 50 feet.
L. When street lines deflect by more than 5°, they shall be connected by
curves with the following minimum radii. These radii are to be
measured from the inside curbline.
(1) On arterial streets: 500 feet.
(2) On collector streets: 300 feet.
(3) On minor streets: 100 feet.
M. Clear sight distance along the center lines of minor streets shall be
maintained at not less than 200 feet; along collector streets, at not less
than 300 feet; and along arterial streets, not less than 500 feet.
N. Vertical curves are required for changes in grade. The rate of change of
grades on vertical curves shall be not more than 4% per 100 feet of
road, provided that the clear sight distance specified in these
regulations is maintained at all points on the road. The maintenance of
these distances may require changes in grade as gradual as 3.66% per
100 feet in minor streets and 1.62% per 100 feet on collector streets,
depending on the length of the curve involved.
O. Surface drainage. The slope of the crown in streets shall be more than
1/4 inch per foot and less than 1/2 per foot as directed by the Township
Engineer.
P. Street cuts shall be provided with side slopes not steeper than 30°
degrees and streets on fill shall be provided with side slopes no steeper
than one vertical to three horizontal. Such slopes shall be suitably
planted with perennial grasses or other vegetation to prevent gulleying
and erosion. Along streets side slopes no steeper than one foot vertical
to three feet horizontal shall be provided, and said slope shall
commence only outside the utility easement.
§ 190-87 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-87
186:488
Q. Access by street shall be provided for all lots in the development and to
neighboring tracts.
R. A dead-end street (cul-de-sac) shall not be longer than 1,000 feet with a
maximum of 16 building lots and shall terminate in a circular right-ofway
having a radius of not less than 60 feet and having a paved radius
of not less than 50 feet and tangent wherever possible to the right side
of the street when viewed toward the closed end, or in a turnaround of
such other design as may be approved by the Planning Board. The same
requirements shall prevail if the dead-end street is of a temporary
nature, and provision shall be made for future extension of the street
and subsequent reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
land. A temporary dead-end street is one on which no building lots abut
the closed end of the turnaround and for which provision shall be made
for future extension of the street to connect with the existing or
proposed streets. The cul-de-sac length shall be measured from the
center line of the intersecting street to the tangent point with the culde-
sac radius.
S. Proposed street names and project/development names shall be
submitted with the original development application. The appropriate
reviewing board shall review such names to determine that they are not
similar to other street names or development/project names within the
Township. No applicant or developer shall change a street name or
development/project name without approval of the appropriate
reviewing board.
T. The following standards shall apply to the location of private drives:
Private drives serving commercial and industrial establishments are
required unless other provisions for service are approved by the
Planning Board. Private drives serving such establishments shall have a
paved width of at least 25 feet. If it is impossible for a driveway to go
through the block, it shall be provided with an adequate turnaround at
its closed end.
U. Conformity with Highway Access Management Code. Development
design shall conform to the following:
(1) The Highway Access Management Code adopted by the
Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:7-91
applicable to state highways within the Township.
(2) Conformity with any access management code adopted by the
County of Monmouth pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:16-1; and
(3) Conformity with any Township access management code adopted
by the County of Monmouth pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 relating to
municipal streets.
V. Rural improvement developments.
§ 190-87 JUNK DEALERS § 190-87
186:489
§ 190-88. Blocks and lots.
(1) If it is determined by the Planning Board that the proposed
development conforms with the standards established for rural
improvement development pursuant to § 190-125, the following
standards and improvements for local streets will be allowed:
(a) The pavement width for such local streets shall be reduced to
22 feet with a stabilized grass shoulder of eight feet in width on
each side thereof.
(b) The property restrictions to be hereinafter provided in
connection with the development of the tract shall require the
abutting property owner to maintain the stabilized grass
shoulder and to keep same in a neat and weed-free condition
suitable to serve the purpose for which it was established.
(c) Surface stormwater runoff may be carried in open swales to
appropriately located storm inlets, which is then carried in
pipes to the discharged point as may be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(d) Curbs and/or gutters will not be required except where
excessive grades or other conditions require their installation.
(e) Sidewalks will not be required.
(2) Except as stated above all other improvements for a subdivision
shall be required.
(3) Prior to the approval of any such subdivision, the developer shall
present to the Planning Board for its review and approval the
documents establishing the restrictive covenants and scheme or
plan of development of the subdivision including the restrictions
above noted which will prohibit the further subdivision of any lot or
lots subdivided under the provisions of this chapter and the
affirmative obligations to maintain the improvements, including the
grassed road curbs and where necessary the natural drainage.
Such restrictions shall be recorded in a form sufficient to create
covenants running with the land.
A. Block lengths may vary between 500 feet and 1,300 feet, but blocks
along arterial and collector roads shall not be less than 800 feet long.
Crosswalks may be required for public convenience, including the
provision of walks giving access to schools, playgrounds and shopping
centers without the necessity of crossing traffic thoroughfares.
B. Block lengths and widths or the dimensions of acreage within bounding
roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the
zone to provide for convenient access, circulation, and safety of street
traffic. For business, group housing, or industrial use, block sizes shall
be such as to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
§ 190-87 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-88
186:490
§ 190-89. Utility, drainage and sight triangle easements.
C. Grading. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage and
to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools. Said grading shall be
done in such a manner so as to preserve as many trees growing on the
land as possible. Topsoil shall be redistributed on the surface as cover
and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
D. House numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the Construction
Official. When installed, house numbers shall be a minimum of six
inches high.
E. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets, and radial to curved streets.
F. Each lot shall front on an approved street.
G. Where extra width has been provided for the widening of existing
streets, lot measurements shall begin at such extra width line, and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
H. All lots shall be adaptable for the purpose for which they are intended
to be used. The Planning Board may require such revisions in layout of a
development or such other arrangements as will prevent the use of lots
that are not thus adaptable by reasons of adverse septic suitability,
topography, rock formations, flood conditions or similar circumstances.
In the R-12, R-15, R-20, R-25, R-40, R-60, R-80, and R-R Residential
Zone Districts, all single-family building lots must have a sufficient
usable area to accommodate customary accessory structures such as a
shed, swimming pool, deck or patio. In order to demonstrate
compliance with this requirement, all lots in the aforementioned zone
districts shall have a minimum usable rear yard depth of 30 feet,
measured from the rear building line of the house to the limit of any
critical area.
I. In the event that a building is so situated that its required side or rear
yard extends into a contiguous piece of land owned by the same person,
said contiguous piece of land may not be sold, leased or otherwise
conveyed unless the two contiguous pieces are so resubdivided that the
piece on which the building is located shall have sufficient land to fulfill
all side and rear yard requirements for the district in which the land is
located.
J. No structure shall be constructed in an area subject to flood at a
frequency of less than twenty-five-year intervals nor at an elevation of
less than two feet above mean water level within 25 feet from the
center line of a stream, nor shall a structure be constructed which is at
an elevation lower than two feet above mean water level of any
drainage course. Any structure within the floodplain of any
drainagecourse must be accessible by a road passable at all times of the
year.
§ 190-88 JUNK DEALERS § 190-89
186:491
§ 190-90. Areas for public use.
Any land shown on the Master Plan as proposed for parks, playgrounds,
school site, or other public use shall be designated and reserved for such
use. If standards for the provision of park and recreation areas or other
public use areas have been adopted as a part of the Master Plan, the
Township agency, in acting on the preliminary plat of a development, shall
apply such standards thereto and shall designate the lands required for
such purposes, and such lands shall be shown and reserved on the plat.
Such designations of such lands shall be in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 to 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-44.
§ 190-91. Community assets and landmarks.
Wherever possible, trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic spots,
and other community assets and landmarks shall be preserved.
§ 190-92. Subsequent conditions.
In the event any drainage problems or conditions arise, which conditions
constitute in the opinion of the Township Engineer a definite hazard to
the health, safety and general welfare to the residents of the Township of
A. Easements at least 20 feet wide for utility installations may be required
along rear property lines or elsewhere. The locations of such easements
shall be determined after consultation with the Planning Board.
B. Where development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel,
stream, the Township agency may require that a stormwater easement
or dedicated fee simple drainage right-of-way be provided, conforming
with the lines of such watercourse floodlines, and such further width or
construction, or both, as will provide adequate drainage. Drainage
easements shall conform with § 190-72H(10) and/or (11), as
appropriate.
C. Sight triangle easements shall be included on final subdivision plats to
be recorded with the County Clerk and for site plans and other plans
not recorded with the County Clerk in a deed to the Township of
Freehold. Typical language for sight triangle easement(s) shall be as
follows subject to approval by the Township Attorney:
Sight triangle restriction and easement. In the sight triangle the
planting of trees or other plantings, or the location of structures,
fences or other alterations of the topography or contour of the land,
including but not limited to the placement of fill exceeding 30 inches
in height that would obstruct clear sight across the sight triangle is
prohibited. There is granted to the Township of Freehold an easement
permitting entry onto and over the sight triangle area for the purpose
of removing any object, nature or otherwise, that obstructs clear sight
across the sight triangle area. Maintenance of the sight triangle area
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
§ 190-89 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-92
186:492
Freehold, even though the owner or subdivider has previously constructed
all drainage structures and lines as shown on the preliminary plat, final
construction plans and final construction profiles, the Township Engineer
shall designate and the owner or subdivider shall cause to be constructed
all additional pipe and structures necessary to correct the condition.
§ 190-93. Fencing on reverse frontage roadways. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
The Planning Board may approve coordinated fencing along reverse
frontage roadways on collector and arterial roadways in conjunction with
the approval of a major subdivision or residential site plan, or subsequent
amendment to an approved major residential subdivision or site plan. A
coordinated fencing design for the project site shall be submitted with the
proposed location, type of fencing and construction details. Said fencing
must be of uniform height and appearance, may not exceed six feet in
height but may be located at the street line or within a required buffer,
provided that the fencing is a decorative fence with facing on the roadway
side where exposed to view from the roadway or from the exterior of the
lot. Coordinated fencing shall be subject to property owner maintenance
requirements of the fencing as well as the area between the street line and
fencing. Gates shall be provided for individual lots in major subdivisions
for access to the roadway side of the fence for maintenance purposes.
Requirements for coordinated fencing shall be included as conditions of
final, or amended final, major residential subdivision and site plan
approvals.
§ 190-94. Fire protection accessibility.
A. All nonresidential and multifamily structures shall be accessible by fire
equipment along roadways, driveways, parking lots or emergency
access roadways (which are to be constructed of concrete pavers,
porous concrete or other surface material capable of bearing a
minimum vehicular weight of 50,000 pounds).
B. A "clear area" shall be provided adjacent to nonresidential and
multifamily buildings in conformance with the requirements in the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.69
C. Courts and culs-de-sac in multifamily housing zoning districts shall be
marked as fire lanes and parking shall be prohibited.
D. No parking shall be permitted on private roads or access drives which
have a pavement width of 30 feet or less in multifamily housing
developments.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 115, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 190-92 JUNK DEALERS § 190-95
186:493
§ 190-95. Truck access. [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-29]
Trucks greater than two tons and all semitrucks shall be permitted to access
and egress only from principal arterials, minor arterials, major collector and
minor collector roads as designated on the Circulation Plan of the Township
Master Plan and that are designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements for such roadways in this chapter.
§ 190-96. Shade tree easement. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-12]
Shade tree easements shall be furnished to the Township by the developer;
said easement shall be an uninterrupted and unobstructed easement, under,
over and across the easement area, consisting of the right to plant, maintain
and/or replace shade trees. The minimum depth of the easement area shall
be 20 feet. Special topographic and other conditions may result in the
reviewing agency requiring a larger easement area. The maintenance of the
shade trees shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The Township
may, but shall not be obligated to, plant, maintain, and/or replace said
shade trees. The maintenance of the shade trees by the property owner
shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Board of Tree Experts Pruning
Standards for Shade Trees, as periodically modified or amended. Copies
of such standards shall be made available to any Township resident upon
request from the Township Clerk's office. The shade tree easements shall be
shown on the preliminary and final plat maps.
§ 190-95 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-96
186:494
ARTICLE XI
Zones and Schedule of Requirements
§ 190-97. Zones. [Amended 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-18;
4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-15; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-2;
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-19; 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-18;
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-24; 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is divided into the following
classes of zones:
R-R Rural Residential Zone
R-E Rural Environmental Zone
RR/PAC Rural Residential/Planned Adult Community Zone
R-120 Residential 120,000 square feet
R-80 Residential Zone
R-60 Residential Zone
R-40 Residential Zone
R-40/P Residential/Professional Office Zone
R-25 Residential Zone
R-20 Residential Zone
R-15 Residential Zone
R-12 Residential Zone
R-9 Residential Zone
High Density Garden Apartment/Townhouse Zone
PC Planned Community Zone
PAC-3 Planned Adult Community-3 Zone
PAC-4 Planned Adult Community-4 Zone
PAC-AHO Planned Adult Community-Affordable Housing Overlay
Zone
PUD Planned Unit Development Zone (Approved)
PUD-1 Planned Unit Development-1 Zone
MH Mobile/Manufactured Housing Zone (Approved)
MLC-6 Moderate- and Low-Income Housing Contribution Zone
ML-7 Moderate- and Low-Income Housing Zone - 7 DU/Acre
ML-8 Moderate- and Low-Income Housing Zone - 8 DU/Acre
LTW Lake Topanemus Watershed District
LTW-40 Lake Topanemus Watershed - 40 District
B-2 Commercial Zone
B-10 Highway Development Zone
§ 190-97 JUNK DEALERS § 190-97
186:495
HMUD Highway Mixed Use Development Zone
CMX-2 Corporate Multi-Use Development Zone
CMX-3 Corporate Multi-Use Development Zone
CMX-3/A Corporate Multi-Use Development Zone
CMX-4 Corporate Multi-Use Development Zone
CMX-10 Corporate Multi-Use Development Zone
HC Historical Commercial Zone
H-1 Hospital Zone
P-1 Professional Office Zone
P-2 Professional Office Zone
LI Light Industrial Zone
LI-3 Light Industrial Zone
M-1 Industrial Zone
M-2 Industrial Zone
ROL Research/Office/Laboratory Zone
R Recreational Zone
RMZ-1 Regional Mall Zone
RMZ-2 Regional Mall - Ancillary Retail/Service
RMZ-2A Regional Mall - Hotel/Conservation Center Zone
RMZ-3 Regional Mall - Ancillary Retail Service/Use Zone
VC Village Center
SC Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone
§ 190-98. Zoning Map.
The Zoning Map of the Township of Freehold, Monmouth County, New
Jersey, which is included as Schedule B, was adopted on August 25, 1980,
in accordance with Ordinance No. 80-29.
§ 190-99. Zoning Map amendments.
The Zoning Map (Schedule B of this chapter)70 of Freehold Township,
County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey, adopted in accordance with
§ 190-98 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62, Power to Zone, is hereby amended to
delineate the boundaries and districts as described by block and lot and/or
by map or diagram in accordance with the following ordinances:
Ordinance Date
81-10 May 26, 1981
81-30 November 23, 1981
70.Editor's Note: Schedule B, the Zoning Map, is on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 190-97 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-99
186:496
Ordinance Date
84-24 September 25, 1984
84-31 December 26, 1984
85-11 May 13, 1985
86-5 January 24, 1986
86-8 March 24, 1986
86-16 May 12, 1986
86-18 May 27, 1986
87-2 March 10,1987
87-29 September 22, 1987
87-40 December 29, 1987
88-20 May 20, 1988
88-24 June 28, 1988
88-44 December 27, 1988
89-12 May 9, 1989
89-14 May 9, 1989
90-6 April 10, 1990
90-8 April 10, 1990
90-11 May 1, 1990
90-22 June 26, 1990
90-26 July 17, 1990
91-13 April 2, 1991
93-13 April 13, 1993
94-39 June 28, 1994
94-49 August 23, 1994
94-51 September 13, 1994
94-63 December 6, 1994
O-95-27 June 27, 1995
O-96-01 January 23, 1996
O-96-02 January 23, 1996
O-97-16 August 26, 1997
O-97-23 September 23, 1997
O-97-24 September 23, 1997
O-97-25 November 25, 1997
O-98-11 March 24, 1998
O-98-18 June 23, 1998
O-99-2 January 26, 1999
§ 190-99 JUNK DEALERS § 190-99
186:497
Ordinance Date
O-99-4 February 9, 1999
O-99-6 March 23, 1999
O-99-30 November 23, 1999
O-00-6 March 7, 2000
O-00-7 March 21, 2000
O-00-8 March 7, 2000
O-00-18 July 11, 2000
O-00-26 August 22, 2000
O-01-01 February 27, 2001
O-01-33 August 28, 2001
O-01-48 December 18, 2001
O-02-16 May 21, 2002
O-02-44 November 26, 2002
O-04-9 March 9, 2004
O-04-16 April 27, 2004
O-05-25 August 23, 2005
O-05-42 December 27, 2005
O-06-18 May 23, 2006
O-06-35 September 19, 2006
O-07-29 November 20, 2007
O-08-2 February 26, 2008
O-08-11 June 17, 2008
O-09-9 March 30, 2009
O-12-18 August 28, 2012
O-13-15 February 26, 2013
O-13-5 April 23, 2013
O-13-28 July 23, 2013
O-13-39 December 17, 2013
O-14-2 February 25, 2014
O-14-18 December 23, 2014
O-14-19 December 23, 2014
O-15-24 December 22, 2015
O-16-10 August 9, 2016
O-17-1 January 24, 2017
§ 190-99 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-100
186:498
§ 190-100. Interpretation of zone boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zone as
shown on the Zoning Map, the following definition shall govern:
§ 190-101. Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
Schedule C, Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements, is hereby
made a part of this chapter and is included at the end hereof.
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center lines of streets,
streams, railroad rights-of-way and lot or property lines, unless the
boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map or as
hereinafter set forth.
B. Where zone boundary lines are not fixed by dimensions and are so
indicated that they appear to be within 10 feet of a lot line as
determined by scale from the Zoning Map, such lot line shall be
construed to be the boundary line.
C. In those instances where zone boundary lines appear as extensions of
property lines, and in other instances where the zone boundary line
divides a lot, and where the boundary line appears to be more than 10
feet distant from a property line, the location of the boundary line shall
be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
§ 190-100 JUNK DEALERS § 190-101
186:499

ARTICLE XII
General Zoning Provisions
§ 190-102. Conformity with regulations required.
No structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, or moved nor
shall any lands or the buildings thereon be used for any purpose except
in conformity with all regulations hereinafter established for the zone in
which the land or structure is located, nor shall any open space or yard
area established for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this
chapter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner except as shall be
specifically permitted in this chapter.
§ 190-103. Permitted yard encroachments.
No building or part thereof shall be erected within or project into any
required yard area except in accordance with the following provisions:
§ 190-104. Height requirements.
A. An open entrance porch not more than 10 feet in width shall not project
more than eight feet into a required front yard area. The provisions of
this subsection shall apply to cheek walls or similar wall structures
which are utilized for landscaping or privacy screening purposes.
B. An open and unroofed patio not more than three feet above ground
level may extend into a required side or rear yard to within 10 feet of a
side or rear property line. Such patios, if at ground level, may extend to
within five feet of a side or rear property line.
C. No accessory building shall be permitted except in rear yards. In the
case of a corner lot, no accessory building or structure shall project
beyond the line of the existing principal structure as such structure
faces the street. When a building is constructed in the shape of an "L,"
"T" or "U" and the shorter angle of the "L," "T" or "U" faces the rear lot
line, then and in that event, accessory structures shall be permitted in
that portion of the lot between the rear building line and the least
projected exterior rear surface of the principal dwelling. For the
purposes set forth above, the portion of the lot heretofore referred to
shall not be deemed a side yard.
D. The front setback line of any dwelling located in a major subdivision
shall be that line shown on the recorded plat. Where a dwelling is not
located in a major subdivision, the front setback line shall be that shown
in the schedule attached to the Zoning Map.
E. Parcels which constitute corner lots may use the side yard schedule set
forth in this chapter in order to satisfy rear yard depth requirements.
F. The projection of a chimney shall not be deemed a violation of side yard
requirements.
§ 190-102 JUNK DEALERS § 190-104
186:501
A. No single-family residential structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet nor any building accessory to a residential structure exceed one
story or 16 feet.
B. Appurtenances attached to principal structures. House of worship
spires, belfries, domes or antennas attached to buildings, silos or
penthouses (not for human occupancy) chimneys, ventilators, skylights,
water tanks, bulkheads, and necessary mechanical appurtenances
usually carried above roof level shall not be considered when
determining the height of the building, and are generally not subject to
height limitations of any sort except that such features shall not exceed
20% of total roof area and shall not exceed a height such as is necessary
to accomplish the purpose for which it is intended to serve. In
residential zones, however, and on properties adjacent to single-family
residential zones, such appurtenances, which exceed the height
limitation for single-family residences by more than five feet shall not
be located nearer to any property line than a distance equal to its height
above the ground. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
C. Freestanding noncommercial accessories. Water towers, radio and
television antennas, windmills and flagpoles which are erected as
freestanding structures may be erected to a height which can be
demonstrated to the Planning Board is necessary to accomplish their
intended function. Such structures shall not be located within any
required front, side or rear yard setback areas and shall be subject to
the structural provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
and the following:
(1) Private radio or television antenna structures in residential zones
shall not be erected nearer to the lot lines than the total height of
the antenna structure, nor shall such structure be installed near
electric power line or encroach upon any street or other public
place. Such a structure not exceeding 12 feet in height may be
erected and maintained on the roof of any building.
(2) Federally licensed amateur radio facilities shall be subject to
Federal Communications Commission rules (47 CFR, Part 97)
which govern the height of licensed amateur operator radio
antennas. Amateur radio operators shall submit a copy of their
current FCC operator license and documentation of the required
antenna height and construction details for any antenna or tower in
excess of that permitted for private radio or television antennae
structures in Subsection C(1) above. Such antennas or structures
shall comply with New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
structural design requirements for safety and shall not be located
within any required front, side or rear yard setback areas. The
height of the tower or antenna shall conform with U.S. Federal
Communications Commission Regulations governing licensed
amateur radio operators and, if required, Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) notification and FCC approval. Such
structure shall not be utilized to support lights or signs other than
§ 190-104 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-104
186:502
those required for aircraft warning in accordance with Federal
Aviation Administration regulations or other required safety
purposes.
(3) Personal earth terminals as defined in § 190-3 shall be subject to
the following:
(a) A personal earth terminal may only be located in the rear of
any principal structure, shall not be closer to any property line
than the height of the antenna and may not be located in a
buffer area.
(b) A personal earth terminal shall not violate the yard setback
requirements applicable to accessory structures within the
particular zone district as set forth in § 190-101, Schedule C,
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements, at the end
of this chapter.
(c) A personal earth terminal may be erected only on the ground
or on a platform mat not exceeding one foot in height in a
secure fashion.
(d) The height of a personal earth terminal shall not exceed 12
feet.
(e) The main reflector shall not exceed a diameter of 10 feet.
(f) All wiring or connecting cables between a personal earth
terminal and the principal building shall be buried
underground.
(g) A personal earth terminal shall be so located and shall be
effectively screened from view by natural plants, trees or other
suitable sight barriers, which shall be maintained in good
condition in order to minimize visibility of the earth terminal
from any adjacent property or public street as approved by the
Planning Board.
(h) Only one personal earth terminal shall be permitted on any
property.
(i) A personal earth terminal may only be erected on a lot
containing a principal structure and may only be used by
residents of the principal building on the property in question.
Any connection, by cable or otherwise, to adjacent properties
shall constitute a violation of yard and setback requirements.
D. No sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any chimney, tower,
tank or other structure without approval of the Planning Board.
E. In the M-1 Zone District, building height may be increased to 75 feet
provided that buildings which exceed 50 feet in height shall be set back
§ 190-104 JUNK DEALERS § 190-104
186:503
§ 190-105. One principal building per lot.
Except as might be hereinafter specifically provided, there shall not be more
than one principal residential building erected on any lot.
§ 190-106. Frontage and direct access.
No development shall take place upon a lot which does not have frontage
upon and direct access to a public street improved to meet requirements
of the Township or for which such improvements have been guaranteed in
accordance with requirements and established in the land subdivision and
site plan regulations of this chapter. Limited access highways shall not be
deemed to be frontage for purposes of this chapter.
§ 190-107. Reverse frontage lots.
§ 190-108. Front yards.
not less than 200 feet from all front property lines, 125 feet from all
side and rear property lines and 200 feet from all residential zones.
A. No development shall be designed to create reverse frontage lots
except for lots which will abut limited access expressways, principal
arterial roadways (those having at least two lanes in each direction), or
designated scenic roadway corridors.
B. Whenever reverse frontage lots are to be allowed along access
expressways or principal arterial roadways, the development plans
must provide for a buffer easement of 150 feet within which shall be an
earthen berm, at least four feet high. The buffer easement area and
berm shall be landscaped and maintained consistent with the
requirements of § 190-166B, C, D, E and G; however, no fencing or
other structures may be placed within such buffer easement. The
development approval shall further provide for the maintenance of the
buffer easement by the homeowner.
C. Whenever reverse frontage lots are permitted along designated scenic
roadway corridors the development plans must be in accordance with
all requirements of the SC Scenic Corridor Overlay Zone.71
A. Any yard facing a public street shall be considered a front yard and
shall conform to the minimum front yard requirements established for
the zone in which the yard is located for principal structures. Accessory
structures limited to swimming pools, fences, flagpoles, lampposts,
ornamental objects, seasonal decorations, landscaping accessories, and
permitted toolshed or similar storage building shall be permitted within
a reverse frontage yard; provided, however, that no such structure or
use shall encroach into any required buffer area or within 25 feet of the
street line whichever is greater.
71.Editor's Note: See § 190-160 of this chapter.
§ 190-104 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-108
186:504
§ 190-109. Obstructions to vision.
On any corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of 1 1/2 feet
and 10 feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets, within
the triangular area formed by the two intersecting street lines bounding the
lot, and by a line connecting points on each street line located 25 feet from
the intersection of the street lines. Measurements shall be made from the
curbline or the edge of the pavement.
§ 190-110. Accessory structures.
B. No accessory structures shall be erected in any front yard, with the
exception of:
(1) Flagpoles.
(2) Signs.
(3) Lampposts.
(4) Ornamental objects.
(5) Seasonal decorations.
(6) Landscaping accessories.
C. No front yard in any residential zone shall be used for the storage of
vehicles exceeding 10,000 pounds and/or the parking of boats, trailers
or equipment. Other vehicles which are in operating condition and
which are parked on an improved driveway or parking area are
permitted.
D. On a parcel of land situated between parallel streets, the front yard is
defined as the area situated between the street line and a minimum
front building line. (See § 190-3.) In such circumstances, fences, or
other accessory uses or structures which are constructed in the rear
yard may be built to the street line, provided that they do not exceed
three feet in height. Any fence or other accessory uses or structures
which exceed the three-foot height limitation shall adhere to the front
yard setback set forth herein.
E. Where the proposed construction of a residential development by a
single developer is located in two different zoning districts, each
principal structure may have a front yard depth requirement of that set
forth for principal structures in either zone.
A. Except in the ROL, B-1 and M-2 Zone Districts, no accessory structure,
excluding fences and temporary buildings necessary for construction
purposes, shall be erected prior to the completion of the principal
building. Such temporary construction buildings may be erected only
after the issuance of a building permit for the principal building and
shall be removed within 30 days following the issuance of a certificate
§ 190-108 JUNK DEALERS § 190-110
186:505
of occupancy, for the principal building; or in the case of a major
subdivision, within 30 days following the issuance of a certification of
occupancy for the final principal building in the subdivision.
B. In all residential zones, any accessory structures exceeding 192 square
feet in area shall be constructed of materials which are the same as or
consistently similar to the materials of the principal structure. Any
owner or occupant of property in any residential zone seeking
permission to place upon his or her property a structure not in
compliance with the foregoing, may appeal any permit denial to the
Planning Board under § 190-248A of this chapter. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
C. Portable on-demand storage structures. [Added 9-24-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-31]
(1) A portable on-demand storage structure may be located as a
temporary structure on residential property within the Township
for the duration of a valid permit or extension thereof from time of
delivery to time of removal. The portable storage structure is to be
used only for the temporary storage of household goods and related
items for the property of the permit holder. The portable storage
structure may not be used for habitation, solid waste, construction
debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business inventory,
commercial goods, goods for property where the structure is
located (i.e., used for retail sales) or any other illegal or hazardous
material or substances.
(2) Portable on-demand storage structures shall be located on paved
surfaces of the property and are prohibited from being placed in
streets, easements, rights-of-way, or landscaped areas. The
structures shall be located in the driveway of the property at the
farthest accessible point from the street and shall be no closer than
10 feet to a property line.
(3) Portable on-demand storage structures may not exceed eight feet
six inches in height, 10 feet in width or 20 feet in length.
(4) It shall be the obligation of the owner or user of such temporary
storage structure to secure it in a manner that does not endanger
the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the temporary
structure. In the event of high winds or other weather conditions in
which such structure may become a physical danger to persons or
property, the appropriate code or law enforcement officers may
require the immediate removal of such temporary structure.
(5) The applicant, as well as the supplier of the portable on-demand
storage structure, shall be responsible for ensuring that the
structure is maintained in good condition, free from evidence of
deterioration, weathering, discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping,
tearing or other holes or breaks, at all times.
§ 190-110 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-110
186:506
§ 190-111. Aboveground heating fuel storage tanks.
In the zones where permitted, aboveground heating oil storage tanks may
be installed but only in accordance with the following regulations:
(6) In the event of fire, hurricane or other natural disaster causing
substantial damage to a residential property or structures on the
property, the property owner may apply to the Township for
permission to extend the time that a portable on-demand storage
structure may be located as a temporary structure on the property.
Application for such extended duration shall be made in writing
and filed with the Township Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer
and shall give sufficient information to determine whether such
extended duration should be granted. The Township Zoning and
Code Enforcement Officer shall determine whether or not to grant
such extended duration and the length of such extension. In the
event of an adverse decision by the Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer, the applicant may appeal such decision to the Township
Committee. In the event of such appeal, the decision of the
Township Committee shall be final.
(7) Duration. A portable on-demand storage structure may be located
as a temporary structure on a property within the Township for a
period not exceeding 30 days in duration from time of delivery to
time of removal. Permits for such structures are limited to not more
than three permits per year. No more than one portable on-demand
storage structures may be located on a specific piece of property
within the Township at one time; such storage structures shall be
individually limited to the duration time period established herein.
(8) Application.
(a) Use of a portable on-demand storage structure shall only be
permitted where a zoning permit has been issued by the
Township Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) An application fee of $35 shall accompany the zoning permit
request. A property survey indicating the location of the
storage structure must be included with the zoning
application.
(9) Violations and penalties.
(a) Failure to obtain permission for placement of a portable ondemand
storage structure shall result in the issuance of an
after-the-fact permit with a fee set at 10 times the amount of a
permit issued prior to erection of such structure $350. Failure
to satisfy the after-the-fact permit fee shall result in the
issuance of a summons.
(b) Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 190-110 JUNK DEALERS § 190-111
186:507
§ 190-112. Existing natural features.
Existing natural features such as streams, lakes, ponds, trees and the
natural configuration of the ground shall be retained wherever possible. If
it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the reviewing board that such
features will substantially interfere with any reasonable proposed use of
a property, such features may be altered only to the extent necessary to
permit such use.
§ 190-113. Appearance of buildings.
A. Tanks shall not exceed 275 gallons.
B. Screening shall be installed that is year round and which completely
conceals the tank from view of neighboring properties.
C. Tanks shall be permitted only in side and/or rear yards.
D. The Zoning Officer shall be supplied with and satisfied of proof that the
soil conditions on the property make the installation of metal tanks
impractical.
A. No principal structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, placed,
altered, or enlarged in any residence district which shall be like or
substantially like any neighboring building or structure as hereinafter
defined then in existence or for which a building permit has been
issued, or which is included in the same building permit application, in
more than three of the following six respects:
(1) Height of the main roof ridge above the top of the plat. All flat roofs
shall be deemed identical in this dimension.
(2) Height of the main roof ridge or in the case of a building structure
with a flat roof, the highest point of the roof beams above the
elevation of the first floor.
(3) Length of the main roof ridge, or in the case of a building or
structure with a flat roof, length of the main roof.
(4) Width between outside walls at the ends of the building or
structure measured under the main roof at right angles to the
length.
(5) Relative location of windows in the front elevation or in each of
both side elevations with respect to any door, chimney, porch or
attached garage in the same elevation.
(6) In the front elevation, both relative location with respect to each
other of garage, if attached, porch, if any, and the remainder of the
building or structure; and either height of any portion of the
building or structures located outside the limits of the main roof
measured from the elevation of the first floor to the roof ridge, or in
the case of a flat roof, the highest point of the roof beams, or width
§ 190-111 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-113
186:508
§ 190-114. Architectural design requirements for commercial, office
and industrial development.
All commercial, office and industrial buildings and sites shall be designed
and developed in a manner that will be compatible with the architectural
and visual characteristics of historic buildings, sites or districts in the
Township. This shall include the scale, height, and location of buildings, as
well as the specific construction materials that are used.
of the portion of the building or structure if it has a gable in the
front elevation, otherwise length of the roof ridge or the flat roof
in the front elevation. Buildings or structures shall be deemed to
be like each other in any dimension with respect to which the
difference between them is not more than two feet. Buildings or
structures between which the only difference in relative location of
elements is end to end or side to side reversal of elements shall be
deemed to be like each other in relative location of such elements.
B. In relation to the premises with respect to which a building or structure
is sought to be erected, constructed, placed, altered or enlarged, a
building or structure shall be deemed to be a neighboring building or
structure if the lot upon which it may or any part of it has been or will
be located in any one of the following lots:
(1) Any lot on the street upon which the building or structure to be
located on the premises would front which is the first building or
structure on either side of the building or structure on the same
side of the street without regard to intervening street lines.
(2) Any building or structure to be erected on any lot, any part of a
street line, frontage of which is across the street from the premises.
(3) Any lot, any part of the street line frontage of which faces the end
of, and is within the width of, the street, if there are less than two
lots between the premises and the end of the street.
(4) Any lot, any part of the street line frontage of which is across such
other street from the premises or from a lot referred to in
Subsection B(3) above.
A. General guidelines.
(1) Determination of compliance. All applications for commercial,
office and industrial buildings shall be reviewed by the Historic
Preservation Commission in accordance with the standards of
review contained in § 190-233E of this chapter. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall review applications for
conformance with this section within 35 days following receipt
from the Planning Administrator. The Commission shall issue a
letter of certification of compliance or noncompliance of the
architectural design requirements of this section. If an application
is not in compliance with this section, the Commission shall specify
§ 190-113 JUNK DEALERS § 190-114
186:509
the elements of the proposed building or building addition that
does not conform with the requirements of this section. The letter
of certification shall be submitted as a recommendation to the
Planning Board, and the Planning Board shall make the final
determination of compliance or noncompliance. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(2) The design of new buildings shall take into consideration the
natural features of the site, existing buildings and other substantial
structures in the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the
proposed building or buildings. In particular areas, building design
may have to be adjusted to maintain existing visual relationships or
to preserve visual access to community focal points either natural
or man-made.
(3) The selection of building design elements including facade
materials, fenestration, color, texture and other design
considerations shall be determined so that such treatment is
consistent with traditional architectural styles. For purposes of this
chapter, "traditional architectural styles" shall include the Colonial,
Federal, Georgian, and Victorian traditionally found in Freehold
Township as determined by the Freehold Township Historical
Commission and adaptations of these styles for the use and type of
the building.
(4) The design of additions and renovations are to reflect the existing
building in terms of scale, materials, fenestration and color. An
exception applies to those existing buildings that do not meet the
objectives of this section. In those cases, additions and renovations
are to be designed to revise existing building design to comply with
the traditional architectural styles of this section to the extent
practicable.
(5) Appearance of the side and rear elevations of buildings are to
receive architectural treatments comparable to that of any
proposed front facade where such elevations are generally within
public view.
(6) New buildings, additions, and renovations should, where
appropriate, strengthen the particular design features of its locale
by, for example, framing a view corridor, enclosing an open space
area, or continuing a particular design feature or statement. Such
construction should, when located in business districts,
complement existing building designs that are consistent with
Township architectural design objectives.
B. Harmony of design.
(1) New buildings are to be designed to be consistent with the scale,
form and proportion of older development that conforms with the
traditional architectural styles of this section. This can be done by
§ 190-114 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-114
186:510
repeating existing building lines and providing uniformity of detail,
scale, proportion, textures, materials, color, and building form
designed to achieve traditional architectural styles.
(2) The use of unusual shapes, colors and other characteristics which
cause new buildings to call excessive attention and create
disharmony shall be avoided.
(3) The existing building line (at the front setback) is to be maintained.
(4) The rhythm of structural mass to voids (windows) of a front facade
(or any facade easily viewed from the street) shall relate to rhythms
established in adjacent buildings or designed to be consistent with
traditional architectural styles.
(5) If several storefronts are located in one building, there is to be a
unified design treatment; e.g., design of windows and door
openings, use of materials and color.
(6) Building additions are to be designed to reflect the existing
building in terms of scale, materials, fenestration, and color. A
change in scale may require a transitional design element between
the addition and the existing building. Facade renovations are to
include as few different materials as possible.
C. Creativity and diversity of design.
(1) These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovations,
or variety, but rather to focus on design principles that can result in
creative solutions.
(2) Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be
avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide
visual interest.
D. Building details.
(1) A human scale of design is to be achieved at ground level, at
entryways, and along street frontages through the use of such
elements as windows, doors, columns, and canopies.
(2) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roofs, the
ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so located
as not to be visible from any public streets or residential zoning
districts.
(3) Building components such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets
shall be in proportion to one another.
E. Signs and lighting.
(1) Signs shall be erected and maintained in accordance with Article
XVII, § 190-173 et seq. of this chapter. Signs that are proposed in
§ 190-114 JUNK DEALERS § 190-114
186:511
conjunction with applications in accordance with this subsection
are to be designed to complement the architectural style and scale
of the building and are to be designed as an integral architectural
element of the building and site to which it principally relates.
Signs shall not compete for attention with signs on adjacent
properties. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be
kept to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message.
Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos
shall conform to these standards.
(2) Exterior lighting shall enhance the building design and the site
landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a
design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas.
F. Building design, massing and scale.
(1) Where large structures are required, massing is to be broken up
through the use of setbacks and other design techniques.
(2) The orientation of buildings to provide access through side and
rear entrances is encouraged, with the side and rear facades
receiving appropriate entryway design treatment.
(3) Long horizontal facades are to be broken with segments having
vertical orientation. Tall, vertically-oriented facades are to be
broken with horizontal components through use of facade design
features.
(4) Buildings with expansive blank walls are prohibited.
(5) Buildings are to be designed so that facades are the prominent
architectural feature and the roofs are visually less dominant in the
total design. Gable and hip roofs are encouraged and other types
may be permitted if, in the opinion of the approving authority the
roof is generally consistent with traditional architectural styles.
(6) In infill construction, the front alignment of new buildings are to be
designed to be consistent with the existing setbacks of nearby
buildings, but in conformance with the minimum setback
requirements of the applicable zoning district.
G. Facade treatment.
(1) Multitenant commercial buildings shall provide uniform
storefronts, doorways, windows, awnings and other design features
for all ground floor tenants. Upper floors of buildings shall be
coordinated with the ground floor through common materials,
window treatments and colors. Storefronts shall include display
windows with a sill height of not less than two feet from grade.
(2) New construction shall use windows of similar sizes and shapes or
incorporate other facade elements that establish the same pattern
§ 190-114 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-114
186:512
of other buildings in its context. Window and door sizes and shapes
are not to be significantly altered by any building renovation.
(3) Fire escapes are prohibited on the principal facades of a building.
(4) Facade renovations are to be designed in accordance with the
original architectural style of the building. Original details are to be
retained; when it becomes necessary to introduce new features,
they are to be designed to harmonize with existing features or
altered to conform with traditional architectural styles. If windows
and doors must be replaced, new materials shall match the original
design.
(5) Surface detailing shall be integrated within the structure rather
than applied for decorative purposes.
(6) Exterior-mounted mechanical and electrical equipment shall be
architecturally screened.
H. Building materials, color and texture.
(1) For renovations of existing buildings, original materials shall be
retained when compatible with traditional architectural styles.
New materials shall be designed to be compatible with traditional
architectural styles.
(2) The use of brick, stone, clapboard, and other facade materials
consistent with traditional architectural styles shall be utilized. In
general, a maximum of two principal facade materials shall be
permitted.
(3) Aluminum siding, metal panels and mirrored glass surfaces are
prohibited.
(4) The painting of buildings in bold colors, patterns, check or stripes
is prohibited.
(5) The use of earth tone colors and/or other colors generally
associated with traditional architectural styles shall be encouraged
on all buildings. Accent of complementary colors which harmonize
with the main facade colors shall be permitted for trim, awnings
and other building details.
(6) The use of street furniture (benches, tables, trash receptacles, etc.)
shall be encouraged, provided that the materials used are
consistent with the overall design concept of the building.
(7) Awnings shall be constructed and installed so that the frame and
fabric of the awning is integrated into the overall building design.
No awning shall extend more than four feet from the building
facade, and no awning shall be less than eight feet above the
ground. Awnings that project into any roadway, driveway or
parking area are prohibited. Awnings shall not be placed so as to
§ 190-114 JUNK DEALERS § 190-114
186:513
§ 190-115. Private swimming pools.
Private swimming pools are permitted as an accessory use to residential
dwellings in every zone wherein that principal use is permitted subject to
the following:
§ 190-116. Outdoor storage, sales and display of goods.
conceal or disfigure an architectural feature or detail. Awning
materials shall be limited to cloth, canvas and similar materials;
metal and aluminum awnings are prohibited.
A. A private swimming pool shall not be constructed, installed or
maintained within 15 feet of any side or rear yard line, provided that in
the case of any lot less than 50 feet in width, it shall be permissible to
place a pool within 10 feet of a side or rear property line.
B. No private swimming pool shall be constructed, erected, installed or
maintained in the front yard of any property.
C. In the case of a corner lot, a pool shall not be constructed any closer to
the side street line than the principal structure.
D. A private swimming pool shall not be constructed or installed on any
premises unless a residence building is also located on the premises or
unless the premises is part of a residence curtilage.
A. Site plan review and approval shall be required for all outdoor storage,
sales, and display areas as specified in § 190-37 of this chapter. Nothing
shall be stored, sold or displayed out of doors for any purpose except in
compliance with the following provisions:
(1) New or used automobiles on display for sale or awaiting delivery
may be stored out of doors as a permitted accessory use to a new
car dealership in accordance with § 190-146B(9) for any indefinite
period of time, provided that the automobiles are in operating
condition and further provided that they shall be stored on a paved
area constructed to the standards established by this chapter.
Automobiles shall not be stored or displayed on access drives or
within parking areas designated for customer and employee
parking. Automobiles shall not be placed on display ramps or on
lawns or other landscaped areas. [Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-4]
(2) All garbage, trash, recyclable materials, or any other refuse
awaiting disposal shall be stored in a completely enclosed
container within a storage facility. Trash and recycling storage
facilities shall be constructed with a six-inch-thick reinforced
concrete pad base over six inches of compacted dense graded
aggregate base course (DGABC) stone, and shall be surrounded on
three sides by a masonry wall six feet in height that is comprised of
the same facade material or compatible with the exterior design of
§ 190-114 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-116
186:514
the building facade. A solid gate shall be provided on the open side
of the enclosure. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-02]
(3) Products and materials that are necessary or supplementary to a
permitted principal use and which are customarily stored or sold
out of doors may be stored or sold out of doors, provided that:
(a) The area used for such outdoor storage or sales shall be paved
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The storage shall not be permitted within a front yard area.
Outdoor storage or sales areas which are covered or partially
enclosed shall adhere to the setback requirements for a
principal building. Outdoor storage and sales areas shall not be
counted as structures for calculating floor area ratio and offstreet
parking requirements, provided that the area does not
exceed a maximum of 20% of the gross floor area of the use
located within the principal building.
(c) The storage shall be screened from view from any street and
from any adjoining residential property.
(d) All materials stored out of doors shall be arranged and
maintained in a safe, orderly and neat manner.
(4) No outdoor storage or sales shall be permitted within a required
buffer area or on lawns or other landscaped areas, on or within five
feet of any access drive or fire lane, within parking areas
designated for customer and employee parking, or within 25 feet of
any street line or within 10 feet of any side or rear lot line.
(5) Outdoor storage shall be limited to equipment, merchandise or
materials necessary to the operation of the principal use on the
premises, not normally or economically stored indoors. No junk
cars, wrecked cars or cars damaged by accident or damaged in any
other manner; or which are in such condition that they cannot
operate under their own power; used auto parts or appliances; used
auto or truck tires; damaged or discarded machinery, equipment or
parts thereof; used or damaged refrigerators, household or
electrical appliances or other damaged or disabled merchandise; or
junk shall be stored, maintained or permitted to remain situated in
the open on any premises for more than 15 days from the time first
placed on the premises, and the items shall thereafter be
permanently removed from the open and stored within a
completely enclosed building. Specifically excluded from this time
requirement are disabled or damaged motor vehicles awaiting
repair at an automotive repair shop. For these purposes, the above
fifteen-day requirement shall be extended to 60 days in order to
permit a reasonable time for insurance adjustment and parts
ordering purposes.
§ 190-116 JUNK DEALERS § 190-116
186:515
B. Temporary, special or seasonal sales and displays may be permitted in
accordance with a permit issued by the Code Administrator and/or
Zoning Officer and in compliance with the following:
(1) Outdoor displays and temporary sales shall be limited to those
materials and goods that are connected with the principal use on
the premises.
(2) Goods that are displayed or sold outdoors shall not be located
closer than 25 feet from any street or 10 feet from a rear or side
property line.
(3) Goods that are sold or displayed outdoors shall be located on a
surface paved in accordance with § 190-162 and shall not interfere
with off-street parking areas, vehicular circulation or fire
protection accessibility. Sidewalk sales shall be permitted, provided
that the goods displayed and sold outdoors do not interfere with
pedestrian circulation.
(4) Temporary sales and outdoor displays shall be limited to one week
in duration. Not more than six such sales and special displays shall
be allowed per year.
(5) Signs associated with temporary sales and outdoor displays shall
be in accordance with a permit issued by the Code Administrator
and/or Zoning Officer and in accordance with Article XVII, Signs,
§ 190-173 et seq., of this chapter.
C. Temporary sales of Christmas trees may be permitted in nonresidential
zone districts beginning the day after Thanksgiving through the end of
December. Such sales shall be in accordance with a permit issued by
the Code Administrator and/or Zoning Officer and in compliance with
the following:
(1) The display and sale of Christmas trees shall not interfere with
other uses on the site.
(2) Adequate off-street parking, internal circulation, and fire
protection accessibility shall be provided.
(3) Trees, signs and other materials shall be removed from the site not
later than December 31.
D. Farm stands.
(1) Purpose. To allow qualified farm owners or operators to set up a
farm stand to sell primarily locally grown produce as a way to keep
the land in agricultural use and as a service to local residents. To
control the intensity of use allowable as a farm stand because such
closely circumscribed use is site plan exempt.
(2) Applicability.
§ 190-116 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-116
186:516
(a) Farm stands are permitted upon receipt of a zoning permit
pursuant to this section and in accordance with the conditions
and restrictions set forth herein.
(b) Temporary stands selling only produce grown on a tract of land
less than five acres in area shall be exempt from all provisions
of this § 190-116D. No person or entity shall be permitted to
sever parcels in order to qualify for this exemption.
(3) Site requirements.
(a) Farm stands must be located on land which is under active
continuous farming operation and which meet the
requirements of and qualify under the Farmland Assessment
Act of 1964, as amended (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.).
(b) One farm stand per farm lot is permitted. Minimum farm lot:
five acres.
(c) Minimum setback requirements.
[1] Farm stand setback: 75 feet.
[2] Parking setback: 25 feet.
[3] Side yard parking and stand: 75 feet.
(d) Parking. Adequate on-site parking must be provided to handle
peak customer demand. No parking on street or street
shoulder shall be permitted.
(e) A farm stand shall be limited to one story with a maximum floor
area of 900 square feet.
(f) Lighting shall be provided only as necessary for security
purposes.
(4) Operation.
(a) A zoning permit shall be required. All statements in the zoning
permit application are considered incorporated by reference in
and become a part of any zoning permit issued. Upon
expiration of the zoning permit all produce, baskets, etc., shall
be removed, the premises swept clean, and suitably secured.
(b) Hours of operation shall be limited to not earlier than 7:00 a.m.
nor later than 8:00 p.m., prevailing time, daily.
(c) Produce grown outside the State of New Jersey will be limited
to no more than 10% of total produce offered for sale on the
premises.
(d) Any item offered for sale must be displayed only within or on
the farm stand as defined in § 190-3. There shall arise a
§ 190-116 JUNK DEALERS § 190-116
186:517
rebuttable presumption that any items located within 30 feet
of the front, sides or back of the farm stand are being offered
for sale. The foregoing presumption shall not apply to farm
machinery or equipment used in the production of the farm
product, registered and licensed motor vehicles, or growing
crops not yet harvested and still in the ground.
(e) No food or drink shall be offered for sale for on premises
consumption.
(5) Signs and traffic control.
(a) All signs are to be in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter. A temporary sign permit must be secured before any
signs are installed or displayed.
(b) Temporary signs are permitted as per § 190-176I, except that
the period of display will correspond to the time limits stated
on the zoning permit.
(c) Temporary directional signs are permitted per § 190-174A,
except that the time period of display will correspond to the
time limits stated on the zoning permit.
(d) No trucks, trailers, wagons or similar vehicles or structures
displaying advertising shall be parked within 100 feet of the
front lot line except during active loading or unloading
operations.
(e) People in costume located and utilized so as to attract passing
vehicles on street are considered animated signs and are not
permitted.
(f) If determined to be needed for public safety, the applicant shall
provide personnel to control and direct traffic.
(g) Hay rides or the equivalent may be operated on the farm
covered by the farm stand zoning permit. Location of loading/
unloading of passengers and the path of the ride shall be a
minimum of 100 feet from the street frontage.
(6) Issuance of permit. The Zoning Officer, after conferring with the
Township Administrator, Township Planner, and the Building
Inspector, may issue the required zoning permit. The permit shall
be issued or denied within 15 days of receipt of application. The
applicant shall supply the following:
(a) A completed zoning permit application.
(b) A letter certifying that the location is on a qualified commercial
farm.
§ 190-116 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-116
186:518
§ 190-117. Prohibition of uses. [Amended 6-17-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-11]
(c) A sketch showing the location of the stand in relation to the
road, parking, driveways, sign location(s) and description of
hay ride path (is so provided). Additional information may be
requested.
E. Site plan approval shall not be required for outdoor sales and displays
within the RMZ-2 Zones which are in compliance with the following
provisions: [Added 7-29-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-10]
(1) Outdoor displays and sales shall be limited to those materials and
goods that are connected with the principal use on the premises.
(2) Outdoor displays will be permitted on the front walkway against
the front wall of the business enclosed within a structure located on
the site and shall not protrude further than four feet into any
walkway at which a minimum clear and unobstructed six-foot
pathway shall be maintained at all times as not to impede
pedestrian traffic.
(3) Outdoor sales and displays shall not be permitted within
landscaped areas, off street parking areas, on or within five feet of
any access drive or fire lanes.
(4) Outdoor displays will be limited to 40% of the linear length of the
front wall to the business.
(5) Outdoor displays shall not obstruct any means of ingress or egress,
including emergency exits, and shall provide a clear distance of 10
feet from the edge of any building's ingress or egress point,
including emergency exits, to the edge of an outdoor display.
(6) Outdoor displays shall not obscure decorative architectural details,
or windows.
(7) All outdoor displays shall be arranged and maintained in a safe,
orderly and neat manner.
(8) Outdoor displays shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
(9) Signage on outdoor displays shall not exceed two square feet and
shall be in accordance with Article XVII, Signs, within this chapter.
(10) Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
A. Any use not provided for in a zone is prohibited except for those uses
listed below:
(1) Garage sales, as defined herein, limited to no more than two sales
per year per household.
§ 190-116 JUNK DEALERS § 190-117
186:519
(2) 72Auctions and flea markets may be authorized by the Township
Committee for a period not to exceed two days when operated or
sponsored by and for the benefit of a public, semipublic,
educational, eleemosynary, charitable or religions organization,
based in the Township of Freehold, provided that:
(a) A favorable report is received by the Recreation Commission if
the event involves public lands.
(b) Only one event may occur within the Township on a given day.
(c) No event is scheduled in a traffic-congested area of the
Township as determined by the Police Department.
(d) No merchandise will be displayed or sales made in or in
immediate proximity to an automobile or other motor vehicle.
(e) No group or organization may be permitted more than one
event during the calendar year.
(f) The premises upon which the auction or flea market is
conducted are returned to their prior condition within 24 hours
after termination of the event. If the premises are not so
returned, the Township shall have the right to enter upon
them, return them to their prior condition, and assess the cost
as a lien upon the land.
(g) The sponsor of any auction or flea market conducted in
accordance with the preceding conditions may be required by
the Township Committee to furnish either a performance bond
or cash or other guarantee acceptable to Township Committee
to assure that cleanup occurs after termination of the event.
(3) Home office uses in accordance with § 190-118, Home office use.
[Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-18]
B. For purposes of clarity, and not in any manner diluting the allencompassing
prohibition of Subsection A above, from time to time,
given the advent of new uses, which may evolve and which may bear
similarities to uses either permitted or conditionally permitted in
certain zones, the following are descriptions of specifically prohibited
uses: [Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-12]
(1) Retail or wholesale establishments, businesses, persons or entities
selling or offering for sale:
(a) Marijuana or marijuana products, whether for medicinal and/
or recreational use;
72.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding business-related activities in residential
dwellings, was repealed 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-18. This ordinance also redesignated
former Subsection A(3) as Subsection A(2).
§ 190-117 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-117
186:520
§ 190-118. Home office use.
(b) Paraphernalia that facilitates any use of marijuana, including
but not limited to inhalation, ingestion or injection of any
substance which contains marijuana.
(2) The growing, cultivation or harvesting of any type of marijuana
plant, including but not limited to cannabis sativa, cannabis indica,
and cannabis ruderalis.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to recognize a changing trend in
business whereby people are conducting low-intensity and
unobtrusive businesses from their homes. Many valid and useful
purposes are served by allowing such activity, including but not
limited to:
(a) Diminishing the need to commute, thereby lessening traffic
congestion and air pollution.
(b) Providing residents with an alternative lifestyle which may
decrease stress and increase enjoyment and productivity.
(c) Promote a more economical system for bringing goods or
services to the consuming public at a lower cost.
(d) Accommodate working parents and allow for greater time and
interaction with their children.
(e) Promote the ability of working children and relatives to provide
for the needs of elderly, as well as physically or emotionally
challenged members of their family.
(2) However, all of the foregoing advantages notwithstanding, the first
priority and concern is to preserve the peace and tranquility of the
Township's residential zoning districts. Consistent with that
priority, one intention of this section is to restrict any home office
use so that there is no infringement upon the right of all those
residing in a residential zoning district to enjoy an uncompromised
residential atmosphere. It is not the intention of this section to
encourage or countenance a home office use which would in any
way diminish or compromise the residential atmosphere.
B. Regulations.
(1) Except where otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations of this
chapter, any person may utilize his/her home for a home office use
which is conducted in such a manner as to comply with the
restrictions which follow. The following restrictions shall apply to
all home office uses:
§ 190-117 JUNK DEALERS § 190-118
186:521
(a) At least one person employed in the home in conjunction with
the home office use must be a bona fide resident of that home;
and
(b) All persons employed in the home in conjunction with the home
office use must either be a bona fide resident of that home or a
member of the immediate family (mother, father, husband,
wife, son, daughter, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law) of a bona
fide resident of the home. In no event may more than two
persons who are not bona fide residents of the home be
employed, either part-time or full-time, in conjunction with the
home office use; and
(c) There shall be no external display of goods, no outdoor activity
or storage of any kind, including but not limited to the
assembling or staging of workers or equipment even if the
goods or equipment are at another location, and no onpremises
advertising, including but not limited to signs; and
(d) The street address of the home shall not be listed in any
advertising of the business done by means of signs, billboards,
newspapers, commercial circulars, radio, television, telephone
books or leaflets. This shall not be construed to prohibit use of
the home address on business cards or catalogs or single-line
listing in the white or yellow pages of the telephone book; and
(e) Such home office use shall not occupy more than 10% of the
gross habitable floor area of the home, but in no event is it to
exceed 300 square feet. For purposes of performing this
calculation, all nonhabitable areas shall be excluded, including
but not limited to cellar, basement, attic and porch areas; and
(f) No noise relating to the home office use shall be audible
beyond the dwelling unit; and
(g) Such home office use shall not adversely affect adjacent
property owners, or interfere with the quiet enjoyment of their
properties or create activity or an atmosphere inconsistent
with a strictly residential use; and
(h) No delivery of goods or supplies shall be permitted except by
means and with a frequency which is typical of a strictly
residential use; and
(i) Infrequent or sporadic customers, clients or other business
invitees shall be permitted to visit the premises.
(2) No garage area shall be converted to or used for home office use on
any property located in a higher density residential zoning district.
For purposes of this regulation, a higher density residential zoning
district shall be any residential zone except R-9, R-20, R-40, R-60,
R-80, R-120 and RR.
§ 190-118 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-118
186:522
§ 190-119. Gasoline storage containers.
No container or containers with a cumulative capacity of more than five
gallons above or below ground designed or intended for the storage of
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel shall be permitted on any residential
property, except that this restriction shall not apply to properties devoted to
agriculture, industrial and/or commercial uses.
§ 190-120. Undersized lot for drainage, utility, open space, or other
public facilities. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
Whenever a developer shall propose to locate drainage, utility, open space
or other public facilities on a separate lot, ownership of which will be
dedicated to the local, county or state government, there shall be no
necessity for the developer to seek a variance if any such lot does not
meet the requirements of Schedule C, Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements, at the end of this chapter, if the Planning Board finds that
the lot dimensions are appropriate for the use proposed.
§ 190-121. Lot grading.
Lots shall be graded to provide proper drainage, to prevent the collection
of stormwater, and to prevent adverse impacts on adjoining properties. No
one shall alter the grading of any lot or portion of a lot without first securing
approval from the Municipal Engineer's office.
(3) In any zone in which the expansion of internal living space is
limited by ordinance, the owner of such a unit may, subject to
applicable code requirements, expand the internal area of the unit
by not more than 100 square feet of habitable space for purposes of
creating a home office use.
A. All residential building lots that are part of an approved subdivision or
site plan shall be graded in accordance with the final construction
plans.
B. No construction permit shall be issued for construction of a singlefamily
dwelling on a lot that is not part of an approved subdivision
without first submitting a lot grading plan for review and approval by
the Municipal Engineer's office.
C. No one shall install a retaining wall, gabion wall, crib wall or similar
structures used to control slopes without first securing approval as to
lot grading and drainage from the Municipal Engineer's office.
D. The Construction Official and/or Zoning Officer may refer building
permit applications for additions to existing single-family dwellings or
for accessory buildings or structures which involve disturbance of more
than 500 square feet of land to the Municipal Engineer's office for
review to determine that proper drainage is provided.
§ 190-118 JUNK DEALERS § 190-122
186:523
§ 190-122. Storage of recyclable materials.
A. For each application for 50 or more single-family dwelling units, the
applicant shall provide a storage area of 12 square feet within each
dwelling unit to accommodate a four-week accumulation of designated
recyclable materials (including, but not limited to, aluminum and tin or
bimetal cans, glass bottles and jars, plastic containers and
newspapers). The storage area may be located within a hidden laundry
room, garage, or basement.
B. For each application for 25 or more multifamily dwelling units the
applicant shall provide a storage area of three square feet within each
dwelling unit to accommodate a one-week accumulation of designated
recyclable materials (including, but not limited to, aluminum and tin or
bimetal cans, glass bottles and jars, plastic containers and
newspapers). Within the site, the applicant shall provide a centralized
storage area to accommodate a one-month's supply of recyclable
materials. The storage area shall be designed for truck access for
pickup of materials and shall be suitably screened from view if located
outside a building.
C. For each application for nonresidential development which utilizes
1,000 or more square feet of land, the applicant shall provide the
Planning Board with estimates of the amount of recyclable materials
(including, but not limited to, aluminum and tin or bimetal cans, glass
jars and bottles, plastic containers, newspapers, high grade office
paper and corrugated cardboard) that will be generated each week.
Applicants may obtain information regarding average generation rates
from the New Jersey State Office of Recycling. Within the site, the
applicant shall provide a centralized storage area to accommodate a
one-week's supply of recyclable materials. The storage area shall be
designed for truck access for pickup of materials. Recyclable area
storage areas shall be constructed with a six-inch-thick reinforced
concrete pad base over six inches of compacted dense graded
aggregate base course (DGABC) stone, and shall be surrounded on
three sides by a masonry wall six feet in height that is comprised of the
same or compatible facade material with the exterior design of the
building facade. A solid gate shall be provided on the open side of the
enclosure. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-2]
D. All new multifamily housing developments shall provide an indoor or
outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially
generated recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area
shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which
are of adequate size and number, and which are consistent with
anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the area in
which the project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and
the bins or containers shall be determined in consultation with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator, and shall be consistent with the
district recycling plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102
§ 190-122 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-122
186:524
§ 190-123. Private tennis and other sports courts.
Private tennis and other sports courts (such as basketball, handball, and
roller hockey) are permitted as an accessory use to residential dwellings in
every zone wherein that principal use is permitted subject to the following
requirements:
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13) and the Recycling Plan Element of the Freehold
Township Master Plan.
(1) The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably
near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
(2) The recycling area shall be well lighted, and shall be safely and
easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection
vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area without
interference from parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable
measures shall be taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins
or containers placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials,
bins or containers.
(3) The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the
collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are located
in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid, or
otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
(4) Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to
the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped
with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein. All signs
shall be in conformance with Article XVII, § 190-173 et seq., of this
chapter.
(5) All outdoor recycling areas shall be screened by a solid uniform
wall, fence, or similar enclosure. Landscaping shall also be
provided around any outdoor recycling area in an aesthetically
pleasing manner.
A. Courts shall not be constructed or installed on any premises unless a
residential building is also located on the premises.
B. Courts shall only be located in the rear area of a lot. No court shall be
permitted in the required front yard setback nor in the yard area in
front of a residence that is located at a depth greater than the required
minimum front yard setback.
§ 190-122 JUNK DEALERS § 190-123
186:525
§ 190-124. Steep slope requirements.
C. In the case of a corner lot, a sports court shall not be constructed any
closer to the side yard than the principal structure or the required
minimum side yard, whichever is greater.
D. All court construction, including fencing in excess of six feet, shall be a
minimum of 25 feet from the rear and side yard lines.
E. A fence not to exceed 10 feet in height may be constructed surrounding
a tennis or other sports court, provided that such fencing shall not be
located closer than 25 feet from the rear and side yard lines and shall
conform to requirements of the Construction Official in terms of
construction details. A current survey by a surveyor licensed in the
State of New Jersey may be required by the Township Engineer and/or
Construction Official for determination of the placement of the court,
fencing and any related construction.
F. No lighting shall be permitted.
G. Plans for tennis and other sports courts shall be prepared by a
professional engineer or architect licensed in the State of New Jersey,
submitted to the Township Engineer, and shall comply with the
following:
(1) Court location and construction materials including construction
details.
(2) Grading including proposed location and amount of soil to be
removed or to be placed as fill.
(3) Surface and subsurface drainage. Existing and proposed condition
drainage calculations shall be provided. Additional drainage
resulting from the proposed construction shall be discharged in
stormwater drainage system approved by the Township Engineer,
provided that such system or systems has adequate capacity. If
such system (or systems) does not have adequate capacity for the
additional storm drainage, plans for detention and/or retention
basin shall be provided to the Township Engineer for his review and
approval.
(4) Landscaping plan including location and caliper of trees to be
removed and proposed plantings and buffers along adjacent
properties.
(5) Fencing shall be permitted at a height of six feet at the property
line in accordance with Article XV, § 190-165 et seq. Fencing
around the tennis and sports courts in excess of six feet but not to
exceed 10 feet shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from rear and
side yard lines.
§ 190-123 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-124
186:526
A. Purpose. The Township Committee finds that residential and
nonresidential developments have encroached into steep slope areas,
thereby increasing the likelihood of erosion in periods of moderate or
heavy rainfall and destruction of the natural character of the Township
of Freehold. The Township Committee also finds that disturbance of
steep slope areas of Freehold Township produces including increased
runoff, soil erosion, creation of retaining walls greater than four feet in
height and destruction of mature woodland areas that provide natural
stabilization of steep slopes, gradual natural surface flows to streams
and their tributaries and natural recharge ground water resources in
the headwaters and tributaries of the streams that originate within or
flow through the Township. The Township Committee finds that many of
the steep slope areas are adjacent to streams and their tributaries and
disturbance of these woodlands reduces the natural water filtering
function of the stream banks thereby the water quality of the streams,
increasing the turbidity of the streams and transportation of topsoil
from the Township and reduction of the streams to fulfill their
multifaceted functions of surface drainage, subsurface recharge, and
maintaining the natural stream bank habitat and canopy that is
essential for maintaining and enhancing water quality, water
temperatures and stream benthic and stream-edge vegetation and
wildlife habitats.
B. Any property which is the subject of a minor or major subdivision or site
plan application and which contains slope areas of 12% or greater
having a rise of five vertical feet or greater (hereafter "steep slopes")
shall comply with the provisions set forth below.
C. Existing and proposed lots with steep slopes shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Existing wooded and well-stabilized steep slopes shall not be
disturbed and shall be contained in conservation easements.
(2) Previously disturbed, eroded and/or poorly stabilized steep slopes
in excess of five vertical feet:
(a) The approval board may require filling of the steep slope area
with compacted clean fill to a maximum slope of 25% and
restabilization of the slope as described.
(b) Stabilization of the steep slope area through application of
topsoil, fertilization, seeding, ground cover and tree planting to
promote reforestation based upon a reforestation plan
approved by the approval board.
(c) Steep slopes areas shall be contained in conservation
easements.
(3) If retaining walls are used to stabilize existing or proposed steep
slopes, all slope area measurements will be calculated as if
retaining walls were not used. Retaining walls of four feet or
§ 190-124 JUNK DEALERS § 190-124
186:527
§ 190-124.1. Riparian Zone regulations compliance. [Added
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-13]
Where applicable, there must be compliance with § 190-161.2, Riparian
Zone.
§ 190-124.2. Expansion of existing residential structures on
undersized lots in R-E Rural Environmental Zone. [Added 6-25-2013
by Ord. No. O-13-22]
Property owners of undersized lots containing less than 10 acres that
contain a residential structure as of June 1, 2013, are hereby permitted
to apply for building permits for expansion of such structure, provided
that the resulting structure does not exceed the maximum lot coverage
for all buildings, the maximum lot coverage of all impervious surfaces, the
maximum floor area ratio, the minimum front yard, the minimum side yard
and the minimum rear yard requirements for the R-E Rural Environmental
Zone as shown in Schedule C, Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements.73 For existing structures on undersized lots that have front
and/or side yards less than those required within the R-E Zone, the
expansion of the existing structure shall be located within the rear yard and
shall not be any closer to the street or encroach more into the undersized
side yard (or yards) than the existing structure.
§ 190-124.3. Improved Lots in RR and RE Zones. [Added 8-15-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-11]
greater shall be permitted only if their design is prepared and
certified by a professional engineer licensed in New Jersey.
D. Steep slopes areas shall be maintained in an open space condition and
shall not have any structures constructed within it.
A. Any nonconforming lot currently located in either the Rural Residential
Zone ("RR") or the Rural-Environmental Zone ("RE") shall be allowed to
be further developed in compliance with the R-40, R-60 or R-80 zoning
regulations, depending on which of those three zones in which the lot
was previously located ("previous zone"), without seeking waivers or
bulk variances from the RR or RE zoning regulations, if such
nonconforming lot complies with each of the following:
(1) Such lot was on April 25, 2000 (hereafter the "rezoning date"),
previously zoned R-40, R-60 or R-80.
(2) Such lot was, at the rezoning date, improved with an occupied
residential dwelling.
(3) Such lot is currently in compliance with the previous zone zoning
regulations or it can be documented that it had been granted
73.Editor's Note: Schedule C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-124 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-124.3
186:528
§ 190-124.4. Emergency standby generators for filling stations.
[Added 7-23-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-12]
Any gasoline filling station, gasoline service station, gasoline filling stations
with convenience stores or any other location dispensing gasoline and
diesel fuel to the public shall have an appropriately sized emergency
standby generator system as defined in § 190-3, capable of operating fuel
pumps, cash registers and lighted signs in the event of power outage for
at least 18 hours. Separate convenience store facilities need not have an
emergency standby generator system, to the extent that the facilities set
forth herein have such a system.
waiver or variance relief by the appropriate land use agency as to
any existing nonconformity.
(4) Such lot has not, since the rezoning date, been subject to/part of a
subdivision approval which reduced the lot’s size.
(5) Such lot has not, since the rezoning date, been located adjacent to
any land which was under the same legal, equitable or constructive
ownership.
(6) The proposed development activity is permitted by and would be
undertaken in compliance with the current zoning regulations for
the previous zone.
B. No subdivision of such lot shall be allowed under the provisions of this
section.
§ 190-124.3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-124.4
186:529

ARTICLE XIII
Zone Regulations
§ 190-125. Rural Residential RR.
The Rural Residential RR Zone encompasses lands with a prevailing highwater
table and sensitive environmental features including regional aquifer
recharge areas, broad floodplains, headwaters and tributaries of major
streams which are designated for future surface water reservoir use, and
wetlands soils. These circumstances require differentiation of densities
based upon the availability of public sanitary sewer and public water
service.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Farms.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Public buildings.
(4) Single-family dwellings.
(5) The keeping of horses or ponies subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Not more than one horse or pony shall be kept on a lot of
approximately two acres in size (80,000 square feet), provided
it is enclosed in a pen or corral containing at least 3,000 square
feet, including a structure containing a box stall of
approximately five by eight feet plus 100 square feet for feed
and tack room, and further provided that such structure is not
closer than 40 feet to adjacent property lines. All fencing shall
be at least five feet from any property line.
(b) Not more than three horses or ponies shall be kept on a lot of
approximately three acres, provided that they are enclosed in a
pen or corral containing 3,000 square feet for the first horse or
pony and 2,000 square feet for each additional horse or pony,
including a structure containing box stalls of approximately
100 square feet and/or straight stalls of approximately five by
eight feet per horse and further provided that such structures
are not closer than 40 feet to adjacent property lines. An
additional acre shall be required for each additional horse.
(c) Stable management.
[1] Stables must be maintained free of offensive odors, flybreeding
or other horse connected nuisances.
[2] Manure must be collected and disposed of in a sanitary
manner.
§ 190-125 JUNK DEALERS § 190-125
186:531
§ 190-126. Rural-Environmental Zone R-E.
The Rural-Environmental R-E Zone encompasses lands within the
Manasquan River, Toms River, and Metedeconk River watersheds and their
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garage with a maximum capacity for garaging no more than
three automotive vehicles, whether attached and/or within a
freestanding accessory building, which garaging area shall not
exceed 24 feet by 36 feet and 864 square feet. [Amended
9-24-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-30]
(2) A single toolshed or similar storage building not exceeding 192
square feet in building area.
(3) Private swimming pools.
(4) Fences.
(5) Signs.
(6) Outdoor barbecue structures.
(7) Shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area does not
exceed 30 square feet.
(8) Essential utilities.
(9) Farm storage sheds and barns.
(10) Aboveground heating oil storage tanks.
(11) Gazebo, pergola, arbor or similar open structure not exceeding 192
square feet in building area and not exceeding 16 feet in height.
[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-10]
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Veteran and service organization facilities.
(2) Campgrounds.
(3) Golf courses and country clubs.
(4) Houses of worship. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) Public, private and parochial schools.
(7) Cluster development.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
§ 190-125 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-126
186:532
tributaries in areas that are not serviced by public sewers. The R-E Zone
contains lands with a prevailing high-water table, freshwater wetlands,
floodplains, and other sensitive environmental features including regional
aquifer recharge areas, broad floodplains and freshwater wetland areas
and lands that are surrounded by or drain to these lands. The headwaters
and tributary areas of the Manasquan and Metedeconk Rivers contribute to
surface waters that are utilized or planned for reservoirs for surface water
for potable water purposes. The R-E Zone also provides for the designation
of the nationally significant historic Monmouth Battlefield State Park and
maintains the historic and scenic rural roadways that traverse the Turkey
Swamp area of Freehold Township.
§ 190-127. Rural Residential/Planned Adult Community (RR/PAC)
Zone District.
In addition to the uses permitted in the R-R (Rural Residential) Zone
District, in the RR/PAC Zone District, single-family detached residential
cluster development shall be permitted, consisting of single-family detached
age-restricted adult housing units and community amenities as provided for
herein, subject to the following standards and requirements:
A. Permitted uses: same as RR Rural Residential zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as RR Rural Residential Zone.
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Campgrounds.
(2) Golf courses and country clubs.
(3) Houses of worship. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
(4) Cemeteries.
(5) Accessory apartment.
(6) Cluster development.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. General tract requirements.
(1) The minimum gross tract area for a planned retirement community
shall be 200 acres.
(2) The development shall be serviced by public water supply and
public sanitary sewer facilities.
(3) The density of development in the RR/PAC Zone District shall not
exceed 1.5 units per gross acre.
§ 190-126 JUNK DEALERS § 190-127
186:533
(4) The development shall have a minimum of two access points to a
public road.
(5) Not more than 20% of the entire tract shall be covered by
buildings.
(6) Not more than 40% of the entire tract shall be covered by
impervious surface.
B. Building requirements. Only age-restricted single-family detached
dwelling units and community facilities shall be permitted and all
residential lots shall conform to the following schedule:
(1) Minimum lot area: 5,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet; except that on a cul-de-sac or street
with a curved alignment having an outside radius of 500 feet or
less, lot frontage shall not be less than 75% of the required lot
frontage. For corner lots, the smaller of the two lot lines coexistent
with the street line shall be considered the lot frontage.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet except 110 feet if lot will contain a
rear yard drainpipe.
(4) Minimum lot width: 55 feet at the front building setback line.
(5) Minimum front setback line: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: seven feet; driveways shall have a side yard
setback of five feet, except that on a cul-de-sac or street with a
curved alignment, the side yard setback for the driveway may be
reduced to two feet at the front lot line.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 30 feet and two stories, the front
elevation shall not give an appearance of greater than 1 1/2 stories.
(9) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 65%.
(10) Decks/patios: same as principal structures except rear yard
setback: 10 feet.
(11) Sheds: not permitted.
(12) Minimum building size: 1,300 square feet of habitable floor area,
with a minimum of an attached one-car garage and a minimum 80
cubic feet of storage space in addition to standard closets.
C. Recreation and common elements. A planned adult community shall
provide developed and undeveloped open space and common
recreational or community facilities for the exclusive use of its
residents, in accordance with the following standards:
§ 190-127 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-127
186:534
(1) Not less than 30% of the gross tract area shall be devoted to
common open space, and such common open space shall be
restricted, owned and maintained by a homeowner's association.
The common open space may include man-made lakes. All critical
areas on the site, including wetlands, floodplains and the like, shall
be encompassed within the common open space provided.
(2) There shall be not less than 15 square feet of floor space per
dwelling unit provided in a community or clubhouse building,
which building shall have a minimum floor area of at least 5,000
square feet. Such facility shall be designed and equipped to meet
the social and recreational needs of the anticipated residents. This
may include hobby and craft rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms,
card rooms, kitchen, social hall, rooms providing support facilities
for outdoor recreation facilities or other similar facilities, as
required to meet the needs of persons 55 years of age and older.
The building shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet in height.
(3) Within the common open space, facilities shall be included for
outdoor recreational use, storage and maintenance. These facilities
shall include, as a minimum, a tennis court and an inground
swimming pool and their related improvements, such as parking,
lighting and ancillary buildings, and may also include, by way of
illustration and not limitation, picnic areas, walking, jogging and
bicycle paths, paddle boat facilities, fishing areas, shuffleboard,
bocce and horseshoe courts, other racquet sport courts, chipping
and putting greens, a practice golf course and other appropriate
facilities.
(4) The community clubhouse and pool shall be operational on or prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for 50% of the approved
residential units.
D. Perimeter setback requirements. No buildings or structures, other than
roadways, access drives, walking, jogging and bicycle paths, walkways,
entrance gatehouses, walls, fences, or drainage facilities and utility
structures, shall be located within 50 feet of any exterior tract
boundary, and the outer 25 feet of the perimeter setback shall be
designated as a landscape/conservation easement.
E. Deed restrictions. Approval of a planned adult community shall be
conditioned upon the placement of restrictive covenants on the deeds to
any and all portions of the tract so developed to:
(1) Insure that the age-restricted units qualify as "55 or over housing"
within the meaning of the Federal Fair Housing Act. The agerestrictive
covenants shall be subject to review by the Township
Attorney.
(2) Garages shall not be converted to habitable space.
§ 190-127 JUNK DEALERS § 190-127
186:535
§ 190-128. Residential Zone R-120.
§ 190-129. Residential Zone R-80.
F. Other ordinances. In the event of any conflict between the provisions
and requirements of this section and the provisions and requirements of
any other subsections, the provisions and requirements of this section
shall govern.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-120 Residential Zone is to permit lowintensity
residential development within the Lake Topanemus
Watershed area in order to minimize stormwater runoff and subsurface
drainage pollution in accordance with the requirements of the Lake
Topanemus Watershed Conservation District requirements.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Farms, provided that no livestock or horse farms shall be
permitted.
(2) Single-family dwellings.
(a) On minimum lot size and yard area requirements: in
accordance with Schedule C at the end of this chapter.
(b) On variable lot sizes: in accordance with § 190-161.
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public buildings.
C. Permitted accessory uses: same as R-R Zone.
D. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
(Reserved) [Amended 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-11]
E. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Farms.
(2) Single-family dwellings. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
(a) On minimum lot size and yard area requirements: in
accordance with Schedule C at the end of this chapter.
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public buildings.
(5) Keeping of horses and ponies in accordance with § 190-125A(5) in
the RR Zone District.
§ 190-127 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-129
186:536
(6) Houses of worship on principal arterial highways, minor arterial
highways, major collector streets, minor collector streets and
collector streets as defined and listed in the Circulation Plan
Element of the Freehold Township Master Plan. Houses of worship
shall be required to have a one-hundred-foot front yard setback and
seventy-five-foot side yards, but otherwise shall be governed by the
P-1 Zone in terms of other bulk standards, building coverage,
impervious surface coverage and other site design standards.
[Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-1174]
(7) Planned adult community. A planned adult community is permitted
as an overlay zone on Block 96, Lots 22, 24, 25 and 26, east of
Jackson Mills, north of Georgia Road, in accordance with a
settlement agreement in the matter of Isaacs Estate et al. vs.
Mayor and Township Committee of the Township of Freehold in
accordance with the following:
(a) General tract requirements.
[1] The minimum gross tract area for a planned retirement
community shall be 40 acres.
[2] The development shall be serviced by public water supply
and public sanitary sewer facilities.
[3] The density of development in the PAC Overlay Zone
District shall not exceed 1.9 units per gross acre and shall
not exceed the following number of dwelling units: Lots 22
and 24: 75 dwelling units combined. If Lot 25 and/or Lot
26 are added to the PAC, additional PAC dwellings may be
added as follows: Lot 25: 2 dwelling units, and Lot 26: 2
dwellings.
[4] Not more than 20% of the entire tract shall be covered by
buildings.
[5] Not more than 40% of the entire tract shall be covered by
impervious surface.
(b) Building requirements. Only age-restricted single-family
detached dwelling units and community facilities shall be
permitted, and all residential lots shall conform to the
following schedule:
[1] Minimum lot area: 6,600 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage: 55 feet; except that on a cul-de-sac
or street with a curved alignment having an outside radius
of 500 feet or less, lot frontage shall not be less than 75%
of the required lot frontage. For corner lots, the smaller of
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(6) as Subsection A(7).
§ 190-129 JUNK DEALERS § 190-129
186:537
the two lot lines coexistent with the street line shall be
considered the lot frontage. [Amended 4-24-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-9]
[3] Minimum lot width: 55 feet at the front building setback
line. [Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-9]
[4] Minimum lot depth: 110 feet.
[5] Minimum front setback line: 20 feet.
[6] Minimum side yard: seven feet; driveways shall have a side
yard setback of five feet, except that on a cul-de-sac or
street with a curved alignment, the side yard setback for
the driveway may be reduced to two feet at the front lot
line.
[7] Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. The projection of two feet or
less of a fireplace or chimney shall not be deemed a
violation of the rear yard requirements.
[8] Maximum building height: 30 feet and two stories; the
front elevation shall not give an appearance of greater
than 1 1/2 stories.
[9] Maximum impervious lot coverage: 60%.
[10] Decks/patios: same as principal structures except rear
yard setback: 10 feet.
[11] Sheds: not permitted.
[12] All PAC dwelling units shall, as a minimum, provide an
attached one-car garage and a minimum 80 cubic feet of
storage space in addition to standard closets.
(c) Recreation and common elements. A planned adult community
shall provide developed and undeveloped open space and
common recreational or community facilities for the exclusive
use of its residents in accordance with the following standards:
[1] Not less than 30% of the gross tract area shall be devoted
to common open space, and such common open space shall
be restricted, owned and maintained by a homeowners’
association. The common open space may include manmade
lakes. All critical areas on the site, including
wetlands, floodplains and the like, shall be encompassed
within the common open space provided.
[2] There shall be not less than 15 square feet of floor space
per dwelling unit provided in a community or clubhouse
building, which building shall have a minimum floor area
of at least 1,200 square feet. Such facility shall be
§ 190-129 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-129
186:538
designed and equipped to meet the social and recreational
needs of the anticipated residents. This may include hobby
and craft rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms, card
rooms, kitchen, social hall, rooms providing support
facilities for outdoor recreation facilities or other similar
facilities, as required to meet the needs of persons 55
years of age and older. The building shall not exceed two
stories or 35 feet in height.
[3] Within the common open space, facilities shall be included
for outdoor recreational use, storage and maintenance.
These facilities shall include, as a minimum, a tennis court
and their related improvements, such as parking, lighting
and ancillary buildings, and may also include, by way of
illustration and not limitation, picnic areas, walking,
jogging and bicycle paths, paddle boat facilities, fishing
areas, shuffleboard, bocce and horseshoe courts, other
racquet sport courts, chipping and putting greens and
other appropriate facilities.
[4] The community clubhouse shall be operational on or prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for 50% of the
approved residential units.
(d) Perimeter setback requirements. No buildings or structures,
other than roadways, access drives, walking, jogging and
bicycle paths, walkways, entrance gatehouses, walls, fences or
drainage facilities and utility structures, shall be located within
50 feet of any exterior tract boundary, and the outer 25 feet of
the perimeter setback shall be designated as a landscape/
conservation easement.
(e) Deed restrictions. Approval of a planned adult community shall
be conditioned upon the placement of restrictive covenants on
the deeds to any and all portions of the tract so developed to:
[1] Insure that the age restricted units qualify as “55 or Over
Housing” within the meaning of the Federal Fair Housing
Act (42 USC 3601 et seq.) and applicable United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development
Regulations. The age restrictive covenants shall be subject
to review by the Township Attorney.
[2] Garages shall not be converted to habitable space.
(f) The PAC development shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, the New Jersey Stormwater Management
Regulations and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
§ 190-129 JUNK DEALERS § 190-129
186:539
§ 190-130. Residential Zone R-60.
(g) The PAC development shall provide 12.5% of all units as
affordable housing units in accordance with N.J.A.C. 94-1 et
seq. and the provisions of Article XX, Affordable Housing.
(h) Other ordinances. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions and requirements of this subsection and the
provisions and requirements of any other subsections, the
provisions and requirements of this subsection shall govern.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as R-R Zone.
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Public schools.75 [Amended 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-3]
(2) Accessory apartment.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Farms.
(2) Single-family dwellings.
(a) On minimum lot size: in accordance with Schedule C at the end
of this chapter.
(b) On variable lot sizes: in accordance with § 190-161.
(c) On rural improvement lots subject to the following:
[1] Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 100,000 square
feet.
[2] Each lot shall have a minimum width and depth of 250
feet.
[3] Minimum tract size of 30 acres.
[4] Rural improvements shall be as set forth in § 190-87V.
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public buildings.
(5) Keeping of horses or ponies in accordance with § 190-125A(5) in
the R-R Zone District.
75.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), Houses of worship, as amended 9-25-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-25, was repealed 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11. This ordinance also
renumbered former Subsection C(2) and (3) as Subsection C(1) and (2), respectively.
§ 190-129 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-130
186:540
§ 190-131. Residential Zone R-40. [Amended 5-13-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-11; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48; 9-25-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-25; 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-37]
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for R-R Zone.
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Houses of worship. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
(2) Public schools. [Amended 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-3]
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Purpose. The principal purpose of the R-40 Residential Zone is to
permit the development of single-family housing units on individual
lots, to provide for conditional uses compatible with single-family-home
neighborhoods, and to permit long-term and nursing home facilities in
designated R-40 Overlay Zones. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-25]
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Farms.
(2) Single-family dwellings on minimum lot sizes in accordance with
Schedule C.76
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Purpose. The principal purpose of the R-40 Residential Zone is to
permit the development of single family housing units on individual
lots and to provide for conditional uses compatible with single
family home neighborhoods.
(5) Public buildings.
(6) The keeping of horses or ponies (same as R-R Zone).
C. Permitted accessory uses: same as R-R Zone.
D. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Swim clubs.
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public schools. [Amended 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-3]
(4) Veteran and service organization facilities.
76.Editor's Note: Schedule C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-130 JUNK DEALERS § 190-131
186:541
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) Supportive-care housing for low- and moderate-income senior
citizens and the handicapped.
(7) R-40 cluster development per § 190-202.1. [Added 2-26-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-5]
E. Area, yard and building requirements for uses permitted in Subsection
B above: as specified in Schedule C.77,78 [Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-25]
F. R-40 Overlay Zone. [Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-25]
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) All uses permitted in Subsection B.
(b) Long-term-care and assisted-living residential facilities
licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:39-1 et seq., Standards for
Licensure of Long-Term-Care Facilities.
(c) Nursing home facilities licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:33H-1 et
seq., Certificate of Need: Policy Manual for Long-Term-Care
Facilities.
(d) Outpatient clinics, medical laboratories and professional
medical offices which are part of and located within a longterm-
care facility as permitted in Subsection F(1)(b) and (c)
and defined herein.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Fences in accordance with the Freehold Township fence
regulations contained in § 190-165.
(b) Signs in accordance with Article XVII, Signs, and as permitted
in § 190-179 of this chapter.
(c) Common parking areas.
(d) Common storage structures and facilities subject to the same
limitations and requirements as the principal structures.
(e) Physical therapy facilities.
(f) Entertainment facilities.
(g) Libraries.
77.Editor's Note: Schedule C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 18-38-2.1, Residential Zone R-40G, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed by Ordinance No. O-99-6.
§ 190-131 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-131
186:542
(h) Food preparation facilities.
(i) Dining facilities.
(j) Linen service facilities.
(k) Housekeeping service facilities.
(l) Security facilities, administrative offices, ancillary office space,
storage facilities, chapels, and facilities for the temporary
lodging of patients or residents.
(3) Area, yard and building requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 500 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 350 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: four stories/50 feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(f) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.35.
(g) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 90 feet from an
existing public street right-of-way.
(h) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from any
property line within a residential zone.
(i) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a
parking area (except for loading and unloading areas for
persons and supplies).
(j) Building height shall not exceed four stories or 50 feet.
(k) Required planted screening. A planted screen area along the
rear and side yards of the site adjacent to residential uses not
less than 20 feet in width shall be provided containing
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such a
manner that will provide a visual screen throughout the entire
year. Where an area required for a planted screen has existing
plants and shrubs, it shall be left in its natural state to the
greatest extent practicable, and existing vegetation shall be
supplemented with additional plant material where deemed
necessary.
(l) Required planted screening areas shall be used for no other
purpose than as a screen area. Structures which may be
erected within a buffer area include fences, as elsewhere
regulated in this chapter, stormwater management structures
(including but not limited to basins, swales and related
improvements), provided such facilities shall be suitably
§ 190-131 JUNK DEALERS § 190-131
186:543
§ 190-132. Residential Zone R-40/P.
§ 190-133. Residential Zone R-25.
landscaped to be visually compatible and harmonious with
the surrounding natural and/or planted screening areas. All
nonpaved areas shall conform with Article XV, Fence and
Buffer Regulations.
(m) Parking spaces shall provide for a minimum of 1.25 parking
spaces per peak-hour employee rates, including required
handicapped parking spaces in accordance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
A. Permitted uses: same as for R-40 Zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for R-40 Zone.
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Same as § 190-131D. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-37]
(2) Professional offices as permitted in accordance with § 190-151.
D. Area, yard and building requirements as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter. [Added 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-37]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Farms.
(2) Single-family dwellings on minimum lot sizes in accordance with
Schedule C.79 [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-37]
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public buildings.
(5) County nursing homes.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for R-40 Zone. [Amended
4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-10; 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-37]
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
(1) Swim clubs.
(2) Houses of worship. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
(3) Public schools. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-37;
1-29-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-3]
79.Editor's Note: Schedule C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-131 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-133
186:544
§ 190-134. Residential Zone R-20.
§ 190-135. Residential Zone R-15.
§ 190-136. Residential Zone R-12.
(4) Veteran and service organization facilities.80
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses: same as for R-25 Zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for R-25 Zone, except that private
garages shall not exceed a maximum of two automotive vehicles'
capacity whether attached and/or within a freestanding building, which
garaging area shall not exceed 24 feet by 24 feet or 576 square feet.
[Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-10; 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-30]
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: same as
for R-25 Zone.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses: same as for R-25 Zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for R-25 Zone, except that private
garages shall not exceed a maximum of two automotive vehicles'
capacity whether attached and/or within a freestanding building, which
garaging area shall not exceed 24 feet by 24 feet and 576 square feet.
[Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-10; 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-30]
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: same as
for R-25 Zone.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses: same as for R-25 Zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for R-25 Zone, except that private
garages shall not exceed a maximum of two automotive vehicles'
capacity whether attached and/or within a freestanding building, which
garaging area shall not exceed 24 feet by 24 feet and 576 square feet.
[Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-10; 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-30]
80.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(5), Golf courses and country clubs, and (6),
Cemeteries, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 12-22-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-37.
§ 190-133 JUNK DEALERS § 190-136
186:545
§ 190-137. Residential Zone R-9.
§ 190-138. High Density Zone.
§ 190-139. PC Planned Community.
The provisions of this section shall apply to those premises upon which
preliminary site plan approval has been granted, i.e., a certain planned
adult community development known as "Wemrock Farms."
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: same as
for R-25 Zone.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses: same as for R-25 Zone, except mobile home parks are
not permitted.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for R-25 Zone, except that private
garages shall not exceed a maximum of two automotive vehicles'
capacity whether attached and/or within a freestanding building, which
garaging area shall not exceed 24 feet by 24 feet and 576 square feet.
[Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-10; 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-30]
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: same as
for R-25 Zone, except cemeteries are not permitted.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Garden apartments.
(2) Townhouses.
(3) Farms.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as in M-1 Zone.
C. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter and as set forth in the schedule.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Townhouses, which may be on lots to be held in fee simple
ownership in accordance with the requirements hereinafter set
forth.
(2) Patio homes, which may be on lots to be held in fee simple
ownership in accordance with the requirements hereinafter set
forth.
§ 190-136 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-139
186:546
(3) Condominiums.
(4) Recreation centers and facilities.
(5) Multifamily units.
(6) Golf courses.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Outdoor barbecue structures.
(2) Essential utilities.
(3) Parks and playgrounds.
(4) Detached garages.
(5) Patio, on grade only.
C. Area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Townhouses.
(a) Front yard setback: 20 feet.
(b) Rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(c) Side yards.
[1] Ten feet from all buildings or structures.
[2] Fifteen feet from all streets including corner lots.
(d) Lot size.
[1] Minimum 2,000 square feet in area.
[2] Minimum 20 feet in width.
(2) Patio homes.
(a) Front yard setback: 20 feet.
(b) Rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(3) Side yards:
(a) Ten feet from all buildings or structures.
(b) Fifteen feet from all streets.
(4) Lot size:
(a) Minimum 4,000 square feet in area.
(b) Minimum 40 feet in width.
§ 190-139 JUNK DEALERS § 190-139
186:547
(5) Multifamily units.
(a) There shall be no more than 16 dwelling units in one building
or structure.
(b) No single building or structure shall exceed 200 feet in length
along a linear plain.
(c) Setback requirements:
[1] Side to side: 15 feet.
[2] Side to front: 15 feet.
[3] Rear to rear: 25 feet.
[4] Corner to corner: 20 feet.
[5] Building to roadway: 15 feet.
[6] Building to parking area: 10 feet.
[7] Building to boundary of tract: 50 feet.
(d) Area.
[1] One-bedroom units shall have a minimum gross habitable
floor area of 750 square feet.
[2] Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum gross habitable
floor area of 900 square feet.
D. Development standards.
(1) No building, structure or parking area shall be located closer than
100 feet from any exterior boundary line of the tract.
(2) All streets, driveways and parking facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter with the
following exceptions:
(a) Collector streets shall be constructed with a base of
bituminous concrete stabilized base mix SMI to a minimum
thickness of five inches; collector streets shall have a surface
course of FABC-1 bituminous concrete Mix #5 to a minimum
thickness of two inches; further, the Township Engineer may
determine that in specific locations a subcourse of Type 5 Class
A road stone is required due to unsuitable subbase conditions.
In those instances, said stone shall be installed at the locations
and to the depths required by the Township Engineer.
(b) All other streets, driveways and parking facilities shall be
constructed in the following manner: A base of bituminous
concrete stabilized base Mix SM-1 to a minimum thickness of
four inches; a surface course of FABC-1 bituminous concrete
§ 190-139 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-139
186:548
Mix #5 to a minimum thickness of 1 1/2; further, the Township
Engineer may determine that in specific locations a subcourse
of Type 5 Class A road stone is required due to unsuitable
subbase conditions. In those instances, said stone shall be
installed at the locations and to the depths required by the
Township Engineer.
(3) There shall be no less than two square feet of floor space per
dwelling unit provided in community recreational buildings. Such
facilities shall be designated and equipped to meet the social and
recreational needs of the anticipated residents.
(4) Adequate landscaping shall be provided with the site plan and a
landscaping plan shall be provided for each section and approved
prior to construction.
(5) Not less than 5% of the gross area of the tract shall be set aside and
developed for outdoor recreation which land shall be computed as
part of the open green area. This may include swimming pools and
related facilities, shuffleboard and horseshoe courts, tennis courts
or other appropriate facilities.
(6) There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of walks
between all sections accessible to all occupants.
(7) Artificial lighting shall be provided along all walks and interior
roads and driveways and in all off-street parking areas sufficient for
the safety and convenience of the residents and shall be approved
prior to construction.
(8) Not less than 30% of the gross shall be devoted to open green area.
(9) All utility services within the territorial area shall be underground
in proper conduits or ducts insofar as possible and shall, where,
applicable, be in accordance with the standards, terms, and
conditions incorporated as part of the utilities tariff as the same are
then on file with the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities; and shall,
where applicable, comply with the latest regulations, standards
and specifications established by any statute or ordinance of any
state, local department or bureau applicable thereto. Written
evidence of compliance with the above shall be submitted for each
service utility.
E. Approval procedure. Application and approval shall be by the site plan
regulations contained in this chapter; provided, however, that where
the developer proposes to construct townhouses or patio homes on
individual lots to be held in fee simple ownership as permitted in this
chapter, the developer shall also follow the procedures set forth in the
chapter pertaining to approval of major subdivisions. The developer
shall not be required to submit different maps or plats in order to
secure such approval, provided that any maps submitted shall comply
§ 190-139 JUNK DEALERS § 190-139
186:549
with the requirements of the ordinance pertaining to major subdivisions
and the requirements of the New Jersey Map Filing Law.
F. Building requirements.
(1) Individually secured storage space for the occupant's use and
storage space for equipment and supplies for the project operation
and maintenance shall be provided in suitable locations within the
project. Not less than 250 cubic feet shall be provided for each
dwelling unit.
(2) All buildings shall be provided with adequate heating and cooling
systems to comply with state codes currently in effect.
(3) Dwelling units may be one- and two-bedroom units. One-bedroom
units shall have a minimum gross habitable floor area of 750 square
feet and two-bedroom units shall have a minimum gross habitable
floor area of 900 square feet.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall have bath facilities, including as a
minimum a lavatory, toilet, and bathtub or stall shower. The floor
finish shall be impervious to water, have nonslip characteristics and
slope inward. The threshold shall be flush with the floor.
(5) Stall showers may include a built-in seat or bench or room enough
for a bath stool.
(6) Openable windows operated from across the bathtub will not be
permitted.
(7) All dwelling units shall contain heat and smoke detector units of a
type and in accordance with the applicable Township ordinances.
(8) Ventilation fans must be so controlled that they can be operated
independently from the lighting. Convenient outlets in bedrooms
shall be integrated with electric wall fixtures. No other convenient
outlets will be permitted in the bathroom.
(9) If heating, cooking or any other facility or equipment are to use any
source of heat or energy other than electricity, then the distribution
thereof shall be made from a common storage area through pipes;
the storage and pipes shall be underground. There shall be
separate meters for each dwelling unit and for each separate use of
the common storage facility.
(10) Small infirmaries, medical and first aid rooms to provide
observation, minor treatment and short term nursing care of
project residents and their guests may be built.
(11) Where practical, self-service laundry facilities for the common use
of the residents may be provided in a convenient location or
locations.
§ 190-139 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-139
186:550
G. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Streets, driveways and parking areas shall be plowed free of snow
for their full width or dimensions within six hours after the
cessation of snowfall.
(2) All water and sanitary systems and facilities shall be constructed
and operated in accordance with Township ordinances and
applicable rules and regulations of the Township Board of Health or
the New Jersey Department of Health, whichever shall have
jurisdiction. No individual wells or sewer disposal systems shall be
permitted, and each building shall be serviced with utilities by a
central supply or disposal system approved by the appropriate
agencies. No building permit shall be issued unless and until plans
for such facilities have been submitted to the proper authorities for
approval and adequate provisions are made to ensure that such
necessary facilities shall be installed. Separate water services and
metering shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
(3) As far as is practical, development of nonresidential uses and
facilities shall proceed at the same rate as the dwelling units.
(4) Other standards and conditions relating to the uses permitted and
required in any building, structure or any area of the planned adult
community facilities and services may be required as standards and
conditions by the Planning Board, provided such conditions and
standards further the purpose of this chapter and promote the
health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Township, whether
resident with the planned adult community, or not.
(5) No structure or portion of a structure constructed as a private
garage or storage area shall be converted into living area.
H. Technical subdivisions permitted.
(1) While subdivisions are not necessarily required for multiple family
residence developments, it is recognized that the project to be
developed pursuant to this subsection may be of such size as to
make sectionalization by subdivision and different forms of
ownership a practical necessity. The Township recognizes that
technical subdivisions for such a project may be required for
marketing and/or financing purposes. It is further recognized that
the size of the development referred to in this subsection, as a
practical necessity, may require the creation of recreational
facilities for use of all of the unit owners with such owners owning
their unit under different forms of ownership, thus further
indicating the likelihood of a technical subdivision to meet such
practical needs.
(2) While the Township recognizes that any technical subdivision shall
require the approval of the Planning Board, it also appears that any
such subdivision will not modify or impact on the integrity of the
§ 190-139 JUNK DEALERS § 190-139
186:551
§ 190-140. PUD Planned Unit Development.
The intent of this zone is to regulate development in a planned unit
development but to permit flexibility in design standards in order to
promote creative design concepts for the development. It is further
intended to provide a higher level of amenities and to provide for protected
natural open spaces of the site.
development plan, and the Township hereby desires to state its
intent that such subdivision be deemed "technical" in nature.
(3) Accordingly, subdivisions of lands which are either to be conveyed
to a homeowners' association and/or a community homeowners'
association within the project referred to in this subsection or
which consists of recreational facilities which, prior to the
completion of the project, will be constructed or completed by
developer and thereafter conveyed to a homeowners' association
and/or a community homeowners' association, shall be permitted
upon application being made therefor by the owner.
A. General location criteria. Any tract proposed to be developed as a
planned unit development shall have the following locational
characteristics and qualifications.
(1) It shall have direct access and a minimum frontage of 400 feet on a
major collector or a secondary arterial road as designated on the
Township Master Plan of roads.
(2) The amount of frontage on major roads shall be sufficient to
provide not less than two distinct and direct means of access to the
entire tract.
B. Minimum size of development. The following tract size of a planned unit
development shall be 75 acres and shall include the total land area
within the boundaries designated for residential use, commercial and
office use, open spaces, parking and driveways.
C. Permitted uses. The following types of land uses are permitted within
the planned unit development zone.
(1) Semiattached single-family units (patio homes, duplex units) and
townhouses.
(2) Neighborhood commercial. General business activities, including
such activities as retail sales, offices and banks, eating and
drinking establishments and personal services.
(3) Recreational facilities for the PUD residents, such as tennis courts,
swimming pool, shuffle board and clubhouse.
D. Open space. The minimum amount of open space to be designated
within a planned unit development community shall be at least 20% of
the gross acreage of the project.
§ 190-139 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140
186:552
E. Area, height and setback requirements (semiattached single-family
units and townhouses):
(1) Lot size. A lot shall have a minimum area of 3,500 square feet with
a minimum width of 20 feet at setback line and depth of 90 feet.
(2) Height. No unit shall exceed 2 1/2 stories in height or 35 feet.
(a) Front yard. Units shall have a minimum front yard requirement
of 20 feet from the front property line.
(b) Side yard. All units shall have a minimum side yard
requirement of zero feet on one side and six feet on the other
side, except that these requirements shall not apply to ongrade
patios and fences.
(c) Rear yard. All units shall have a minimum rear yard of 20 feet.
(3) Minimum unit size. One- or two-bedroom units shall have a
minimum gross habitable floor area of 1,000 square feet, and threebedroom
units shall have a minimum gross habitable floor area of
1,100 square feet.
F. Development standards.
(1) No residential building or structure shall be located closer than 50
feet from any exterior boundary line of the tract nor closer than 25
feet from any public road right-of-way or 30 feet from any internal
collector road.
(2) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for all units and shall
have a minimum of 2.0 spaces per dwelling unit, one of which may
be enclosed as a garage. Visitor parking shall have a minimum of
0.5 spaces per dwelling unit. No structure or portion of a structure
constructed as a private garage or storage area shall be converted
into living area.
(3) A community building shall be provided for social and recreational
use of the residents and shall have floor space of no less than four
square feet per dwelling unit.
(4) Landscaping plans shall be provided at time of submission of
preliminary plans.
(5) Not less than 5% of the gross area of the tract shall be set aside and
developed for outdoor recreation which land shall be included as
part of the open green area, including but not limited to swimming
pools and related facilities, bicycle and walk paths, tennis courts or
other appropriate facilities.
§ 190-140 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.1
186:553
§ 190-140.1. PUD-1 Planned Unit Development-1 Zone. [Added
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-19]
Purpose: The purpose of the Planned Unit Development-1 Zone is to provide
a range of commercial, retail and multifamily residential uses to be
designed for a single tract in accordance with a comprehensive plan with
regard to the location of uses, buildings, parking, open space, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation networks and related site improvements.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Retail sales and service stores, including garden centers.
(2) Retail stack/storage and wholesale clubs, including garden centers.
(3) Personal service establishments.
(4) Restaurants, including fast food and drive-through restaurants that
do not access directly onto and off a public road.
(5) Office buildings for professional, executive or administrative
purposes, and related business support services.
(6) Hotels and conference centers, which shall contain a minimum of
100 guest rooms and which may also include ancillary restaurant,
meeting, banquet, fitness and guest service facilities.
(7) Municipal and other governmental facilities.
(8) Public utility installations and structures.
(9) Banks, with or without drive-through facilities, that do not access
directly onto and off a public roadway, financial institutions,
insurance and real estate businesses.
(10) Theaters, assembly halls, bowling alleys, sporting arenas, fitness
and physical therapy centers, and other public recreation and
entertainment facilities.
(11) Passenger bus stations.
(12) Gasoline filling stations with convenience stores provided they
meet the following:
(a) No direct access onto or off a public roadway.
(b) The convenience store contains a minimum of 4,000 square
feet of floor area.
(c) No repair work shall be permitted.
(d) There shall be no drive-through facilities associated with the
convenience store.
§ 190-140.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.1
186:554
(e) Outdoor solid waste disposal containers and dumpsters shall
be contained within masonry structures with the same fascia
material as the convenience store.
(f) Parking space is provided for each 150 square feet of floor area
devoted to the convenience store.
(g) Parking and pedestrian circulation for the handicapped shall
conform with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(h) The location and access to the convenience store does not
impede or interfere with vehicular and pedestrian circulation
to and from fuel pumps.
(13) Multifamily residential dwellings.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the PUD-1, Zone; same as for RMZ-1,
§ 190-158B, and including:
(1) Gasoline filling station as an accessory use to § 190-140.1A(2)
above provided it meets the following:
(a) No direct access onto or off a public roadway.
(b) No repair work shall be permitted.
(2) Any other uses which are subordinate and customarily incidental to
a permitted use.
C. Required components. A planned unit development shall include the
following:
(1) A neighborhood commercial component subject to the standards
established herein. The neighborhood commercial component shall
be located in the area east of the Trotter's Way extension and shall
occupy no more than the 20% of the total land area within the
planned unit development.
(2) A community commercial component subject to the standards
established herein. The community commercial component shall be
located in the area west of the Trotter's Way extension and shall
have frontage on County Route 537. The balance of any land in the
area east of the Trotter's Way extension not devoted to the
neighborhood commercial component may be devoted to the
community commercial component. The community commercial
component shall occupy no more than 60% of the total land area
within the planned unit development.
(3) A residential use component subject to the standards established
herein. The residential use component shall be located in the area
west of the Trotter's Way extension, shall be a minimum of 1,000
feet from the County Route 537 right-of-way and shall occupy a
§ 190-140.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.1
186:555
minimum of 25% of the total land area within the planned unit
development.
(4) The extension of Trotter's Way from the Freehold Raceway Mall
access at County Route 537 through the planned unit development
to Route 9 southbound.
(5) The neighborhood commercial and residential components of the
planned unit development on each side of the Trotter's Way
extension shall be linked via a joint pedestrian and bicycle
underpass.
D. General development plan.
(1) Any developer seeking approval for a planned unit development
shall submit a general development plan to the Planning Board and
the Planning Board shall approve such plan prior to approving any
preliminary subdivision or preliminary site plan.
(2) Findings for planned unit development. Prior to approving a
planned unit development, the Planning Board shall render the
following findings and conclusions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space, and the amount, location and purpose of
such open space, are adequate;
(c) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned unit development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established;
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
(3) A general development plan shall include the following:
(a) A general land use plan indicating the tract area and locations
of the land uses to be included in the planned unit
development. The total number of dwelling units and amount
§ 190-140.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.1
186:556
of nonresidential gross floor area to be provided and proposed
land area to be devoted to residential and nonresidential use
shall be set forth. In addition, the proposed types of
nonresidential uses to be included in the planned development
shall be set forth, and the land area to be occupied by each
proposed use shall be estimated. The density and intensity of
use of the entire planned development shall be set forth and
a residential density and a nonresidential floor area ratio shall
be provided;
(b) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian
access, within the planned unit development and any proposed
improvements to the existing transportation system outside
the planned unit development;
(c) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and
location of land areas to be set aside for conservation and
recreational purposes and a general description of
improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan
for the operation and maintenance of such lands;
(d) A utility plan indicating the proposed location of sewage and
water lines and setting forth the proposed method of
controlling and managing stormwater on the site;
(e) A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed
method of controlling and managing stormwater on the site;
(f) An environmental inventory, a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology,
climate and cultural resources of the site, existing manmade
structures or features and the probable impact of the
development on the environmental attributes of the site;
(g) A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities;
(h) A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided and the extent to which any affordable housing
obligation assigned to the municipality pursuant to the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985 (as amended) will be fulfilled
by the development;
(i) A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include, but not
be limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal;
(j) A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal
services and the school district to be generated by the planned
unit development. The fiscal report shall also include a detailed
projection of property tax revenues which will accrue to the
§ 190-140.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.1
186:557
county, municipality and school district according to the timing
schedule provided under Subsection D(3)(k) below, and
following the completion of the development in its entirety.
(k) A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned unit
development whose construction is contemplated over a period
of years, including the number of dwelling units and amount of
nonresidential gross floor area to be included in each
development phase, and any terms or conditions which are
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
residents who occupy any section of the planned development
prior to the completion of the development in its entirety; and
(l) A written agreement between the developer and the Township
relating to the planned unit development.
(4) Effect and duration of approval.
(a) The planned unit development shall be developed in
accordance with the general development plan approved by
the Planning Board notwithstanding any provision of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., or of any ordinance or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto after the effective date of the approval. The
general terms and conditions upon which the general
development plan was granted shall not be changed, unless
application for modification is made by the developer and
approved by the Planning Board pursuant to the requirements
of this section.
(b) The term of the effect of the general development plan
approval shall be determined by the Planning Board using the
guidelines set forth in Subsection D(4)(c) below, except that
the term of the effect of the approval shall not exceed 20 years
from the date upon which the developer received final approval
of the first section of the planned unit development.
(c) In making its determination regarding the duration of the
effect of approval of the general development plan, the
Planning Board shall consider: the number of dwelling units or
amount of nonresidential floor area to be constructed;
prevailing economic conditions; the timing schedule to be
followed in completing the development and the likelihood of
its fulfillment; the developer's capability of completing the
proposed development; and the contents of the general
development plan and any conditions which the Planning
Board attaches to the approval thereof.
(5) Modification of proposed schedule. In the event that the developer
seeks to modify the proposed timing schedule (i.e., the term of the
general development plan approval), such modification shall
require the approval of the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall, in deciding whether or not to grant approval of the
§ 190-140.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.1
186:558
modification, take into consideration prevailing economic and
market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential
units and nonresidential space within the Township and the region,
and the availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate
the proposed development.
(6) Variations in location of land uses or increase in density or floor
area ratio. The developer shall be required to gain the prior
approval of the Planning Board if, after approval of the general
development plan, the developer wishes to make any variation in
the location of land uses within the planned development or to
increase the density of residential development or the floor area
ratio of nonresidential development in any section of the planned
unit development.
(7) Amendment or revision of general development plan; allowable
reductions within original approval.
(a) Except as provided hereunder, once a general development
plan has been approved by the Planning Board, it may be
amended or revised only upon application by the developer and
approval by the Planning Board.
(b) A developer, without violating the terms of the general
development plan approval, may, in undertaking any section of
the planned unit development, reduce the number of
residential units or amounts of nonresidential floor space by no
more than 15% or reduce the residential density or
nonresidential floor area ratio by no more than 15%.
(8) Termination of approval upon completion of development. In the
event that a development which is the subject of an approved
general development plan is completed before the end of the term
of the approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of
the development. For the purposes of this section, a development
shall be considered complete on the date upon which a certificate
of occupancy has been issued for the final residential or
nonresidential structure in the last section of the development in
accordance with the timing schedule set forth in the approved
general development plan and the developer has fulfilled all of his
obligations pursuant to the approval.
E. Development standards as applied to the entire planned unit
development.
(1) The intent of these regulations is to encourage creative and
innovative design and provide flexibility in terms of how uses/
buildings shall visually relate to each other as well as the overall
landscape. As such, multiple uses and buildings are permitted on a
lot. There shall be no area, dimensional, FAR, coverage or setback
requirements for individual lot development within the planned
unit development, provided that such development is in
§ 190-140.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.1
186:559
conformance with all other standards established herein. There
shall be no minimum distances between individual buildings except
as required by applicable building and fire safety codes.
(2) Individual lots may be developed without frontage on a public
street, provided such lot has access to a public street by means of
an improved roadway and that there exists a perpetual right of
ingress and egress over said improved roadway in the form of a
recorded permanent easement granting such access. The easement
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board Attorney
and Township Engineer to insure there is adequate provision for
future maintenance of such roadway, and that such roadway can
accommodate fire trucks and other emergency vehicles.
(3) The total number of internal roadway connections to and from
public streets shall be limited only to those necessary to provide
safe and convenient access, without undue impacts to the safety
and mobility of traffic on abutting public streets as determined by
the Planning Board. The intent of this requirement is to encourage
shared access and limited internal roadway connections onto
public streets.
(4) The maximum impervious surface coverage within the planned unit
development shall be 65%.
(5) In the area west of the Trotter's Way extension, a minimum fiftyfoot
landscaped buffer shall be provided separating the community
commercial and residential use components of the planned unit
development. Said buffer may be placed wholly or partially within
either the community commercial or residential use components.
(6) Nothing contained herein shall preclude the phasing of any section
of the planned unit development provided it is consistent with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board.
F. Nonresidential development standards.
(1) Maximum yield and use/size limitations.
(a) The total floor area of nonresidential development (i.e., within
the neighborhood commercial and community commercial
components of the planned unit development) shall not exceed
375,000 square feet exclusive of any floor area devoted to hotel
use. In addition, up to maximum of 40,000 square feet of
nonresidential floor area may be devoted to mezzanine space.
Off-street parking for mezzanine floor area shall be provided at
a ratio of one-half of that which is otherwise required for the
use.
(b) Retail stack/storage and wholesale clubs, and any permitted
accessory use(s) thereto, shall only be permitted within the
§ 190-140.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.1
186:560
community commercial component of the planned unit
development.
(c) Supermarkets/specialty food stores shall only be permitted in
the area east of the Trotter's Way extension and such stores
shall not have a floor area in excess of 52,500 square feet.
(d) A minimum of 30,000 square feet of floor area shall be
provided within the neighborhood commercial component of
the planned unit development. In addition, no individual
business establishment within the neighborhood commercial
component of the planned unit development shall have a floor
area in excess of 4,500 square feet.
(e) Hotel use shall only be permitted within the community
commercial component of the planned unit development.
(2) Principal building setbacks.
(a) From County Route 537 right-of-way: 100 feet.
(b) From U.S. Route 9 right-of-way: 100 feet.
(c) From State Route 33 right-of-way: 100 feet.
(d) From right-of-way of Trotter's Way extension: 50 feet.
(e) From any other property line along the perimeter of the
planned unit development: 50 feet.
(3) Principal building height.
(a) For hotel use: five stories, 75 feet.
(b) For other permitted uses: three stories, 50 feet.
(4) Buffer requirements.
(a) A minimum fifty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided along
the County Route 537 right-of-way.
(b) A minimum fifty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided along
the U.S. Route 9 right-of-way.
(c) A minimum twenty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided
along the State Route 33 right-of-way.
(d) A minimum twenty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided
along the right-of-way of the Trotter's Way extension.
(e) A minimum twenty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided
along any other property line along the perimeter of the
planned unit development.
(5) Off-street parking.
§ 190-140.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.1
186:561
(a) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be as
follows:
[1] Retail sales and service stores, personal service
establishments and wholesale clubs: 4.5 spaces per 1,000
square feet of floor area.
[2] Supermarkets/specialty food stores: 5.0 spaces per 1,000
square feet of floor area.
[3] All other uses: in accordance with § 190-163.
(b) Parking stalls may be nine feet by 18 feet in size provided there
is a twenty-five-foot wide aisle and provided further that such
spaces are marked with hairpin striping.
(6) Screening of loading areas. No loading shall face any public street
or internal access road (exclusive of onsite service roads) unless it
is shielded, bermed, or otherwise four-season-buffered from view
from such street/road.
(7) Architectural design requirements. In reviewing building design
within the neighborhood commercial and community commercial
components of the planned unit development, the Planning Board
shall consider the guidelines set forth in § 190-114.
G. Residential development standards.
(1) Maximum yield and size limitations.
(a) The maximum number of multifamily residential dwelling units
shall be 400.
(b) A minimum of 10% of all multifamily residential dwelling units
constructed shall be set aside for low- and moderate-income
households. Affordable units shall be integrated throughout
the development and shall comply with applicable regulations
of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
(c) The maximum number of multifamily residential dwelling units
in any building shall not exceed 90.
(2) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the land area occupied by
residential development.
(3) Principal building setbacks.
(a) From State Route 33 right-of-way: 100 feet.
(b) From right-of-way of Trotter's Way extension: 100 feet.
(c) From any other property line along the perimeter of the
planned unit development: 100 feet.
§ 190-140.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.1
186:562
(4) Principal building height. The maximum height of any multifamily
residential building shall be four stories and 55 feet.
(5) Buffer requirements.
(a) A minimum fifty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided along
the State Route 33 right-of-way.
(b) A minimum fifty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided along
the right-of-way of the Trotter's Way extension.
(c) A minimum fifty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided along
any other property line along the perimeter of the planned unit
development.
(6) Screening of loading areas. No loading shall face any public street
or internal access road (exclusive of onsite service roads) unless it
is shielded, bermed, or otherwise four-season-buffered from view
from such street/road.
(7) Miscellaneous requirements for residential development.
(a) A minimum of 5% of the land area occupied by residential
development shall be devoted to active and passive recreation
facilities, which may include, but not be limited to, a
clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis courts, exercise areas,
walking paths, bikeways and picnic areas.
(b) An accessory parking structure shall be required to serve the
residential component of the planned unit development. Said
structure shall not exceed 50 feet in height and shall be
designed such that it is substantially "wrapped" by residential
development to screen it from the remainder of the planned
unit development and public viewshed. Such accessory parking
structure shall provide multiple convenient access locations to
the adjacent residential building(s).
(c) Outdoor refuse and recycling storage areas shall be
appropriately screened by a wall enclosure constructed of
materials similar to the facades of the buildings and with
appropriate landscaping as required by the Planning Board.
(d) Single-story accessory garage structures shall be permitted
provided they are located a minimum 50 feet from any property
line.
(8) Architectural design requirements for residential development.
(a) Building articulation and massing.
[1] Multifamily building facade bulk shall be broken down
vertically into a series of bays and/or through vertical
massing changes in the façade plane. Individual bays or
§ 190-140.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.1
186:563
groups of bays may be defined by a change in material,
color, pattern and/or texture; use of columns, pilasters,
gutters or expansion joints massing; and/or size and
rhythm of fenestration. Bay definition should extend
upward through all levels of the building.
[2] Multifamily buildings shall be differentiated horizontally
into a base, middle and top as follows:
[a] The base should be highlighted architecturally to
visually ground the building. Detailing at the base
should be richer than on upper floors, for example, by
horizontal banding, and/or belt courses.
[b] The middle should be distinguished from the base and
top, for example, by horizontal belt courses or
cornices and/or changes in material, texture and
fenestration pattern.
[c] The top floor and/or the roof line should be
distinguished from the base and middle, for example,
with a coping, parapet wall, balustrade, cornice and/or
change in material, texture, color and/or fenestration
pattern.
[3] Roof shape and mass shall relate to the multifamily
building massing on the lower levels. Flat, peaked or
sloped roof shapes are permitted, but mansard roofs are
prohibited.
(b) Building facade detailing.
[1] Windows, sliding and/or French doors shall occupy at least
25% of the façade area.
[2] Continuous expanses of windowless walls, except for walls
facing the accessory parking structure, in excess of 20 feet
in length shall be discouraged at all levels; instead, a
change in plane and variation in materials and/or detailing
shall be provided for any windowless wall area in excess of
20 feet in length.
[3] Preferred materials for facades are brick, cultivated stone
or other masonry facing; fiber cement siding or backboard;
and synthetic or composite trim and/or panels. No more
than three different materials, exclusive of windows, doors
and decks/railings, shall be employed as primary materials
on a building façade. Within the chosen primary materials,
variation in color, texture and pattern may be employed to
create further distinctions. To the extent practical, the
level of materials, detailing and articulation shall be
consistent along all façades except for any portion of a
§ 190-140.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.1
186:564
§ 190-140.2. Planned Adult Community-3 (PAC-3). [Added
4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-15]
Purpose: The PAC-3 Planned Adult Community Zone is established in
accordance with a settlement agreement in the matter of Land Bank-
Freehold, Inc., v. the Township of Freehold Docket No.: MON-L-6026-08 of
the Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division: Monmouth County.
The PAC-3 Zone shall permit only age-restricted housing units consisting
of single-family detached, duplex, attached single-family and multifamily
attached housing units and community amenities as provided for herein,
subject to the following standards and requirements:
façade that faces an accessory parking structure and/or
is not visible from the remainder of the planned unit
development and public viewshed. Materials should be
extended around corners and extensions in order to avoid
a "pasted on" appearance. Vinyl siding shall be permitted
on façades facing the accessory parking structure.
[4] All major mechanical equipment located on any roof of a
building shall be screened from view from all vantage
points with a material harmonious to that used in the
façade of the building.
[5] Any portion of the accessory parking structure that is not
screened from the remainder of the planned unit
development and/or public viewshed shall be faced with
masonry, stucco or synthetic panels.
[6] Any other accessory structure, including, but not limited
to, a clubhouse/ leasing building or detached garage, shall
utilize similar materials as residential building facades.
A. General tract requirements.
(1) The minimum gross tract area for a planned adult community shall
be 33 acres.
(2) The maximum gross density for the residentially zoned PAC-3 tract
area is 6.0 dwelling units per acre.
(3) The development shall be serviced by public water supply and
public sanitary sewer facilities.
(4) The development shall have primary access and egress from U.S.
Route 9. Such access may be supplemented by one or more
controlled and limited emergency accessways from U.S. Route 9.
(5) Not more than 25% of the entire tract shall be covered by
buildings.
§ 190-140.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.2
186:565
(6) Not more than 40% of the entire tract shall be covered by
impervious surface.
(7) Residential units shall be age-restricted in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family detached age-restricted housing units.
(2) Single-family attached age-restricted housing units.
(3) Duplex age-restricted housing units.
(4) Multifamily age-restricted housing units.
(5) Recreation buildings and facilities for residents of the PAC.
(6) Maintenance building and equipment storage yard for PAC-related
services.
C. Single-family detached lot requirements. Single-family lots shall
conform to the following requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 5,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 55 feet; except that on a cul-de-sac or street
with a curved alignment having an outside radius of 500 feet or
less, lot frontage shall not be less than 75% of the required lot
frontage. For corner lots, the smaller of the two lot lines coexistent
with the street line shall be considered the lot frontage.
(3) Minimum lot width: 55 feet at the front building setback line.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: seven feet; driveways shall have a minimum
side yard setback of five feet, except that on a cul-de-sac or street
with a curved alignment, the side yard setback for the driveway
may be reduced to two feet at the front lot line.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 30 feet and two stories.
(9) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 65%.
(10) Decks/patios: same as principal structures, except rear yard
setback: 10 feet. Sheds are permitted to be not greater than 80
square feet.
(11) Single-family detached housing unit lots abutting existing
residential housing units shall provide a twenty-five-foot planted
buffer area along the property abutting the existing residential
§ 190-140.2 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.2
186:566
housing units. The planted buffer shall be deed restricted as a
planted buffer and screening area to be maintained by the
homeowners' association and/or property owner. The planted
buffer area may be a separate lot or lots. If attached to the singlefamily
detached housing lot, the affected lots shall be a minimum
of 125 feet in depth, of which 25 feet shall be deed restricted.
D. Single-family attached and duplex housing unit lot requirements.
Single-family attached and duplex housing unit lots shall conform to the
following requirements:
(1) Minimum combined lot area: 9,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 90 feet for combined housing units and 45
feet for individual housing units; except that on a cul-de-sac or
street with a curved alignment having an outside radius of 500 feet
or less, lot frontage shall not be less than 75% of the required lot
frontage. For corner lots, the smaller of the two lot lines coexistent
with the street line shall be considered the lot frontage.
(3) Minimum lot width: 90 feet for combined and 45 feet for individual
housing units at the front building setback line.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: seven feet; driveways shall have a minimum
side yard setback of five feet, except that on a cul-de-sac or street
with a curved alignment, the side yard setback for the driveway
may be reduced to two feet at the front lot line. Attached and
duplex housing unit lots shall have a zero-foot shared lot line
between the combined units.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(9) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 65%.
(10) Decks/patios: same as principal structures, except rear yard
setback: 10 feet.
(11) Sheds are permitted to be not greater than 80 square feet.
(12) Single-family attached and duplex housing unit lots abutting
existing residential housing units shall provide a twenty-five-foot
planted buffer area along the property abutting the existing
residential housing units. The planted buffer shall be deed
restricted as a planted buffer and screening area to be maintained
by the homeowners' association and/or property owner. The
planted buffer area may be a separate lot or lots. If attached to the
single-family detached housing lot, the affected lots shall be a
§ 190-140.2 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.2
186:567
minimum of 125 feet in depth, of which 25 feet shall be deed
restricted.
E. Multifamily building requirements. Multifamily buildings shall conform
to the following schedule:
(1) There shall be no more than six dwelling units in one building or
structure.
(2) No single building or structure shall exceed 210 feet in length
along a linear plane.
(3) Setback requirements:
(a) Side to side: 15 feet.
(b) Side to front: 15 feet.
(c) Rear to rear: 25 feet.
(d) Corner to corner: 20 feet.
(e) Building to roadway: 15 feet.
(f) Building to parking area: 10 feet.
(g) Building to boundary of tract: 50 feet, except abutting existing
single-family residential development, where a minimum of 75
feet shall be required.
(4) Maximum building height: 40 feet and three stories, except
buildings abutting existing single-family residential development,
where a maximum of 35 feet and two stories shall be permitted.
(5) Multifamily housing unit buildings abutting existing residential
housing units shall provide a fifty-foot planted buffer/screening
area along the property abutting the existing residential housing
units. The planted buffer shall be deed restricted as a planted
buffer and the planted buffer/screening area to be maintained by
the condominium homeowners' association or by the apartment
owner/management company as applicable. The planted buffer
area may be a separate lot or lots. The buildings in affected
portions of the site plan abutting existing single-family residential
uses shall be a minimum of 75 feet from the adjacent residential
boundary, of which 25 feet shall be planted or visually screened
from the adjacent single-family-home residential area.
F. Recreation and common elements. A planned adult community shall
provide developed and undeveloped open space and common
recreational and community facilities for the exclusive use of its
residents, in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Not less than 25% of the gross tract area shall be devoted to
common open space, and such common open space shall be
§ 190-140.2 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.2
186:568
restricted, owned and maintained by a homeowners' association
or, if rental units, by the apartment owner/management company.
The common open space may include man-made ponds. All critical
areas on the site, including wetlands, wetland transitional areas,
floodplains and the like, shall be encompassed within the common
open space provided.
(2) There shall be not less than 10 square feet of floor space per
dwelling unit provided in a community or clubhouse building,
which building or buildings shall have a minimum total floor area of
at least 3,000 square feet. Such facility shall be designed and
equipped to meet the social and recreational needs of the
development residents. This facility or facilities may include hobby
and craft rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms, card rooms, kitchen,
social hall, rooms providing support facilities for outdoor
recreation facilities or other similar facilities, as required to meet
the needs of persons 55 years of age and older. The building(s) shall
not exceed two stories or 35 feet in height. The building(s) shall
meet the required off-street parking standards in accordance with
this chapter.
(3) Within the common open space, facilities shall be included for
outdoor recreational use. These facilities shall include, as a
minimum, a tennis court or a Bocce court and an in-ground
swimming pool and their related improvements, such as parking,
lighting and ancillary buildings, and may also include, by way of
illustration and not limitation, picnic areas, walking, jogging and
bicycle paths, shuffleboard and horseshoe courts and similar types
of facilities.
(4) The community clubhouse shall be operational on or prior to the
issuance of certificates of occupancy for 50% of the approved
residential units.
(5) A homeowners' association administrative area within the
community clubhouse or within a separate building shall be
permitted.
(6) A community maintenance and storage facilities shall be permitted.
Such facilities shall be landscaped. Outdoor storage areas shall be
fenced and visually screened with trees and shrubs.
(7) Perimeter setback requirements. No buildings or structures, other
than roadways, access drives, walking, jogging and bicycle paths,
walkways, entrance gatehouses, walls, fences, drainage facilities,
utility structures and residential decks and/or patios with at least
one wall contiguous with the principal building shall be located
within 50 feet of any exterior tract boundary, and the outer 20 feet
of the perimeter setback shall be designated as a landscape/
conservation easement. Where the outer 20 feet of the nonroadway
perimeter setback is landscaped with deciduous trees, evergreen
§ 190-140.2 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.2
186:569
trees and evergreen shrubs to effectively create a landscape visual
screen/buffer to the adjoining properties, the fifty-foot perimeter
setback may be reduced to 40 feet. If the contiguous property along
the nonroadway perimeter boundary line is an environmentally
sensitive area containing freshwater wetlands, streams, ponds, or
floodplains that are deed restricted for conservation or open space
purposes, the perimeter setback may be reduced one foot for every
two feet of restricted area on the contiguous property; provided,
however, that setback shall not be less than the required rear yard
setback.
G. Affordable housing units. Approval of a planned adult community shall
be conditioned upon the provision of a twenty-percent inclusionary
component of affordable low- and moderate-income housing units to be
located on site. The development shall provide a minimum of 50% lowincome
and a maximum of 50% moderate-income housing units.
Affordable housing units shall be distributed equitably throughout the
development in accordance with the following:
(1) When the PAC-3 is composed of one type of multifamily housing
throughout the development, the affordable housing units shall be
distributed equitably throughout the entire development.
(2) When the PAC-3 is composed of a mix of single-family and
multifamily housing, the affordable housing units may be located
within the multifamily housing building, provided that not more
than 40% of any one building shall contain affordable housing
units.
(3) When the PAC-3 is composed of single-family detached dwelling
units, the developer may request that affordable housing units be
located within single-family attached or duplex buildings
comprising not more than two units. Such units shall be distributed
equitably throughout the development.
H. An application for a PAC-3 development shall include a plan showing
the location and type of affordable housing units, including whether
such housing unit is a low-income or moderate-income housing unit.
I. Deed restrictions. Approval of a planned adult community shall be
conditioned upon the placement of restrictive covenants on the deeds to
any and all portions of the tract so developed to:
(1) Ensure that the age-restricted units qualify as "55 or over housing"
within the meaning of the Federal Fair Housing Act. The agerestrictive
covenants shall be subject to review by the Township
Attorney.
(2) Garages shall not be converted to habitable space.
J. Solar facilities. Rooftop solar facilities shall be permitted and shall
conform with the requirements of Chapter 153, Laws of 2007, and
§ 190-140.2 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.2
186:570
§ 190-140.3. Planned Adult Community-4 (PAC-4). [Added
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-24]
Purpose: The Planned Adult Community-4 PAC-4 Zone is designed to permit
a planned adult, age-restricted development consisting of single-family
detached housing units and community amenities as provided herein,
subject to the following standards and requirements:
Chapter 33, Laws of 2009,81 pertaining to provision of solar facilities for
residential developments, or other such state-wide standards as may be
applicable at the time of the application for development.
K. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along U.S. Route 9. A sidewalk
system within the PAC development shall be designed to interconnect
residential housing units with internal recreation and other PAC
community service facilities. The sidewalk system shall also provide
access to the commercial/office development along the frontage of U.S.
Route 9.
L. Other ordinances. In the event of any conflict between the provisions
and requirements of this section and the provisions and requirements of
any other subsections, the provisions and requirements of this section
shall govern.
A. General tract requirements.
(1) The minimum gross tract area for a planned adult community shall
be 40 acres.
(2) The maximum gross density for the residentially zoned PAC-4 tract
area is 3.0 dwelling units per acre.
(3) The development shall be serviced by public water supply and
public sanitary sewer facilities.
(4) The development shall have primary access and egress in
accordance with the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
(5) Residential units shall be age restricted in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
(6) Not more than 20% of the entire tract shall be covered by
buildings.
(7) Not more than 40% of the entire tract shall be covered by
impervious surface.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family detached age-restricted housing units.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:22A-48.2 and 52:27D-141.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 190-140.2 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.3
186:571
(2) Attached single-family and duplex age-restricted affordable
housing units.
(3) Recreation buildings and facilities for residents of the PAC-4.
(4) Maintenance building and equipment storage yard for PAC-4
related services, including pump stations.
C. Single-family detached lot requirements. Single-family lots shall
conform to the following requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 6,600 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 55 feet; except that on a cul-de-sac or street
with a curved alignment having an outside radius of 500 feet or
less, lot frontage shall not be less than 75% of the required lot
frontage. For corner lots, the smaller of the two lot lines coexistent
with the street line shall be considered the lot frontage.
(3) Minimum lot width: 55 feet at the front building setback line.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: seven feet; driveways shall have a minimum
side yard setback of five feet, except that on a cul-de-sac or street
with a curved alignment, the side yard setback for the driveway
may be reduced to two feet at the front lot line.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet unencumbered by deed-restricted
conservation or planted buffer.
(8) Maximum building height: 30 feet and two stories.
(9) Maximum lot impervious coverage: 65%.
(10) Decks/patios: same as principal structures, except rear yard
setback: 10 feet.
(11) Single-family detached housing unit lots abutting existing off-tract
residential housing units shall provide a twenty-five-foot planted
buffer area along the property abutting the existing residential
housing units. The planted buffer shall be deed restricted as a
planted buffer, and the screening area shall be maintained by the
homeowners' association and/or property owner. The planted
buffer area may be a separate lot or lots. If included within singlefamily
lots, the affected lots shall be a minimum of 125 feet in
depth, of which 25 feet shall be deed restricted as a planted buffer.
D. Single-family attached and duplex housing unit lot requirements for
affordable housing units. Single-family attached and duplex affordable
housing unit lots shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 190-140.3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.3
186:572
(1) Minimum combined lot area: 9,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 90 feet for combined housing units and 45
feet for individual housing units; except that on a cul-de-sac or
street with a curved alignment having an outside radius of 500 feet
or less, lot frontage shall not be less than 75% of the required lot
frontage. For corner lots, the smaller of the two lot lines coexistent
with the street line shall be considered the lot frontage.
(3) Minimum lot width: 90 feet for combined and 45 feet for individual
housing units at the front building setback line.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: seven feet; driveways shall have a minimum
side yard setback of five feet, except that on a cul-de-sac or street
with a curved alignment, the side yard setback for the driveway
may be reduced to two feet at the front lot line. Attached and
duplex housing unit lots shall have a zero-foot shared lot line
between the combined units.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(9) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 65%.
(10) Decks/patios: same as principal structures except rear yard
setback: 10 feet.
(11) Single-family attached and duplex housing unit lots abutting
existing residential housing units shall provide a twenty-five-foot
planted buffer area along the property abutting the existing
residential housing units. The planted buffer shall be deed
restricted as a planted buffer and screening area to be maintained
by the homeowners' association and/or property owner. The
planted buffer area may be a separate lot or lots. If attached to the
single-family detached housing lot, the affected lots shall be a
minimum of 125 feet in depth, of which 25 feet shall be deed
restricted.
E. Recreation and common elements. A planned adult community shall
provide developed and undeveloped open space and common
recreational and community facilities for the exclusive use of its
residents, in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Not less than 25% of the gross tract area shall be devoted to
common open space. Common open space shall be deed restricted
or owned by and shall be maintained by a homeowners' association.
The common open space may include man-made ponds and existing
ponds. All critical areas on the site, including freshwater wetlands,
§ 190-140.3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.3
186:573
wetland transition areas, floodplains and slopes of 15% or greater
shall be encompassed within either designated common open space
areas or subject to a conservation easement preserving the critical
area.
(2) There shall be not less than 15 square feet of floor space per
dwelling unit provided in a community or clubhouse building,
which building or buildings shall have a minimum total floor area of
at least 3,000 square feet. Such facility shall be designed and
equipped to meet the social and recreational needs of the
development residents. The facility or facilities may include hobby
and craft rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms, card rooms, kitchen,
social hall and rooms providing support facilities for outdoor
recreation facilities or other similar facilities to meet the needs of
adult residents. The community or clubhouse building(s) shall not
exceed two stories or 35 feet in height. The building(s) shall meet
the required off-street parking standard of one space per 350
square feet.
(3) Within the common open space, facilities shall be included for
outdoor recreational use. These facilities may include, as a
minimum, a tennis court or a Bocce court and an in-ground
swimming pool and their related improvements, such as parking,
lighting and ancillary buildings, and may also include, by way of
illustration and not limitation, picnic areas, walking, jogging and
bicycle paths, shuffleboard and horseshoe courts and similar types
of facilities.
(4) The community clubhouse shall be operational on or prior to the
issuance of certificates of occupancy for 50% of the approved
residential units.
(5) A homeowners' association administrative area and sales office
within the community clubhouse or within a separate building shall
be permitted.
(6) Community maintenance and storage facilities shall be permitted.
Such facilities shall be landscaped. Outdoor storage areas shall be
fenced and visually screened with trees and shrubs.
(7) Sidewalks. A sidewalk system within the PAC-4 development shall
be provided and designed to interconnect residential housing units
with internal recreation and other on-site community service
facilities. The sidewalk system shall also provide access to the
frontage of NJSH Route 33.
(8) Perimeter setback requirements. No buildings or structures, other
than roadways, access drives, entrance sign, walking, jogging and
bicycle paths, walkways, entrance gatehouses, walls, fences,
drainage facilities, utility structures and residential decks and/or
patios with at least one wall contiguous with the principal building
shall be located within 50 feet of any exterior tract boundary,
§ 190-140.3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.3
186:574
except when the lot fronts on a cul-de-sac bulb or eyebrow bulb,
the setback may be reduced to 25 feet. The outer 20 feet of the
perimeter setback shall be designated as a landscape/conservation
easement and may be included within the single lot area. Where
the outer 20 feet of the nonroadway perimeter setback is existing
preserved landscaping or is landscaped with deciduous trees,
evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs to effectively create a
landscape visual screen/buffer to the adjoining properties, the fiftyfoot
perimeter setback may be reduced to 40 feet. If the contiguous
property along the nonroadway perimeter boundary line is an
environmentally sensitive area containing freshwater wetlands,
streams, ponds, or floodplains that are deed restricted for
conservation or open space purposes, the perimeter setback may
be reduced one foot for every two feet of restricted area on the
contiguous property; provided, however, that setback shall not be
less than the required rear yard setback.
F. Deed restrictions. Approval of a PAC-4 planned adult community shall
be conditioned upon the placement of restrictive covenants on the
deeds to any and all portions of the tract so developed to:
(1) Ensure that the age-restricted units qualify as "55 or over housing"
within the meaning of the Federal Fair Housing Act. The agerestrictive
covenants shall be subject to review by the Township
Attorney.
(2) Garages shall not be converted to habitable space.
G. Solar facilities. Rooftop solar facilities shall be permitted and shall
conform to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 45:22A-48.2 and N.J.S.A.
52:27D-141.1 et seq., pertaining to provision of solar facilities for
residential developments, or other such state-wide solar or alternative
energy standards as may be applicable at the time of the application for
development.
H. On-site affordable housing units. Approval of a planned adult
community shall be conditioned upon the provision of an inclusionary
component of 15% affordable low- and moderate-income housing units
to be located on site or off site as set forth above and/or in accordance
with affordable housing requirements in effect through regulations
adopted by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
regulations established by statutory provisions and/or in accordance
with a housing plan and affordable housing regulations approved by
order of the Superior Court. On-site affordable housing development
shall provide a minimum of 50% low-income and a maximum of 50%
moderate-income housing units. Affordable housing units built on site
shall be distributed equitably throughout the development. The
developer may request that affordable housing units be located within
single-family attached buildings comprising not more than two housing
units. Such units shall be designed to be similar architecturally and
compatible with nonaffordable housing units and shall be distributed
§ 190-140.3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.3
186:575
equitably throughout the development. On-site affordable housing units
shall be shown on a plan clearly identifying the location and type of onsite
affordable housing units, including whether such housing unit is a
low-income or moderate-income housing unit.
I. Off-tract affordable housing.
(1) A developer of age-restricted housing units may satisfy all or a
portion of the applicable affordable housing obligation for the
development through the purchase of an existing off-tract marketrate
housing units at another location in Freehold Township and
the conversion of such units to deed-restricted low- and moderateincome
housing units in accordance with all of the relevant criteria
set forth in the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (U.H.A.C.) at N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq. criteria, and all other regulations and policies
controlling the creditworthiness of such units on the effective date
of the final site plan approval. Such conversion can be
accomplished through reconstruction, and/or a "buy-down/writedown
program" controlling the creditworthiness of such units
against the Township affordable housing obligation, provided that
any affordable housing units so provided are deemed creditworthy
against the Township obligation to provide additional affordable
housing by a court of competent jurisdiction or by a state agency
designated by law to do so. Any development in a planned adult
community shall be in accordance with all applicable elements of
applicable current laws, including, but not limited to, requirements
regarding a phasing schedule, controls on affordability, low/
moderate-income split, heating source, maximum rent and/or sales
prices, affordability average, bedroom distribution and affirmative
marketing. An applicant shall only be entitled to satisfy its
affordable housing obligation via one or more of the alternative offtract
mechanisms set forth above if the applicant first secures the
written authorization of the Township Committee.
(2) Before the execution of the final subdivision plat, the developer
must submit to the Township of Freehold its plan as to the manner
in which alternative mechanism(s) will be used to achieve the
creation of the off-tract affordable residential units. The
developer's proposal shall be in accordance with court. COAH or
other designated state agency and New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(U.H.A.C.) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. criteria, regulations and
policies or participation.
(3) If the developer elects to provide affordable housing units off tract,
certificates of occupancy for such housing units shall be issued
within 10 years from the date of an approved developer's
agreement.
§ 190-140.3 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.3
186:576
§ 190-140.4. Planned Adult Community-Affordable Housing Overlay
(PAC-AHO). [Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-1]
Purpose: The Planned Adult Community-Affordable Housing Overlay Zone
is designed to permit a planned adult, age-restricted, affordable housing
development consisting of multifamily housing units as an affordable
housing development option on Lot 23 in Block 69.01, subject to the
following standards and requirements:
(4) The developer shall enter into a developer's agreement with the
Township of Freehold and the Township Planning Board and shall
post a performance bond or letter of credit as a guaranty for the
provision of the off-tract affordable units off tract. The bond or
letter of credit shall be posted prior to the recording of the
subdivision plat or site plan for the development.
(5) Full and complete satisfaction of all relevant affordable housing
requirements of the development shall be a specific, automatic,
essential and nonseverable condition of the land use approvals.
Pursuant to this condition, the developer must demonstrate that it
has satisfied the Planning or Zoning Board conditions of approval
for affordable housing prior to obtaining the first building permit,
and compliance with the affordable housing requirements shall be
a continuing condition of all Planning or Zoning Board approvals
for the development.
J. Other ordinances. In the event of any conflict between the provisions
and requirements of this section and the provisions and requirements of
any other subsections, the provisions and requirements of this section
shall govern.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) All uses permitted in the R-80 Zone.
(2) Multifamily age-restricted affordable rental housing for those
persons 55 years of age or older as permitted by the Federal Fair
Housing Act of 196882 and Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995.
(a) "Age-restricted housing" means a housing unit that is designed
to meet the needs of, and is exclusively for, an age-restricted
segment of the population such that:
[1] All the residents of the development where the unit is
situated are 62 years or older;
[2] At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person that is
55 years or older; or
82.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 190-140.3 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.4
186:577
[3] The development has been designated by the Secretary of
HUD as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section
807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3607.
(b) Multifamily units shall be subject to the following development
provisions:
[1] The minimum gross tract area for a planned adult
affordable housing community shall be seven acres.
[2] The maximum gross density shall be 11 dwelling units per
acre. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-17]
[3] Minimum lot and yard dimensions.
[a] Width at building line: 100 feet.
[b] Minimum yard depths.
[i] Principal buildings.
[A] Front yard: 100 feet.
[B] Side yard: 30 feet.
[C] Rear yard: 10 feet.
[ii] Accessory buildings.
[A] Front yard: 100 feet.
[B] Side yard: 30 feet.
[C] Rear yard: 30 feet.
[c] Minimum frontage: 100 feet.
[4] Maximum lot coverage.
[a] All buildings: 25%.
[b] Accessory buildings: 5%.
[c] All impervious surfaces: 40%. For purposes of this
subsection, lot coverage shall be computed on the
basis of all buildings and paving over the gross
acreage of the lot.
[5] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60.
[6] Maximum building height.
[a] Feet: 50.
[b] Stories: four. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-17]
§ 190-140.4 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.4
186:578
[7] Setback requirements to roadways and parking areas.
[a] Building to interior roadways: 15 feet.
[b] Building to parking area: 10 feet.
[c] Building to public exterior roadway: 50 feet.
[d] Building to perimeter tract boundary: 30 feet
minimum.
[8] Off-street parking requirements.
[a] Off-street parking shall be provided in spaces
measuring not less than 18 feet by nine feet for
perpendicular parking stalls in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site Improvement
Standards. Parking spaces for people with disabilities
shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) or the Americans
with Disabilities Act,83 as applicable.
[b] As senior rental apartments are not a specific type
listed within N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site
Improvement Standards ("RSIS") and as Table 4.4
(Parking Requirements) of the RSIS permits parking
requirements which are commensurate with similar
uses to be used, a minimum standard of one parking
space per unit shall be required.
[c] No structure or portion of a structure constructed as a
private garage or storage area shall be converted into
living area or shall be included in the calculation of
the number of parking spaces as described herein.
[9] Signage. The setback for identification signs shall be 10
feet from the property line, and said identification signs
may be double-sided, meaning the permissible square
footage of signage shall be permitted for each side of the
sign. Signage must be outside the sight triangle area as
determined utilizing AASHTO guidelines.
[10] Open space and recreational area requirement. Not less
than 30% of the project site shall be devoted to private
passive open space as defined in this chapter. Senior rental
projects shall provide indoor common meeting rooms,
exercise rooms and outside seating areas for the residents
of the project.
[11] A resident superintendent, although allowed, shall not be
required for the development.
83.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 190-140.4 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.4
186:579
[12] Apartments shall conform with New Jersey Housing
Mortgage Finance Agency guidelines for closet and
cabinet space.
[13] The development shall be serviced by public water supply
and public sanitary sewer facilities.
[14] The development shall have primary access and egress in
accordance with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) On-site offices for leasing, management and maintenance
operations.
(2) Essential utilities.
(3) Outdoor gathering and sitting areas, such as gazebos.
(4) Maintenance and equipment sheds.
(5) Fences in accordance with § 190-165.
(6) Signs in accordance with § 190-178, as modified herein.
(7) Outdoor waste collection and recycling areas enclosed and
constructed of materials similar to the facade of the building.
(8) Services for residents, including computer room, library, indoor
common meeting rooms, exercise rooms, outside seating areas,
office for visiting physician/professional and similar types of
facilities and services.
C. Low- and moderate-income housing requirements. [Amended
2-27-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-2]
(1) At least 13% of all units shall be affordable to very low-income
households; and
(2) No more than 70% of the units shall be affordable to moderateincome
households.
D. Bedroom distribution.
(1) Not more than 20% of all units shall be two-bedroom units.
(2) The remaining units shall be one-bedroom units.
E. Other requirements. All housing units shall be age-restricted, to those
persons 55 years of age or older as permitted by the Federal Fair
Housing Act and the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 (HOPA). All
development shall comply with the New Jersey Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.; the applicable
affordable housing requirements of the New Jersey Housing and
§ 190-140.4 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-140.4
186:580
Mortgage Finance Agency and Section 42 of the Low Income Housing
Tax Credit regulations, provided, however, that all units shall be deed
restricted as age-restricted affordable housing for a period of not less
than 30 years.
F. Notwithstanding the existing Township ordinances regarding site plan
submissions and submission requirements, applications for site plan
approval in the Planned Development — Affordable Housing Overlay
Zone shall be permitted to submit the following items as a condition of
final site plan submission rather than as part of the preliminary site
plan submission:
(1) Providing exterior material sample board for proposed buildings.
(2) Environmental impact statement for projects in this zone shall be
deemed satisfied by a summary letter from an environmental
engineer detailing the general environmental conditions of the
property, provided a valid wetlands letter of interpretation from the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection is submitted
along with either a preliminary assessment or Phase 1.
(3) Application for sign permit.
(4) Proof of application to the Monmouth County Planning Board.
(5) Proof of application to the Freehold Soil Conservation District.
(6) Proof of application to the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
(7) Proof of application to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection for either stream encroachment permit
or letter of interpretation.
(8) Tree save and tree clearing plan per § 336-10. However, a heritage
tree survey will be required as part of any preliminary application.
(9) Proof of application to the Freehold Township Historic Preservation
Committee.
(10)Off-site drainage and utility plans.
(11) Center line profiles of streets bordering the site, if required by the
Township Engineer.
(12) Full soil boring logs. Test pits shall be sufficient for preliminary
applications.
(13) Landscape plans. Applicants shall be required to provide
preliminary landscaping plans as part of any preliminary
application, which shall include the various species and the general
planting locations; however, the full landscape plans, including
final plant counts, shall not be required until submission of the final
site plan application.
§ 190-140.4 JUNK DEALERS § 190-140.4
186:581
§ 190-141. Mount Laurel Contribution Zone MLC-6.
(14) Tree removal permit. While projects for low- and moderate-income
senior rental apartments shall be required to provide and apply for
tree removal permits as part of their final submission, it is agreed,
due to the nature of those developments, said projects shall be
limited to a permit fee of $500 and not be required to make any
restitution or repayments for the value of trees being removed,
except as to heritage trees for which there will be a cap of $30,000.
G. Governmental subsidies. The Township shall take such steps as are, in
its reasonable opinion, reasonably necessary to assist the developer in
obtaining state and/or federal subsidies for low- and moderate-income
housing when such subsidies are sought by the applicant as a means to
provide such housing. Nothing herein shall require the Township to
expend any funds, other than funds it would typically incur in its
ordinary course of business, to promote, support or provide any
subsidies.
H. Elimination of cost-generating features. It is further acknowledged that
Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
incorporates the need to eliminate unnecessary cost-generating
features from municipal land use ordinances. Accordingly, Freehold
Township will eliminate development standards that are not essential in
its reasonable opinion to protect the public welfare and to reasonably
expedite or fast-track municipal approvals/denials on certain affordable
housing developments.
A. Developers of property in the MLC-6 Zone may develop the permitted
use conditioned upon making a contribution to the Freehold Township
Affordable Housing Fund pursuant to § 190-224; provided, however,
that the minimum contribution shall not be less than the total
contribution which would be generated from a development developed
at a net density of six dwelling units per acre.
(1) Single-family detached court dwellings.
B. Development of the foregoing uses may be accompanied by the
permitted accessory uses allowed in the ML-8 and ML-7 Zones.
C. Development of townhouses, garden apartments and flats shall be in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Maximum density: six dwelling units per developable acre.
Developable acres shall be determined consistent with
requirements of Schedule C at the end of this chapter and footnotes
thereto. See § 190-101.
(2) Minimum and maximum lot acres: same as for ML-8 and ML-7
Zones.
§ 190-140.4 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-141
186:582
(3) Minimum lot frontage on a public street: same as for ML-8 and
ML-7 Zones.
(4) Maximum lot: same as for ML-8 and ML-7 Zones.
(5) Area, yard and building requirements: same as for ML-8 and ML-7
Zones. See Schedule C at the end of this chapter.
(6) Maximum height: height in feet, 30; stories: two.
(7) Off-street parking requirements: same as for ML-8 and ML-7 Zones.
(8) Open space and recreational area requirements: same as for ML-8
and ML-7 Zones.
(9) Required storage area or garage: same as for ML-8 and ML-7
Zones.
D. Development of single-family detached court dwellings shall be
arranged in groups around a common court and shall be in accordance
with the following standards:
(1) Maximum density: 4.0 dwelling units per developable acre.
Developable acres shall be determined consistent with
requirements of Schedule C at the end of this chapter and footnotes
thereto. See § 190-101.
(2) Minimum tract area proposed for development: 20 acres of
developable land.
(3) Maximum tract proposed for development: 100 acres of
developable land.
(4) Minimum tract frontage on a public street: 200 feet with a
minimum of two access points from a public road.
(5) Minimum lot area:
(a) Interior court lot: 4,500 square feet.
(b) Corner court lot: 5,000 square feet.
(6) Maximum lot impervious coverage: 40% except that an additional
3 1/2% shall be permitted solely for the installation of permitted
patios and sheds.
(7) Minimum lot frontage on a court: 20 feet.
(8) Minimum lot frontage on the residential access street for a corner
court lot: 70 feet.
(9) Lot width on a court at the minimum front yard depth:
(a) Interior court lot: 40 feet.
(b) Corner court lot: 30 feet.
§ 190-141 JUNK DEALERS § 190-141
186:583
(10) Maximum floor area ratio and maximum floor area:
(a) One story: maximum FAR, 0.25; maximum floor area, 1,750.
(b) Two stories: maximum FAR, 0.50; maximum floor area, 3,500.
(11) Maximum building height: 28 feet.
(12) Maximum building stories: two.
(13) Minimum front yard depth from a court lot line: 20 feet.
(14) Minimum front yard depth from a residential access street on a
corner lot: 20 feet.
(15) Minimum side yard: 10 feet, provided that a zero lot line setback
will be permitted from one side line of an interior court lot so long
as a maintenance easement, five feet in width, is provided on the
adjoining lot to ensure access.
(16) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet with this distance to be established and
maintained from any one of the property lines that does not
intersect a front property line on a residential access street or a
court.
(17) Maximum number of bedrooms: No dwelling unit shall contain
more than three bedrooms. Dens, offices, or other spaces which
can be utilized as bedrooms shall be counted as bedrooms.
(18) Minimum pavement width of a court: 25 feet.
(19) Access arrangement. Vehicular access to each dwelling unit shall
be from a court, as shown in the diagram entitled "Residential
Court Cluster," which provides access to a residential street
improved to Township standards for local streets.84 Residential
driveways shall not outlet directly to the residential street and not
more than five dwellings shall be grouped around and have access
to a court. The area of the court shall be a common element of the
development to be owned and maintained by the association
established by the developer.
(20) Spacing between buildings. In order to maintain privacy between
dwelling units, buildings shall maintain the following minimum
spacing:
(a) Window wall to window wall: 75 feet.
(b) Windowless wall to windowless wall: 10 feet.
(c) Windowless wall to windowless wall: 15 feet.
84.Editor's Note: The diagram is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 190-141 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-141
186:584
§ 190-142. ML-8 and ML-7 Moderate- and Low-Income Housing
Zones.
(21) Required garage. Each dwelling unit shall have an attached twocar
garage and driveway fronting upon the court. The driveway
shall maintain a minimum paved width of 18 feet.
(22) Open space and recreational area requirements. Common open
space and recreation areas shall be established as required in the
ML-8 and ML-7 Zone Districts. Recreation facilities shall include a
minimum of 450 square feet of developable area (not to include
wetlands, wetlands transition areas, floodplain, open space
between buildings, buffer or conservation areas) per dwelling unit
and shall include tot-lots and other active recreation conveniently
located within the development and arranged to be easily
accessible by residents.
(23) Required perimeter buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be established
around the perimeter of the tract to be developed. The buffer shall
maintain a minimum width of 80 feet, and no residential building
lot shall encroach into the buffer area. Open space and detention
areas may be located within the buffer.
(24) Block length. A block between interior residential access streets
shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length without providing a cross
street for vehicular and pedestrian movement.
(25) Homeowners' association. The proposed homeowners association
bylaws shall be submitted for review by the board in conjunction
with the application for development, including common courts,
drainage, detention basins, conservation areas, buffer areas,
recreation areas, and other components of the cluster court
development.
(26) An open and unroofed patio not more than eight inches above
ground level may extend into a required side or rear yard to within
five feet of a side or rear property line. Such patios, if more than
eight inches above ground level may extend to within 10 feet of a
side or rear property line.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Moderate- and Low-Income Housing Zones
is to provide a realistic opportunity for the construction of housing for
persons and families of low and moderate incomes as required by the
New Jersey Supreme Court in Southern Burlington County NAACP v.
Twp. of Mt. Laurel, 92 N.J. 158 (1983) (Mount Laurel II) and by the Fair
Housing Act, P.L. 1975, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
B. Resolution of conflicting provisions. Notwithstanding the provisions of
any other ordinance to the contrary, the provisions of this section shall
apply to development within the Moderate- and Low-Income Housing
Zones.
§ 190-141 JUNK DEALERS § 190-142
186:585
C. Permitted uses:
(1) Townhouses.
(2) Garden apartments and flats.
(3) Senior rental apartments. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-3]
(4) Farm, public parks and playgrounds, and public buildings in
accordance with this chapter.
D. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Outdoor barbecue structures.
(2) Essential utilities.
(3) Parks and playgrounds.
(4) Maintenance and equipment sheds.
(5) Fences in accordance with § 190-165.
(6) Signs in accordance with § 190-178. [Added 3-25-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-3]
(7) Outdoor waste collection and recycling areas enclosed and
constructed of materials similar to the facade of the building.
[Added 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-3]
(8) In senior apartment developments, services for residents including
beauty salon and barbershop, gift and personal goods shop,
computer room, library, and similar types of facilities and services.
[Added 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-3]
E. Area, yard and building requirements. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-3; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-16]
(1) Maximum density. Seven dwelling units per developable acre
within the ML-7 Zoning District and eight dwelling units per
developable acre within the ML-8 Zoning District for townhouses
and garden apartments and 15 dwelling units per acre in a ML-8
Zoning District for senior rental apartments. Developable acres
shall be determined consistent with requirements of Schedule C at
the end of this chapter and footnotes thereto. See § 190-101.
(2) Minimum and maximum lot areas.
(a) Minimum lot area for townhouses and garden apartments: 20
acres of developable land in accordance with Subsection E(1)
above.
§ 190-142 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-142
186:586
(b) Maximum lot area for townhouses and garden apartments: 100
acres of developable land in accordance with Subsection E(1)
above.
(c) Minimum lot area for senior rental apartments: 10 acres of
developable land in accordance with Subsection E(1) above.
(3) Minimum lot frontage on a public street: 200 feet with a minimum
of two access points from public roads, one of which may be an
emergency access road.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: 40%. For purposes of this subsection, lot
coverage shall be computed on the basis of all buildings and paving
over the portion of the developable area as delineated by
Subsection E(1) above and not on the basis of individual buildings
upon individual lots, e.g. townhouses.
(5) Area, yard and building requirements.
(a) Townhouses.
[1] Front yard setbacks: 15 feet. Structure setbacks shall be
measured from the property or lot lines, or from the
sidewalk or curbline if there is no property or lot line.
[2] Rear yard setback: 15 feet but not less than 50 feet
between structures parallel to having window-to-window
exposure.
[3] Side yards.
[a] Ten feet from all buildings and structures.
[b] Fifteen feet from all streets.
[c] Ten feet from parking areas.
[4] Lot size.
[a] Minimum 2,000 of square feet in area.
[b] Minimum of 20 feet in width.
[5] Maximum number of townhouse units in one building or
structure: 8.
(b) Multifamily apartments.
[1] No structure shall have more than 16 dwelling units.
[2] No structure building shall exceed:
[a] One hundred eighty feet in length along one linear
plane;
§ 190-142 JUNK DEALERS § 190-142
186:587
[b] Three hundred feet in length on two linear planes one
of which shall not exceed 180 feet with an angle of 90°
to 135°; and
[c] Four hundred fifty feet in length on three linear planes
two angles along the center line, provided that no
single plane shall exceed 180 feet.
[3] Setback requirements to roadways and parking areas.
[a] Building to interior roadways: 15 feet or 75% of the
height of the structure, whichever is greater.
[b] Building to parking area: 10 feet or 50% of the height
of the structure, whichever is greater.
[c] Building to public exterior roadway: 50 feet or two
times the height of the structure whichever is greater.
[d] Building to perimeter tract boundary: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum property standards for rear and side yards as
established by U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development within the project area. Lot lines shall be 1/2
the distance between structures for purposes of this
section.
[a] Yard space between exterior building walls and the
adjacent lot line shall be measured perpendicular to
the lot line opposite the building wall at all points. The
minimum distance from the wall to the lot line is
determined by the height of the wall in stories; the
horizontal length of the wall from corner to corner;
the type of wall.
[i] The primary wall is that wall which contains the
principal window(s) in a habitable room, except
bedrooms and kitchen; and/or the main entrance
to the dwelling when it directly faces a primary
wall or another dwelling.
[ii] The secondary wall is that wall which contains the
window(s) of rooms for other than a primary wall
as defined above.
[iii] A windowless wall is that wall which contains no
windows.
[b] Minimum distance from building wall to lot line:
[i] Primary wall: six feet plus two feet for each story
(S) in height plus one foot for each 10 feet of
length (L).
§ 190-142 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-142
186:588
D = 6 + 2S + L/10
[ii] Secondary wall: two feet plus one foot for each
story (S) in height plus one foot for each 10 feet of
length (L), minimum distance 5 feet.
D = 2 + S + L/10
[iii] Windowless wall. Yard depth for a wall containing
no windows, or only windows which do not involve
loss of privacy for required interior space, shall be
determined by individual design analysis.
[iv] Retaining wall. The distance between a building
wall with habitable room windows and a retaining
wall with the top above the midpoint of the
vertical height of the lowest window shall be a
minimum of the appropriate primary and
secondary wall distance (see above) treating the
retaining wall as a lot line.
[c] Vertical setback. Where the length of a wall is angled
or set back six feet or more, the length (L) of each
segment or plane is measured separately in
determining the required yard depth.
[d] Irregular wall. The length (L) of a curved or
irregularly shaped wall is the shortest distance
between the wall's end corners.
(c) Senior rental apartments.
[1] No building shall contain more than 160 senior rental
apartments.
[2] No building shall exceed:
[a] Two hundred feet in length along one linear plan.
[b] Four hundred feet in length with two wings with an
angle of 90° to 150°, provided that no wing is greater
than 200 feet.
[c] 600 feet in length with three wings with angles of 90°
to 150° provided no wing is greater than 200 feet.
[3] Setback requirements to roadways and parking areas.
[a] Building to interior roadways: 15 feet.
[b] Building to parking area: 10 feet.
[c] Building to public exterior roadway: 50 feet.
§ 190-142 JUNK DEALERS § 190-142
186:589
[d] Building to perimeter tract boundary: 50 feet
minimum.
(6) Maximum height.
(a) Townhouses: 2 1/2 stories.
(b) Apartments: two stories.
(c) Senior apartments: three stories.
(7) Off-street parking requirements.
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided in spaces measuring not
less than 18 feet by nine feet for perpendicular parking stalls.
(b) The minimum number of parking spaces shall be in accordance
with the N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site Improvement
Standards. Parking for senior rental apartments may conform
to the minimum standards of 0.5 parking spaces per unit as
required for assisted living housing units.
(c) No structure or portion of a structure constructed as a private
garage or storage area shall be converted into living area.
(8) Open space and recreational area requirement. Not less than the
30% of the project site shall be devoted to open space as defined in
this chapter. Not less than 10% of a townhouse or multifamily
housing site shall be designated for active recreation space such as
swimming pool; club house; court sports; softball, baseball or field
sports areas; tot-lots; picnic areas; and exercise areas. Senior
rental projects shall provide indoor common meeting rooms,
exercise rooms and indoor recreation areas and picnic,
shuffleboard and other facilities suitable for the residents of the
project. Parking areas for recreational areas shall be provided
based upon the size of the facilities provided.
(9) Governmental subsidies. Freehold Township shall take such steps
as are necessary to assist the developer in obtaining state and/or
federal subsidies for low- and moderate-income housing when such
subsidies are sought by the applicant as a means to provide such
housing.
(10) Provisions specifically waived or modified within the moderate- and
low-income housing zones.
(a) The provisions of Article XVIII, § 190-189 et seq., are waived or
modified as follows: Subsections A and B are waived.
Subsection D is modified to permit minimum gross habitable
floor areas as provided for in current U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development Minimum Property
Standards.
§ 190-142 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-142
186:590
§ 190-143. LTW Lake Topanemus Watershed District.
(b) Subsection E of § 190-190 is waived; all other requirements of
that subsection shall apply.
(c) A resident superintendent shall not be required for each
structure in the development; however, in the case of a rental
complex of greater than 120 units, an on-site superintendent
shall be provided.
(11) Required storage area or garage. Each housing unit shall provide
individual and secured storage facilities containing not less than
200 cubic feet. A private garage containing not less than 180
square feet may be substituted for the storage area requirement
and would count as 1/2 parking space. Senior rental apartments
shall conform with New Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency
guidelines for closet and cabinet space.
F. Other requirements. All development shall comply with Article XX,
Affordable Housing, § 190-217 et seq., of this chapter.
G. Provisions for modified regulations for the ML 7 Moderate- and Low-
Income Zone at Block 49 Lots 39 and 40.01 and a portion of Lot 42 in
accordance with a consent order entered January 11, 1999, by the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Monmouth County and
filed on January 14, 1999, applicable only to Planning Application
445-4-98 (known as "Avalon Manor") as follows: Lofts shall be
permitted in up to 28% of the total number of dwelling units within the
housing units approved by the Planning Board, but in no case more than
80 units. For purposes of this provision, a "loft" shall be defined as an
intermediate-level floor between the floor and the ceiling of any story,
provided that the aggregate floor area of the loft floor shall not exceed
1/3 of the total floor area of the room in which the loft is located. A loft
a) shall be enclosed on no more than three sides with one side fully
open to the room below; b) be prohibited from use as a bedroom; and c)
shall be prohibited from use as a bathroom nor be permitted to have
any installation of plumbing. An applicant seeking permission to
construct a loft shall be required to provide in the written lease or deed
of conveyance, as the case may be, for all units with lofts, provisions
specifically prohibiting the use of the loft space as a bedroom, a bath or
other use requiring plumbing, and enclosing more than three sides of
the loft and further provided that such written lease or deed of
conveyance, as the case may be, that a unit with a loft shall be subject
to reasonable inspection from time to time by the Construction Code
Official or Zoning Officer of the Township of Freehold to ensure full
compliance with the provisions contained herein. A copy (or copies) of
the deed restriction(s) shall be filed with the Planning Board and
Township Attorney for their approval. A copy of the approved lease or
deed of conveyance shall be filed with the Construction Code Official
and Zoning Officer for every residential unit containing a loft.
§ 190-142 JUNK DEALERS § 190-143
186:591
A. Purpose. The purpose of the LTW Lake Topanemus Watershed District is
to establish land use and development controls to maintain low density
residential development and environmental controls within the
watershed area in order to prevent pollution of surface drainage and
subsurface water resources and to comply with Stipulation of
Settlement in the matter of Joel Opatut Family Trust, Opatut L.P., H Plus
E, L.L.C., and Broadway Estates v. Township of Freehold and Township
Committee of the Township of Freehold, Docket No. MON-L-5766-97.
B. Special requirements and best management practices for land
development within the Lake Topanemus Watershed District.
Development within the Lake Topanemus Watershed District requires
special setbacks from tributaries and intermittent streams draining to
McGellaird's Brook and Lake Topanemus for septic systems, structures
and impervious surfaces from streams, intermittent streams, soils with
a shallow depth to water table slopes of 10% or greater, and soils with
rapid percolation and drainage. Development within this district is
required to utilize best management practices in terms of grading and
development to maintain and enhance surface and subsurface drainage
and water quality, protection of natural stream and intermittent stream
corridors and drainageways through planting and reforestation with
native vegetation and design of development to minimize adverse
impacts on the streams and intermittent streams within and adjacent to
the district. [Added 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-5]
C. Permitted uses: single-family dwellings.
D. Permitted accessory uses: same as R-R except farm storage sheds and
barns.
E. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified for the R-25 Zone in
Schedule C at the end of this chapter.
F. Stipulation of settlement requirements for properties included in the
Matter of Opatut et al. cited in Subsection A above.
(1) Maximum number of building lots. The maximum number of
building lots shall not exceed 165 single-family detached building
lots in accordance with the Stipulation of Settlement in the matter
of Joel Opatut Family Trust, et al., v. Township of Freehold, Docket
No. MON-L-5766-97.
(2) Development option. Single-family detached residential
development in this district may develop in accordance with the
area, yard and building requirements of the R-25 Residential Zone
as contained in Schedule C, Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements, at the end of this chapter, provided the development
is developed in accordance with the Stipulation of Settlement and
does not exceed the number of lots permitted in the Stipulation of
Settlement. The Planning Board shall have the fight to grant
variable lot provisions to a subdivision in this district. Development
§ 190-143 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-143
186:592
§ 190-144. Commercial Zone B-2.
within this district shall be designed to protect and enhance the
surface and subsurface water quality of streams and tributaries
and intermittent streams in accordance with best management
practices for stormwater and drainage design and in accordance
with subdivision design standards promulgated by the New Jersey
Residential Site Design Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.)
(3) Chapter 336, Trees, shall be waived, if necessary, upon agreement
with the Township's professionals, for development applications for
lots included in the Stipulation of Settlement for development
within the LTW-40 Zoning District.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) General business activities, including such activities as retail sales,
offices and banks, eating and drinking establishments and personal
services.
(2) Building material supply and sales, including such activities as
lumber yards, mason materials, storage and sales, plumbing and
electrical service and sales and similar storage and wholesale and
retail sales designed to supply and service construction and
building activities.
(3) Contractors' shops and offices.
(4) Small repair and machine shops generally employing fewer than 10
persons; and custom shops primarily engaged in the production of
articles or products to be sold at retail on the premises.
(5) Commercial laundries and dry cleaners, provided that any
commercial laundry shall be connected with a public sewage
disposal system.
(6) Extension and commercial schools.
(7) Animal hospitals and shelters.
(8) Public utility garages and storage facilities.
(9) Printing shops.
(10) Public utility installations.
(11) Automotive repair and maintenance (NAICS 8111). [Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-32]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Storage sheds, except that lumber storage sheds shall be
considered as a principal use.
§ 190-143 JUNK DEALERS § 190-144
186:593
§ 190-145. Commercial Zone B-10 Highway Development.
(2) Garage facilities.
(3) Signs.
(4) Fences.
C. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
D. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Gasoline filling stations.
(2) Planned commercial development in accordance with § 190-203.
[Amended 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-18; 2-26-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-5]
(3) Gasoline filling station with a convenience store per § 190-197.1.
[Added 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-5]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Office buildings for professional, executive, engineering or
administrative purposes.
(2) Banks, retail stores and shops, provided that no exterior storage or
sales of building materials shall be permitted. [Amended
9-9-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-12]
(3) Personal service establishments.
(4) Restaurants, cafes and coffee shops. Fast-food restaurants shall not
be located nearer than 3,000 feet from one another, except that this
provision shall not apply to fast-food restaurants located within
shopping centers. Family-style restaurants without liquor licenses
with video interactive games and/or child entertainment centers
with or without video interactive games shall be permitted subject
to the following design standards:
(a) Minimum floor area devoted to an individual family style
restaurant or child entertainment center use: 2,500 square
feet.
(b) Minimum floor area for each restaurant where two or more
family-style restaurants are located in the same building: 2,500
square feet.
(c) Minimum number of seats is 125.
(d) No separate take-out service area is permitted.
(e) No drive-up windows are permitted.
§ 190-144 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-145
186:594
(f) Video interactive devices, video games, and children
entertainment uses in conformance with Chapter 75, Article II,
§ 75-19, provided that the area used for such uses shall not
reduce the minimum required restaurant floor area and shall
not exceed 25% or 1,000 square feet of the total floor area of a
family-style restaurant, whichever is less.
(g) In any child entertainment center the area which contains
video interactive games shall not exceed 7,500 square feet and
the total area devoted to food service and party rooms shall not
exceed 20% of the total floor area of the child entertainment
center.
(5) Shopping centers comprised only of uses permitted in this zone.
(6) Wholesale business and distributors.
(7) Passenger bus stations.
(8) Research laboratories and light industries for the manufacture of
products which may be produced without the creation of
objectionable or detrimental effects on any other properties,
subject to the performance requirements and specifications as
hereinafter set forth in this chapter.
(9) Horse racetracks, horse racecourses, and premises wherein parimutuel
wagering is permitted by the state.
(10) Municipal facilities.
(11) Extension and commercial schools.
(12) Public utility installations.
(13) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 713940). [Added
6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
(14) Bowling centers (NAICS 713950). [Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-11]
(15) Other indoor recreational facilities including dancing schools,
gymnastic and cheerleading centers, miniature golf, target golf,
archery centers, skateboard parks and similar types of indoor
recreational activities and/or instruction. [Added 6-17-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-11]
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Storage buildings and garages, provided that it can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the reviewing board that such
accessory buildings are necessary to the successful operation of
the principal use on the premises, and that a definite economic
hardship or a health or safety hazard would be created if such
§ 190-145 JUNK DEALERS § 190-145
186:595
accessory building were not permitted; and further provided that
no accessory building be used for sale purposes of any nature.
(2) Signs.
(3) Fences.
(4) Dance halls only as an accessory to premises licensed to dispense
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption.
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Gasoline filling stations.
(2) Public schools. [Amended 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-3]
(3) Cemeteries.
(4) Motels and hotels.
(5) Pool or billiard parlor.
D. Area, yard and building requirements.
(1) As specified in Schedule C at the end of this chapter provided;
however, that for shopping centers containing 200,000 square feet
or more of contiguous gross leasable floor area located on a site of
not less than 10 acres for which preliminary and final site plan
approval for the overall development has been obtained from the
municipal agency, the approved site plan parcel of property may be
subdivided into lots having minimum dimensions as follows and
subject to the conditions contained herein:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot dimensions, lot width and depth: 100 feet each.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: up to 100% total of principal and
accessory buildings combined.
(d) Minimum yard depths: zero feet for principal and accessory
buildings.
(e) Minimum width , buffer zone: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum size of principal building in square feet: 80,000
square feet total.
(2) The following conditions must be met before the municipal agency
can approve the above area, yard and bulk requirements:
(a) All requirements of the preliminary and final site plan approval
other than as provided for above shall apply to the subdivided
lots as if the site plan approved parcel had not been
subdivided; and
§ 190-145 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-145
186:596
§ 190-146. Corporate Multi-Use Development Zones CMX-10,
CMX-4, CMX-3 and CMX-2.
(b) Any areas designed in the approved site plan to be used in
common with other approved site plan uses, or for the benefit
of the public, shall be required of the subdivided lots.
(c) All improvements required by Article IX, § 190-70 et seq., as
approved on final site plan approval for the subdivided parcel
shall continue to apply; and so long as common usage
easements or agreements that will be recorded are made a
condition of subdivision approval, the subdivided lots shall be
deemed to comply with Article IX of this chapter.
(d) All off-street parking, loading and unloading requirements that
apply to the unsubdivided parcel's approved final site plan
pursuant to Article XIV, § 190-162 et seq., of this chapter shall
be deemed to be in conformity as to the subdivided lots, so long
as common usage easements or agreements that will be
recorded are made a condition of approval.
A. Purpose. The CMX Zones are intended to establish areas favorable to
the location of businesses, offices and ancillary business service uses
within planned development environments with compatible building
designs and architectural facades and materials, efficient lot layout and
circulation systems, and aesthetically coordinated and well designed
site and landscape features.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses are limited to those included in the
North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) group or
classification indicated. NAICS codes are based on North American
Industrial Classification Manual of 1997 approved by the United States
Office of Management and Budget:
(1) Finance and insurance offices (NAICS 52).
(2) Real estate (NAICS 531) except lessors of mini-warehouses and
self-storage units (NAICS 53113).
(3) Cable and other pay television services (NAICS 51322) but not
including wireless telecommunications towers and antennas.
(4) Professional, scientific, and technical services (NAICS Sector 54).
(5) Business services limited to:
(a) Professional, scientific, and technical services (NAICS 54).
(b) Consumer credit reporting agencies, mercantile reporting
agencies, and adjustment and collection agencies (NAICS
5222).
(c) Personnel supply services (NAICS 446).
§ 190-145 JUNK DEALERS § 190-146
186:597
(d) Information services and data processing services (NAICS
514).
(e) Office administrative services (NAICS 5611).
(f) Facilities support services (NAICS 5612).
(g) Employment services (NAICS 5613).
(h) Business support services (5614).
(i) Travel arrangement and reservation services (5615).
(j) Detective agencies and protective services (NAICS 56161
except "armored car service" and "dogs, rental of" for
protective services).
(6) Health services limited to:
(a) Offices of physicians (NAICS 6211).
(b) Offices of dentists (NAICS 6212).
(c) Offices of other health practitioners (NAICS 6213).
(d) Medical and diagnostic laboratories (NAICS 6215).
(e) Within the CMX-2 Zone only, nursing care facilities (NAICS
623110). [Added 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-33]
(f) Within the CMX-2 Zone only, services for the elderly and
persons with disabilities, including adult day-care facilities
(NAICS 624120). [Added 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-33]
(7) Social services limited to:
(a) Individual and family services (NAICS 6241).
(b) Vocational rehabilitation services (NAICS 6243).
(c) Other individual and family services (NAICS 62419).
(8) Miscellaneous services limited to:
(a) Elementary and secondary schools (NAICS 6111).
(9) Within the CMX-3/A Zone only, new car dealers (NAICS 441110).
No more than 30% of a new car dealer’s displayed inventory may
consist of secondhand or used automobiles. [Added 3-24-2015 by
Ord. NO. O-15-485]
(10) Corporate office uses including or similar to permitted uses listed
in Subsection B(1) through (9) above.
85.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(9) through A(15) as
Subsection A(10) through A(16), respectively.
§ 190-146 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-146
186:598
(11) Conference and convention centers.
(12)Within the CMX-3/A Zone only, motor vehicle showrooms, offices
and mechanical repair and maintenance service facilities.
(13)Within the CMX-2 and the CMX-4 Zones only, permitted uses shall
also include: [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-29]
(a) Hotels and motels with a minimum of 100 rooms.
(b) Conference facilities.
(14)Within the CMX-2 and CMX-3, only permitted uses shall also
include houses of worship provided that the front yard setback
shall be a minimum of 100 feet and the side yards shall be a
minimum of 75 feet. [Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
(15)Within the CMX-3 Zone, integrated limited business and support
services. In addition to the permitted uses in the CMX-3 Zone listed
above, integrated limited business and support services may be
permitted as an office/commercial planned development option
within the CMX-3 Zone in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65c as part of a planned development to include uses
permitted under § 190-146B(1) through (11) and uses permitted
within Subsection B(15)(a) of this section [§ 190-146B(15)(a)] and
conditional uses permitted under § 190-146C in accordance with
the following: [Added 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-11]
(a) Permitted uses within an integrated limited business and
support services planned development.
[1] Business equipment, supplies, services, training, and
repair and maintenance.
[a] Computer and software stores (NAICS 443120).
[b] Office supplies (NAICS 424120).
[c] Office furniture stores (NAICS 442110).
[d] Communication equipment repair and maintenance
(NAICS 811213).
[e] Business service centers, including copy and
duplicating centers, mailbox rental and mailing and
duplicating shops (NAICS 561439).
[f] Business schools and computer and management
training (NAICS 6114).
[2] Food services.
[a] Restaurants of not less than 1,250 square feet floor
area, and not less than 40 seats (NAICS 722110).
§ 190-146 JUNK DEALERS § 190-146
186:599
[b] Limited-service eating places (NAICS 72221).
[c] Delicatessens (NAICS 722211).
[d] Cafeterias (NAICS 722212).
[e] Snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars (including
sandwich, bagel and/or coffee shops, ice cream and
yogurt stores and ethnic food specialty stores) where
take-out service is permitted, but drive-through
service is not permitted (NAICS 722213).
[f] Baked goods stores (NAICS 445291).
[g] Confectionery and nut stores (NAICS 44292).
[3] Office park employee personal sales and service
establishments.
[a] Health and personal care stores (including
pharmacies, drug stores, cosmetic and beauty supply
stores, optical goods and other health and personal
care stores) (NAICS 4461).
[b] Book, periodical and music stores (NAICS 4512).
[c] Dry cleaner and laundry dropoff and pickup with no
coin-operated equipment and no cleaning processing
equipment on site (NAICS 812320).
[d] Barbershops, hair, beauty and nail salons (NAICS
812111, 812112 and 812113).
[e] Home health equipment rental (NAICS 532291).
[f] Convenience stores not exceeding 2,500 square feet of
floor area with no drive-through service, gasoline or
motor vehicle service permitted (NAICS 445120).
[g] Fitness and recreational sports centers and spas not
over 5,000 square feet in size, with operating hours
not earlier than 6:00 a.m. and not later than 11:00
p.m. (NAICS 713940).
[4] Similar business services, educational and training
facilities where retail sales of products related to the
business or service are ancillary to the service provided.
(b) Bulk, architectural and tract area requirements for:
[1] A planned development must comprise a minimum tract
area of 10 acres.
§ 190-146 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-146
186:600
[2] An integrated limited business and support services
planned development must contain a minimum of 35,000
square feet of gross leasable floor area.
[3] The floor area approved for an integrated limited business
and support services planned development comprised of
non-office uses shall not exceed 30% of the total approved
floor area. Permitted uses in Subsection B(1) through (14)
and permitted conditional uses shall not be classified as
non-office uses for purposes of this calculation.
[4] Applicants for integrated business and support services
planned developments shall submit a schedule of
development providing a phasing plan of permitted uses,
conditional uses, office and non-office uses based upon the
gross leasable floor areas for each category of use. Nonoffice
uses as calculated in Subsection B(15)(b)[3] shall
not exceed 65% of any construction phase within an
approved limited business and support services planned
development.
[5] The floor area ratio for one-story developments shall not
exceed 0.15. The floor area ratio for two-story mixed use
(office and non-office uses) shall not exceed 0.20.
[6] Buildings approved within an integrated limited business
and support services planned development in the CMX-3
Zones shall maintain the following setbacks and buffer
requirements adjacent to residential zones; provided,
however, that existing wooded areas on site or adjacent to
the site that are classified and delineated as freshwater
wetlands and /or delineated wetlands transition areas may
be included as planted buffers areas subject to
supplemental plantings to form a planted screen from the
residential buildings:
[a] Planted buffer:
[i] One story structures: 50 feet.
[ii] Two-story structures: 75 feet.
[7] Specified non-office uses shall not exceed 15,000 square
feet in an individual building and no single non-office use
shall exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, other
than a conditional use restaurant.
[8] Each building within an integrated limited business and
support services planned development that contains nonoffice
uses shall contain not less than two and not more
than four attached non-office uses.
§ 190-146 JUNK DEALERS § 190-146
186:601
[9] An integrated limited business and support services
planned development must be designed with an overall
architectural theme consistent with the requirements of
§ 190-114, Architectural design requirements for
commercial, office and industrial development, in a
manner which will not result in an appearance of a linear
or strip shopping center.
[10] Integrated limited business and support services planned
developments shall provide cross-access easements and
shared parking between contiguous properties within
CMX and B (Business) Zones to the greatest extent
feasible to minimize ingress and egress vehicular
movements on Route 9, Route 537 and other arterial and
collector roadways. The cross-access easements and any
shared parking areas shall be readily visible and clearly
signed on both properties.
(16) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 713940). [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-15]
C. Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Hotels and motels.
(2) Day-care facilities.
(3) (Reserved)86
(4) Cemeteries.87
(5) Pool or billiard parlors.
(6) Historic commercial projects.
(7) Restaurants.
(8) Congregate care and assisted living residential facilities. Permitted
only within the CMX-2 Zone and CMX-3 Zones.
(9) Self-storage warehousing (NAICS 531130).
(10) Car wash facilities. Permitted only within the CMX-3 Zone. [Added
3-17-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-3]
D. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Signs in accordance with § 190-183.
86.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3), which listed nursing homes and similar long-term
care facilities as permitted uses subject to a conditional use permit, was repealed
12-16-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-33.
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), Houses of worship, as amended 9-25-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-25, was repealed 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11. This ordinance also
renumbered former Subsection C(5) through (10) as Subsection C(4) and (9), respectively.
§ 190-146 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-146
186:602
(2) Fences.
(3) Storage sheds for building and property maintenance equipment
and refuse enclosures provided that they are constructed of a
material compatible in form and color with the principal structure
and screened from view from the roadway by landscaping, planted
berm or decorative fencing.
E. Area, yard and building requirements. Specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
F. Lot and building arrangement in CMX-2, CMX-3, CMX-3/A, CMX-4 and
CMX-10 Zones.
(1) All principal and accessory buildings shall be designed and located
upon the site with the intent to minimize the disturbance of existing
land forms, water features, and areas of significant vegetation.
(2) Roadway layout and lot configuration shall be designed to permit
flexibility of building placement to accommodate passive and/or
active solar heating.
(3) All buildings shall be sited to assure minimal interference with the
solar access of adjacent land uses and to create windbreakers
minimizing winter heat loss potential.
(4) Access roadways, signage and landscaping shall be the only
permitted uses within the front yard area. All parking must be
located to the side or rear of the building and screened from view
from the roadway by the use of landscaping, berming, or decorative
fence or wall.
(5) Buildings located within 200 feet of a residence or residential zone
shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories in height or 35 feet, and shall be
designed so as to be harmonious with neighboring residences.
[Amended 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-33]
(6) All buildings within the CMX-2, CMX-3, CMX-3/A, CMX-4 and
CMX-10 zoning districts shall be compatible in architectural design
in accordance with the requirements of § 190-114. All buildings
shall be finished on the front and sides with face brick, its
equivalent or better. All roof-mounted appurtenances must be
screened from view.
(7) Application for development within the CMX-4 Zone shall be made
as a planned commercial development and, where applicable, in
accordance with the general development plan review procedures
contained in § 190-36. In the event the statute providing for
planned developments, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.3 should be interpreted
as inapplicable to a parcel 100 acres or less, then the development
shall be considered by the Planning Board as a conventional
development, subject, however, to all other provisions, including
§ 190-146 JUNK DEALERS § 190-146
186:603
§ 190-147. Highway Mixed Use Development Zone. [Added
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-1888; amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-10]
Purpose: The purpose of the Highway Mixed Use Development Zone is to
provide for a mix of commercial and multifamily residential uses within
development tracts whereby the former can be concentrated along Route
9, County Route 524 and County Route 23 while the latter can serve as an
appropriate transition to adjacent zones.
phasing, of any consent order and stipulation of settlement to
which the property to be developed is subject.
A. Minimum tract size: 20 acres for development that includes mixed-use
and/or multifamily residential buildings and 10 acres for development
that includes permitted principal uses other than mixed-use and
multifamily residential buildings.
B. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Retail sales and service stores.
(2) Restaurants, including fast-food restaurants and drive-through
restaurants.
(3) Specialty food and food markets with seating areas for on-premises
consumption as provided herein.
(4) Offices for professional, executive or administrative purposes, and
related business support services.
(5) Banks, financial institutions, insurance and real estate businesses.
(6) Multifamily residential buildings.
(7) Mixed-use buildings as permitted herein.
(8) Child-care centers in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D—66.6.
(9) Gasoline filling stations with convenience stores provided they
meet the following:
(a) The convenience store contains a minimum of 4,000 square
feet of floor area.
(b) No automotive repair work shall be permitted
(c) There shall be no drive-through facilities associated with the
convenience store.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 190-147, Corporate Multi-Use Development Zones CMX-3/B, as
amended, was repealed 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-18.
§ 190-146 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-147
186:604
(d) Outdoor solid waste disposal containers shall be contained
within masonry structures with the same fascia material as the
convenience store.
(e) Parking spaces shall be provided for each 150 square feet of
floor area devoted to the convenience store.
(f) The location and access to the convenience store shall not
impede or interfere with vehicular and pedestrian circulation
to and from fuel pumps.
(g) Fuel dispensers and/or overhead canopies shall only be
permitted in the front yard and shall be set back a minimum of
50 feet from the right-of-way of U.S. Route 9.
(h) Gasoline filling stations shall only be permitted in tracts where
they provide direct access to a state highway.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs for nonresidential uses in accordance with the standards as
set forth in §§ 190-173 through 190-176 and § 190-183.
(2) Fences.
(3) Parking, including for multifamily residential dwellings as provided
herein.
(4) Garbage storage and recycling enclosures.
(5) Active and passive recreational facilities for residents, which may
include, but not be limited to, a clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis
courts, fitness and exercise areas and bicycle/walking paths.
(6) Management office(s) for multifamily residential use.
(7) Any other uses which are subordinate and customarily incidental to
a permitted use.
D. Location criteria.
(1) No multifamily residential building shall be located within a
distance of 300 feet from the rights-of-way of U.S. Route 9 and
County Route 23, exclusive of any portion of the existing jughandle.
(2) No building accommodating any permitted principal use(s) other
than a multifamily residential building shall be located a distance of
more than 400 feet from the rights-of-way of U.S. Route 9 and
County Route 23, exclusive of any portion of the existing jughandle.
E. Development standards.
§ 190-147 JUNK DEALERS § 190-147
186:605
(1) The ground floor of any mixed-use building shall be used for any
permitted principal use other than multifamily residential
dwellings. No permitted principal use other than multifamily
residential dwellings shall be located above the ground floor of any
mixed-use building.
(2) Food and specialty food markets shall have a minimum gross floor
area of 8,000 square feet and shall provide a minimum of 25 seats
for on-premises consumption.
(3) The maximum permitted residential density, inclusive of any
multifamily dwelling units that are within mixed-use buildings,
shall be 10 units per acre as applied to the total tract area.
(4) The maximum floor area ratio for all nonresidential uses, inclusive
of any nonresidential floor area within mixed-use buildings, shall be
0.05 as applied to development tracts of 20 acres or more. The
maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.10 as applied to all other
development tracts.
(5) The maximum height of any building other than a multifamily
residential building shall be three stories and 45 feet.
(6) The maximum height of any multifamily residential building shall
be four stories and 55 feet.
(7) The maximum number of multifamily residential dwelling units in
any buildings shall not exceed 52. No multifamily residential or
mixed-use buildings shall be more than 270 feet in length.
(8) The maximum building coverage shall be 20%.
(9) The maximum impervious coverage shall be 60%.
(10) The minimum building setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) From a state right-of-way exclusive of any portion of an
existing jug-handle: 100 feet.
(b) From a county right-of-way exclusive of any portion of an
existing jug-handle: 100 feet.
(c) From any abutting nonresidentially zoned property: 50 feet.
(d) From any abutting residentially zoned property to multifamily
residential development: 75 feet, except that said requirement
shall be 50 feet from a detached single-story residential garage
structure.
(e) From any abutting residentially zoned property to
nonresidential development: 150 feet.
(11) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for retail sales
and service stores shall be four spaces per 1,000 square feet of
§ 190-147 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-147
186:606
floor area. For all other uses, the standards set forth in § 190-163
or as otherwise established in this section shall apply.
(12) Any outdoor refuse and recycling storage areas shall be
appropriately screened by a wall enclosure constructed of
materials similar to the facades of the buildings and with
appropriate landscaping as required by the Planning Board.
(13) A minimum twenty-five-foot-wide landscape buffer strip shall be
provided where multifamily residential development abuts a
residential zone. A minimum seventy-five foot-wide landscaped
buffer strip shall be provided where nonresidential development
abuts a residential zone. Said buffer zone shall comply with the
standards set forth in § 190-166 and shall be permanently
maintained along the property line abutting the residential zone.
(14) Multiple uses and buildings are permitted within the development
tract.
F. Miscellaneous requirements for multifamily residential development.
(1) Multifamily residential and mixed-use buildings shall contain oneor
two-bedroom units only, except that a percentage of the
affordable units may be three bedrooms to comply with applicable
regulations as referenced herein.
(2) Multifamily residential and mixed-use buildings shall provide
elevator access to upper floors.
(3) Multifamily residential and mixed-use buildings shall provide
indoor trash disposal and storage facilities.
(4) The following recreational and related amenities shall be provided
for residents: swimming pool, clubhouse, fitness center, lounge,
media and game room and business center. Additional active and/or
passive recreational facilities, including, but not limited to tennis
courts, fitness and exercise areas and bicycle/walking paths may be
required at the discretion of the Planning Board based upon the
number of multifamily residential dwelling units proposed.
(5) Parking for multifamily residential dwellings may be provided by
means of any or all of the following: at-grade surface spaces; tuck
under, below building spaces; spaces in detached, single-story
garage structures.
(6) No parking space intended to satisfy the off-street parking
requirement for multifamily residential use within either a
multifamily residential or mixed-use building shall be located more
than 125 feet from said building.
(7) A minimum of 10% of all multifamily dwelling units constructed
within the development tract shall be set aside for low- and
moderate-income households. Affordable units shall be integrated
§ 190-147 JUNK DEALERS § 190-147
186:607
throughout the development tract and shall comply with applicable
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and
the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
G. Architectural design requirements for multifamily residential and
mixed-use buildings.
(1) Building articulation and massing. Multifamily residential and
mixed-use building bulk shall be broken down vertically and
differentiated horizontally to avoid monotonous and repetitive
facades through any or all of the following: vertical changes in the
façade plane; changes in material, color, pattern and/or texture;
use of columns, pilasters, balustrades or similar ornamental
features; changes in the size and rhythm of fenestration; use of
design features such as balconies and terraces, changes in the
roofline via coping, parapet, cornice or similar ornamental
features. The base of mixed-use buildings in particular shall be
highlighted architecturally and differentiated from upper floors in
order to visually ground the building. Detailing and materials at the
base of mixed-use buildings shall be richer than on upper floors and
may include features such as horizontal banding, variation in
window pattern and proportioning (i.e., larger window openings),
as well as signage and lighting. The top and roof of multifamily
residential buildings shall be defined and differentiated with
multifaceted roof shapes where appropriate to break up the
roofline.
(2) Building façade detailing.
(a) Pedestrian building entries shall be clearly visible and
highlighted within facades. Continuous expanses of
windowless wall shall be prohibited at all levels. A change in
plane and variation in materials and/or detailing shall be
provided for any windowless wall in excess of 20 feet in length.
Windows shall occupy at least 20% of the façade area within
multifamily residential buildings and shall occupy at least 25%
of the façade area within mixed-use buildings.
(b) Preferred materials for facades shall be brick, cultivated stone
or other masonry facing and vinyl or fiber cement siding or
backboard. No more than three different materials shall be
employed as primary materials on a building facade. Within the
chosen primary materials, variation in color, texture and
pattern may be employed to create further distinctions. The
level of materials, detailing and articulation shall be consistent
along all facades. Materials shall be extended around corners
and extensions in order to avoid a "pasted on" appearance.
Where buildings have "tuck under" parking at the ground level
of multifamily buildings or where there are detached
freestanding garages, garage doors shall be richer in color as
compared to the remainder of the façade. Such doors shall
§ 190-147 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-147
186:608
§ 190-148. Historical Commercial Zone HC.
§ 190-149. Hospital Zone H-1. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-32]
further incorporate changes in texture and/or include
ornamental framing/features as part of the design. Detached
freestanding garages shall employ the same façade materials
and articulation as the multifamily residential buildings.
(c) All major mechanical equipment located on the roof of a
building shall be screened from view of all vantage points with
a material harmonious to that used in the façade of the
building.
A. All buildings and uses including single-family residences and farm
structures shall be constructed, designed and developed in a manner
consistent with and designed to complement the Battleground State
Park and the aesthetic and Colonial and Early American architectural
design and character of the Colonial and Revolutionary War period.
B. Permitted uses in the Historical Commercial Zone (Battlefield
Development District) are as follows:
(1) Single-family dwellings in accordance with the Residential R-80
Zone.
(2) Farms.
(3) Farm stands in accordance with § 190-116D.
C. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Hospitals and hospital-related facilities licensed by the State of
New Jersey.
(2) Outpatient clinics, medical laboratories, professional medical
offices which are part of or a subsidiary of a hospital located on the
same lot as the hospital or on separate lots.
(3) Assisted-living and senior residential facilities licensed by or
requiring a certificate of need from the New Jersey Department of
Health or Department of Community Affairs.
(4) Nursing homes, intermediate-care and long-term-care facilities
licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health.
(5) Special-needs housing.
B. Accessory uses:
§ 190-147 JUNK DEALERS § 190-149
186:609
(1) Fences in accordance with the Freehold Township Fence
Regulations contained in § 190-165.
(2) Signs in accordance with Article XVII, Signs, § 190-173 et seq., of
this chapter.
(3) Dormitories in conjunction with a general hospital and providing
living quarters for doctors, interns, nurses and others employed by,
or studying at, the hospital.
(4) Common parking areas.
(5) Common storage structures and facilities subject to the same
limitations and requirements as the principal structures.
(6) Common open space and outdoor and indoor recreational facilities
and structures subject to the same limitations and requirements as
the principal structures.
(7) Physical therapy facilities.
(8) Entertainment facilities.
(9) Libraries.
(10) Food preparation facilities.
(11) Dining facilities.
(12) Linen service facilities.
(13) Housekeeping service.
(14) Security facilities, administrative offices, ancillary office space,
storage facilities, chapels, and facilities for the temporary lodging
of guests of patients or residents.
C. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) A hospital licensed by the State of New Jersey as specified in
Schedule C, Area, Yard and Building Requirements, at the end of
this chapter for the H-1 Zone.
(2) Outpatient clinics, medical laboratories, and professional medical
offices, not on the same lot as a hospital as specified in Schedule
C,89 Area, Yard and Building Requirements, for the P-1 Zone.
(3) Special-needs housing shall be subject to the following:
(a) Special-needs housing developments shall conform with the
requirements of the H-1 Hospital Zone as contained in the
89.Editor's Note: Schedule C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-149 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-149
186:610
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements90, except as
follows:
[1] Maximum density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per
acre;
[2] Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 1.00 for
principal and accessory buildings;
[3] All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
an existing accessible public street and 65 feet from a
nonaccessible or limited access street or portion thereof;
[4] All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
an internal access drive or parking area (except for
loading and unloading areas for persons and supplies);
[5] All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 65 feet from
any property line within a residential zone and a minimum
of 50 feet from any nonresidential property line;
[6] All building and impervious surfaces shall be set back a
minimum of 15 feet from any wetlands transition area in
accordance with an approved letter of interpretation from
the NJDEP;
[7] Requirement of buffer area. Where an area required for a
buffer is already wooded, it shall be left in its natural state,
and the existing growth shall be supplemented with
additional plant material where necessary. Buffer areas
adjacent to residential zones shall contain a strip not less
than 20 feet in width containing massed evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such a manner that
will provide a continuous screen throughout the entire
year;
[8] Required buffers shall be used for no other purpose than
as a buffer and as part of the required open space of the
tract. The only structures which may be erected within a
buffer area are fences as elsewhere regulated in this
chapter; provided further, however, that stormwater
management structures (including but not limited to
basins and related improvements) may be permitted
within a required buffer area, provided such facilities shall
be suitably landscaped around their perimeters in order to
be visually compatible and harmonious with the
surrounding natural and or planted buffer areas. All
nonpaved areas shall conform with Article XV, Fence and
Buffer Regulations.
90.Editor's Note: See Schedule C at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-149 JUNK DEALERS § 190-149
186:611
§ 190-150. Professional Zone P-1. [Amended 8-24-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-35]
The Professional Zone P-1 is generally intended to be utilized as a buffer
zone between residential zones and more intensive nonresidential zones,
and as such, each use within this zone shall be designed, constructed and
operated in such a manner as to create the least possible disruption to
adjacent residential properties. The P-1 Zone on Route 537 east of Gravel
Hill Road is intended to provide for office uses related to and in support
of the existing hospital and medical offices that serve Freehold and the
western Monmouth region.
(b) Parking shall provide for a minimum of 1.25 parking spaces per
dwelling unit including required handicapped parking spaces
in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(c) All proposed restrictive covenants, deed restrictions, articles
of incorporation or other documents related to the creation of a
homeowners' association, trust documents or other deeds or
documents to provide for ownership, age restrictions for rental
units, and maintenance of common property and facilities shall
be submitted to the Township for review by the Planning Board
and Township Attorneys prior to final approval of any site plan.
(d) Affordable housing requirement. The provisions of this section
shall be subject to the provisions of Article XX, Affordable
Housing, § 190-217 et seq. Special-needs housing units shall be
affordable to low- and moderate-income households; provided,
however, that special needs housing may include a permanent
caretaker residence that is not required to be a low- or
moderate-income person or household. Of the low- and
moderate-income housing units 13% shall be affordable for
very low-income residents in accordance with N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, pursuant to Chapter 46 Laws of 2008. The
operator of a special-needs housing facility shall be responsible
for the administrative and reporting requirements and costs
associated therewith in accordance with the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing regulations for special-needs
housing (N.J.A.C. 5:97, and with the New Jersey Housing and
Mortgage Finance Agency requirements for special-needs
housing, N.J.S.A. 5:80 et seq.)
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Office buildings for professional, executive, engineering or
administrative purposes including and similar to uses identified in
the North American Industry Classification System (2002), where
noted, as follows:
(a) Professional, scientific, and technical services (NAICS 54).
§ 190-149 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-150
186:612
(b) Internet service providers, web search portals, and data
processing services (NAICS 518).
(c) Office administrative services (NAICS 5611).
(d) Facilities support services (NAICS 5612).
(e) Employment services (NAICS 5613).
(f) Business support services (NAICS 5614).
(2) Health services including and similar to:
(a) Offices of physicians (NAICS 6211).
(b) Offices of dentists (NAICS 6212).
(c) Offices of other health practitioners (NAICS 6213).
(3) Social services including and similar to:
(a) Individual and family services (NAICS 6241).
(b) Vocational rehabilitation services (NAICS 6243).
(c) Other individual and family services (NAICS 62419).
(4) Banks and financial institutions.
(5) Municipal facilities.
(6) Child-care centers in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(7) Planned medical center support service development. In addition to
the permitted uses in the P-1 Zone listed above, planned medical
center support service developments shall be a permitted in the P-1
Zone on C.R. 537 and Gravel Hill Road in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c for planned developments on one
tract or on contiguous properties totaling 20 or more acres within
the P-1 Zone in accordance with the following provisions.
[Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-21]
(a) Permitted uses and structures:
[1] Offices of physicians (NAICS 6211), dentists and
orthodontists (NAICS 6212) and optometrists and other
health practitioners (NAICS 6213) used solely by those
medical professionals who regularly occupy and conduct
their medical practice from these offices.
[2] Pharmacies and drugstores (NAICS 44610) and other
retail establishments for the sale or lease of medical/
surgical supplies, orthopedic braces, prosthetic
appliances, and other medically related equipment,
§ 190-150 JUNK DEALERS § 190-150
186:613
clothes, shoes or supplies used by health care professional
or patients.
[3] Nursing homes, extended care, assisted living and other
similar long-term in-patient residential living and/or longterm
physical and mental health rehabilitation facilities.
[4] Hotels.
[5] Restaurants, banquet facilities, conference centers,
auditoriums, spas only in included within a hotel.
[6] Schools and other educational institutions related to the
practice of medicine, nursing, medical technician, or
medical, hospital and physician health care provision,
clerical, billing and administrative services, and related
advanced or continuing education programs.
[7] Dormitories or other housing facilities for students
registered in educational programs related to the practice
of medicine, nursing, medical technician or medical and
hospital physician care. [Amended 1-29-2019 by Ord.
No. O-19-2]
[8] Adult day-care centers and child day-care centers.
[9] Opticians and other optical-related businesses; hearing aid
centers; dental laboratories; and blood or specimen
collection sites.
[10] Uses set forth in § 190-50A(1) through (6) above.
(b) Accessory permitted uses including public utilities, off-street
parking lots and garages, loading facilities, fences, signs, and
temporary structures such as tents and trailers for special
events lasting no more than five days.
(c) Buildings and structures shall contain no more than three
aboveground occupiable floors or be more than 45 feet in
height from average adjacent ground levels within 25 feet from
the structure.
(d) HVAC and other similar building equipment if installed on
roofs shall be screened through the use of parapets and
screening walls on all four sides, so that the roof equipment is
not visible from Route 537 or 10 feet above ground level at the
nearest structure of the CentraState Medical Center building
complex. The parapets and screen walls shall not be used to
compute building structure maximum height.
(e) All buildings, parking lots and structures shall have access to
an internal road system that will ultimately link the Medical
Center Support Service structures to each other and be located
§ 190-150 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-150
186:614
§ 190-151. Professional Zone P-2.
The Profession Zone P-2 is intended to provide for small offices in areas
which were once residential in character and which retained the lot
patterns and building characteristics of a residential area with converted
structures for office uses. This zone also is a transition zone from residential
zones to high-traffic roadways. Professional office uses shall provide
coordinated driveways with adjacent office properties to the greatest extent
practicable in order to limit the number of driveway cuts on arterial
roadways. Driveways to side roads shall be utilized whenever practicable.
so that they may in the future connect to CentraState Medical
Center roadways to minimize traffic flow on Monmouth County
Route 537.
(f) Floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 0.25.
(g) Within the development area, impervious coverage shall not
exceed 60%.
(8) Houses of worship, provided that the front yard setback shall be a
minimum of 100 feet and side yards shall be a minimum of 75 feet.
[Added 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Signs.
(2) Fences.
C. Area, space and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size shall be two acres.
(2) All areas other than parking areas shall be planted with grass and
other adequate landscaping. Parking shall not be allowed within
the front yard setback area required for a principal building
fronting on a public road. The facades of proposed structures shall
be designed to complement the adjoining residential properties
and, where applicable, the CentraState Medical Center.
D. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Funeral homes.
(2) Fences.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Office buildings for insurance, engineering, legal services,
architectural, surveying, accounting, auditing, bookkeeping,
management, public relations, detective agencies, advertising
agencies, real estate offices and medical offices.
§ 190-150 JUNK DEALERS § 190-151
186:615
§ 190-152. Light Industrial Zone LI.
§ 190-153. Light Industrial Zone LI-3.
(2) Printing and reprographics shops.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Signs.
(2) Fences.
(3) Parking.
C. Area, yard and building requirements.
(1) As specified in Schedule C at the end of this chapter.
(2) Parking shall not be permitted within the front yard setback area
required for a principal building. The facades of proposed
structures shall be designed to complement the adjoining
residential properties.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Research laboratories and light industries for the manufacture of
products which may be produced without the creation of
objectionable or detrimental effects on any other properties,
subject to the performance requirements and specifications as set
forth in this chapter.
(2) Warehouses.
(3) Office buildings for professional, executive engineering, or
administrative purposes.
(4) Wholesale business and distributors.
(5) Municipal facilities.
(6) Public utility installations.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Signs in accordance with § 190-146F.
(2) Fences.
C. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-2]
(1) Fitness and recreational sports centers.
(2) Uses permitted in the Light Industrial LI Zone in § 190-152.
§ 190-151 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-153
186:616
§ 190-154. Industrial Zone M-1.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Signs in accordance with § 190-146F.
(2) Fences in accordance with this chapter.
C. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses subject of the issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Day-care facilities.
(2) Hotels and conference facilities.
(3) Planned commercial development in accordance with § 190-203.
[Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-18]
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses based on the North American Industry
Classification System include the NAICS classification and the sector or
industry classification. [Amended 8-7-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-16;
1-29-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-3]
NAICS Classification
Sector
2 Digit
Industry
3-6 Digit
(1) Construction 23
(2) Manufacturing:
Chocolate and confectionery
manufacturing
31120,
311330,
11340
Bakeries and tortilla manufacturing 3118
Snack food, roasted nuts and peanut
butter manufacturing
31191
Coffee and tea manufacturing 311912
Seasoning and dressing
manufacturing
31194
Beverage manufacturing 3121
Apparel manufacturing 315
Leather and allied product
manufacturing, including footwear
and luggage
316
Millwork (wood) 32191
Printing and related support activities 323
Plastics product manufacturing 3261
§ 190-153 JUNK DEALERS § 190-154
186:617
NAICS Classification
Sector
2 Digit
Industry
3-6 Digit
Cutlery and handtool manufacturing 3322
Computer and electronic product
manufacturing
334
Electrical equipment, appliance, and
component manufacturing
335
Furniture and related product
manufacturing
337
Medical equipment and supplies 3391
Jewelry and silverware manufacturing 3399
Wholesale trade, durable goods 421
Wholesale trade, nondurable goods 422
(3) General freight trucking (and
terminals)
4841
(4) Warehousing and storage 493
(5) Information:
Publishing industries 511
Motion picture and sound
recording industries
512
Broadcasting and
telecommunications
513
Information and data processing
services
514
(6) Professional, scientific and technical
services
54
(7) Administrative and support services 561
(8) Solid waste collection and solid waste
transfers, including collecting and/or
hauling of hazardous waste materials
not stored or processed on site
562111
(9) (Reserved)
(10)Hotels 7211
(11)Automotive body, paint, interior and
glass repair, but not including "other
automotive repair and maintenance"
(NAICS 81119) such as oil change
and lubrication shops, rustproofing
and undercoating shops, car washes,
tire repair shops and air-conditioning
repair shops
81112
§ 190-154 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-154
186:618
NAICS Classification
Sector
2 Digit
Industry
3-6 Digit
(12)Public administration 81112
(13)Corporate office uses, including or
similar to permitted uses listed in
§ 190-146B(1) through (8), provided
that 50,000 square feet or more of the
"Industrial" uses of the corporate
entity are located in the M-1 Zone in
close proximity to the corporate
offices
(14)Other permitted uses: farms 92
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Those buildings and uses which are essential to the operation of the
principal use situated on the premises; which are incidental and
subordinate to the principal use and which conform to all
performance standards established in this chapter.
(2) Signs.
(3) Fences.
C. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
D. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, artist's body
painting studios, cabarets, massage shops, modeling studios and
tattoo shops.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Commercial and television antennas.
(4) Electrical cogeneration facilities.
(5) Pool or billiard parlor.
(6) Bulk document storage facilities.
(7) Automobile dealership repair and maintenance facilities. The
purpose of this use is to allow automotive dealerships located in
Freehold Township to store and provide sales preparation of
automotive vehicles on site but offered for sale and/or sold off site.
(See § 190-3, definition of "automobile dealership repair and
maintenance facilities.")
(8) Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas.
§ 190-154 JUNK DEALERS § 190-154
186:619
§ 190-155. Industrial Zone M-2.
§ 190-156. ROL Research, Office and Laboratory Zone. [Amended
8-24-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-35]
§ 190-157. Recreational Zone RC.
(9) Alternative motor vehicle fueling station. [Added 5-28-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-16]
(10) Public, private or parochial schools. [Added 1-29-2019 by Ord.
No. O-19-3]
A. Permitted uses: same as for Industrial Zone M-1.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as for Industrial Zone M-1.
C. Area yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses: same as for Industrial Zone M-1.
A. Purpose. The ROL Zone is intended to provide an environment for and
conducive to the development and protection of modern, large-scale,
low-intensity corporate administrative and executive offices, research,
laboratory, educational and/or telecommunication facilities which will
be compatible with and retain amenities of the site and adjacent lands.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be limited to those uses included in
the North American Standard Industrial Classification System (NAICS)
as indicated:
(1) Computer systems design and related services (NAICS 54151).
(2) Management, scientific and technical consulting services (NAICS
5416).
(3) Telecommunications offices and facilities (NAICS 517110) but not
including telecommunication or cellular towers.
C. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Signs.
(2) Parking.
(3) Fences.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C at the
end of this chapter.
A. Regulations. Recreational Zone regulations are applicable in
accordance with the provisions of this section in those areas specified
on the Zoning Map.
§ 190-154 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-157
186:620
§ 190-158. Regional Mall Zones RMZ-1, RMZ-2, RMZ-2A and
RMZ-3.
The RMZ-1, RMZ-2, RMZ-2A and RMZ-3 Regional Mall Zones are intended
to provide for the planned development of properties primarily devoted
to a regional shopping mall as permitted within the RMZ-1 Zone and
development of adjacent parcels of property contiguous to the mall within
the RMZ-2, RMZ-2A and RMZ-3 Zones for uses that complement and
enhance the overall development of the regional mall and to provide for
the orderly development of the regional mall area through coordinated
roadway, drainage and utility infrastructure improvements and
architectural and site design. Development within the RMZ Zones shall be
in accordance with a general development plan approved by the Freehold
Township Planning Board.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the Recreational Zone shall include
buildings, open air areas and other facilities for recreational purposes,
including parks, clubhouses, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis,
basketball and handball courts and other such facilities, but not to
include carnival-type activities, and child care centers in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6. At the time of site plan application and
review, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate to the Planning
Board that the site is to be utilized solely for recreation and recreationtype
uses and that the operator shall comply with all Township and state
regulations for day camp and other private or nonprofit recreation
facilities. Recreation uses shall not include any overnight facilities.
[Amended 12-17-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-39]
C. Area, space and bulk regulations: as specified in Schedule C at the end
of this chapter. [Amended 12-17-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-39]
A. Permitted uses within the RMZ-1 Zone:
(1) Regional mall shopping center.
(2) Retail stores and shops, including temporary, nonpermanent and
permanent vendor displays. [Amended 2-27-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-3]
(3) Personal service establishments including barbershops, beauty
parlors, shoe repair shops, tailor shops and similar types of uses.
(4) Theaters and assembly halls. [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-14]
(5) Restaurants and cafes; provided, however, that fast-food-type
restaurants shall be located within a permitted mall shopping
center structure.
(6) Office buildings for professional, executive or administrative
purposes.
§ 190-157 JUNK DEALERS § 190-158
186:621
(7) Hotels and convention centers.
(8) Passenger bus stations.
(9) Municipal and other governmental facilities.
(10) Extension and commercial schools.
(11) Public utility installations and structures.
(12) Banks, financial institutions, insurance, real estate businesses,
professional and administrative offices.
(13) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 713940). [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-15]
B. Permitted accessory uses within the RMZ-1 Zone.
(1) Storage buildings on a temporary or permanent basis, provided
that it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the reviewing
board that such accessory buildings are necessary to the successful
operation of the principal use on the premises, and that a definite
economic hardship or a health or safety hazard would be created if
such accessory building were not permitted; and further provided
that no accessory building be used for retail, wholesale or bulk
storage purposes of any nature.
(2) Signs in accordance with Article XVII of this chapter, § 190-173 et
seq.
(3) Fences.
(4) Garbage storage and recycling enclosures.
(5) Parking garages.
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of conditional use permit within the
RMZ-1 Zone. Day-care centers, provided that they are contained within
the mall shopping center structure, or a commercial or office building.
One freestanding day-care center of not less than 5,000 square feet nor
greater than 10,000 square feet may be permitted in the RMZ-1 Zone
adjacent to Winners Circle (outer loop road). [Amended 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. O-04-9]
D. RMZ-2, RMZ-2A and RMZ-3.
(1) Permitted uses on property designated as RMZ-2:
(a) Retail stores, retail stack storage and restaurants, provided
that each individual use, tenant, or unit within a building
contains a minimum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area
and provided that the average gross floor area for each use,
tenant, or unit on the overall development parcel is at least
40,000 square feet. On parcels where the aggregate gross floor
§ 190-158 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-158
186:622
area for each use, tenant, or unit on the overall development
parcel is less than 75,000 square feet each individual use,
tenant, or unit within a building shall contain a minimum gross
floor area of 10,000 square feet and the average gross floor
area for each use, tenant, or unit shall be at least 20,000
square feet. A retail stack storage use shall not exceed 65,000
square feet, provided that if more than one retail stack storage
use exceeding 40,000 square feet of floor area is located within
the RMZ-2 overall development parcel, then they shall be
separated by a distance of at least 200 feet from each other.
(b) Theaters and assembly halls.
(c) Office buildings for professional, executive or administrative
purposes which contain a minimum gross leasable floor area of
not less than 20,000 square feet. [Amended 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. O-04-9]
(d) Hotel and conference/convention centers.
(e) Passenger bus stations.
(f) Horse racetracks, horse racecourses, stables and accessory
structures and premises wherein pari-mutuel wagering is
permitted by the state.
(g) Municipal and other governmental facilities, including senior
citizen, cultural, civic and other similar use public facilities.
(h) Colleges, technical and business schools.
(i) Public utility installations and structures.
(j) Banks, financial institutions, insurance and real estate
businesses.
(k) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 713940).
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-15]
(2) Permitted uses on property designated as RMZ-2A:
(a) Hotel and convention centers subject to special design
standards for motels and hotels contained in § 190-204B(2),(3),
(4), (5) and (6) of this chapter.
(b) Restaurants are permitted subject to the following: a minimum
gross floor area of 5,000 square feet and a minimum of 225
seats for a freestanding restaurant on an individual lot and an
average of 200 seats and an average of 4,500 square feet
minimum gross floor area for two or more restaurants on one
lot. All restaurants shall have a minimum parking ratio of one
space for every four seats. No drive-through service shall be
§ 190-158 JUNK DEALERS § 190-158
186:623
permitted in any restaurant in the RMZ-2A Zone. [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-9]
(c) In the RMZ-2A Zone on parcels of less than five acres in
accordance with the general development plan approved by
the Planning Board June 9, 2003, in conjunction with P.B.
Application 697-02, the following uses are permitted: [Added
3-9-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-9]
[1] Banks and other financial institutions subject to the
following: a maximum building coverage of 15%, a
maximum floor area ratio of 0.25 and a minimum gross
leasable floor area of 5,000 square feet.
[2] Professional and administrative offices subject to the
following: a maximum building coverage of 15%, a
maximum floor area ratio of 0.25 and a minimum gross
leasable floor area of 10,000 square feet.
(d) Office buildings for professional, executive or administrative
purposes which contain a minimum gross leasable floor area of
not less than 20,000 square feet. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-2]
(e) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 713940).
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-15]
(3) Permitted uses on properties located in the RMZ-3 Zone:
(a) Retail stores and shops, provided that the minimum gross floor
area for each use, tenant or unit shall be at least 8,000 square
feet; however, any building standing alone and comprising less
than 8,000 square feet may be used for any permitted retail
use within the zone.
(b) Restaurants, provided that fast-food and drive-through
restaurants shall not be permitted.
(c) Office buildings for professional, executive or administrative
purposes.
(d) Horse racetracks, horse racecourses, and accessory structures
and premises wherein pari-mutuel wagering is permitted by
the state.
(e) Municipal and other governmental facilities.
(f) Public utility installations and structures.
(g) Banks, financial institutions, insurance and real estate
businesses.
(h) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 713940).
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-15]
§ 190-158 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-158
186:624
E. Permitted accessory uses in the RMZ-2 and RMZ-2A Zones: same as for
RMZ-1 (§ 190-158B).
F. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
(1) Same as permitted in the RMZ-1 Zone.
(2) In the RMZ-2A Zone only, restaurants are permitted subject to the
following: a minimum lot area of four acres, a minimum gross floor
area of 5,000 square feet, a minimum of 225 seats, no drivethrough
service, a minimum parking ratio of one space for every
four seats and approval of a planned development concept plan for
the entire RMZ-2A Zone delineating existing critical environmental
features including steep slopes, freshwater wetlands and transition
areas, streams, floodplains, heritage trees, and adjacent structures
and roadways within 200 feet and the location of planned land uses,
access drives, site circulation for vehicles and pedestrians, parking
areas, water and sanitary sewers, stormwater management and
development phasing plans.
G. Area, yard and building requirements: as provided for in Schedule C at
the end of this chapter, subject, however to the following:
(1) Within the mall outer loop road, in the RMZ-1 Zone, for regional
mall developments where the approved mall structure contains
400,000 square feet or more of gross leasable floor area, and
preliminary and final site plan approval for the mall structure
development area has been obtained, the approved site plan parcel
of property may be subdivided into lots within the approved
development area having minimum dimensions as follows and
subject to the conditions contained in Subsection G(2) herein.
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot dimensions; lot frontage, width and depth: 100
feet.
(c) Impervious surface coverage (including maximum building
coverage): Principal and accessory buildings, roadways and
parking areas combined shall not exceed the coverage shown
on the approved final site plan. Landscape areas for buildings,
parking islands and other areas within the subdivided area
shall not be less following subdivision than the approved final
site plan.
(d) Minimum yard depths: zero feet for principal and accessory
buildings.
(e) Minimum size of principal building in square feet: 80,000
square feet total.
(f) Floor area ratio: FAR shall not apply to individual subdivided
parcels; provided, however, that each freestanding structure or
§ 190-158 JUNK DEALERS § 190-158
186:625
structures shall comply with the required maximum
impervious surface coverage requirements.
(g) Public or private utility structures supporting the common uses
on the property shall have minimum setback and yard depths
to lot lines of zero feet.
(2) On properties in the RMZ-2 Zone, for non-mall facilities and
combinations of connected and unconnected structures on
contiguous parcels containing a minimum of 25,000 square feet of
gross floor area per structure, where the initial approved site was
not less than eight acres, and for which preliminary and final site
plan approval for the overall development of the parcel has been
obtained; the approved site plan parcel of property may be
subdivided into lots within the approved development area having
minimum dimensions as follows and subject to the conditions
contained in Subsection G(4) herein.
(a) Minimum lot area: 100,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot dimensions, lot frontage, width and depth: 150
feet.
(c) Impervious surface coverage (including maximum building
coverage): same as § 190-158G(1)(c).
(d) Minimum yard depths: zero feet for principal and accessory
buildings where buildings are connected by common or backto-
back walls, enclosed or covered walkways.
(e) Minimum size of principal building in square feet: 25,000
square feet gross floor area.
(f) Floor area ratio: FAR shall not apply to individual subdivided
parcels.
(g) Public and private utility structures supporting the common
uses on the property shall have minimum setback and yard
depths to lot lines of zero feet.
(3) The following conditions must be met before the municipal agency
can approve the above area, yard and bulk requirements:
(a) All applicable requirements of the preliminary and final site
plan approval other than as provided for above shall apply to
the subdivided lots as if the site plan approved parcel had not
been subdivided; and
(b) Any areas designed in the approved site plan to be used in
common with other approved site plan uses, or for the benefit
of the public, shall be required of the subdivided lots.
§ 190-158 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-158
186:626
(c) All improvements required by Article IX, § 190-70 et seq., as
approved on final site plan approval for the subdivided parcel
shall continue to apply; and so long as the recording of
common usage easements or agreements are made a condition
of subdivision approval, the subdivided lots shall be deemed to
comply with Article IX of this chapter.
(d) All off-street parking, loading and unloading requirements that
apply to the unsubdivided parcel approved final site plan
pursuant to Article XIV of this chapter shall be deemed to be in
conformity as to the subdivided lots, so long as the recording of
common usage easements or agreements are made a condition
of approval.
(4) The subdivisions provided for in Subsection G(1) and (2) above may
be granted as minor subdivisions without further public hearings.
(5) In the RMZ-2 and RMZ-2A Zones, development of improvements
shall be architecturally compatible as to facade and roof
treatments, materials and exterior colors used, and landscaping so
as to create aesthetic compatibility with the primary improvements
in the RMZ-1 Zone and other surrounding structures and natural
features.
H. Temporary, nonpermanent and permanent vendor displays. An owner of
a regional mall shopping center in an RMZ-1 Zone shall be permitted to
utilize space within the common area of the mall for temporary vendor
displays, nonpermanent vendor displays and permanent vendor
displays for uses permitted in the RMZ-1 Zone, subject to the following
requirements: [Amended 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-3]
(1) Temporary vendor displays. A "temporary vendor display" shall be
defined as any freestanding kiosk, cart or retail mobile unit with
wheels used for the sale or promotion for sale of services or goods,
for display or dissemination of information or educational
materials, or for the entertainment of the general public. The term
for a temporary vendor display shall not exceed six months. A
zoning permit shall be required for the temporary use of the vendor
display area and shall have a maximum duration of six months. One
or more consecutive zoning permits may be issued for the same
vendor in a particular display area. Each change of vendor shall
require a new zoning permit. In reviewing the application for the
zoning permit, the Zoning Officer shall determine if the proposed
use is permitted as well as what, if any, other inspections or permits
are required to comply with applicable health and safety codes. The
total number of temporary vendor displays shall not exceed 25.
(2) Nonpermanent vendor displays. A "nonpermanent vendor display"
shall be defined as any immobile unit without wheels used for the
sale or promotion for sale of services or goods, for display or
dissemination of information or educational materials, or for the
§ 190-158 JUNK DEALERS § 190-158
186:627
§ 190-159. Village Center Zone.
entertainment of the general public. There shall be no term limit
for a nonpermanent vendor display. A zoning permit shall be
required for a nonpermanent vendor display, and a change of
vendor shall require a new zoning permit. In reviewing the
application for the zoning permit, the Zoning Officer shall
determine if the proposed use is permitted as well as what, if any,
other inspections or permits are required to comply with applicable
health and safety codes. The total number of nonpermanent vendor
displays shall not exceed 25.
(3) Permanent vendor displays. A "permanent vendor display" shall be
defined as any fixed installation used for the sale or promotion for
sale of services or goods, for display or dissemination of
information or educational materials, or for the entertainment of
the general public. There shall be no term limit for a permanent
vendor display. A zoning permit as well as a subcode UCC permit
shall be required for a permanent vendor display, and each change
of vendor shall require a new zoning permit. In reviewing the
application for the zoning permit the Zoning Officer shall
determine if the proposed use is permitted as well as what, if any,
other inspections or permits are required to comply with applicable
health and safety codes. The total number of permanent vendor
displays shall not exceed 15.
(4) Planning Board review or approval shall be required in connection
with the placement of any temporary, nonpermanent or permanent
vendor displays within the common area of the mall, if the mall
owner seeks to exceed the maximum number of displays permitted
herein.
(5) Fees.
(a) Temporary vendor displays (not to exceed six months): $35.
(b) Nonpermanent vendor displays: $35.
(c) Permanent vendor displays: $50.
I. Temporary vendor or display space limited to seasonal shopping events,
civic and cultural shows or fairs, trade, antique and craft shows and
similar shows and events for the education or entertainment of the
general public. [Amended 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-3]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Village Center Zone is to provide for a
planned commercial and planned residential development in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39c, integrating retail, office, hotel/
motel, restaurant and permitted ancillary uses that will be planned and
designed in accordance with the overall concept design for the Village
Center and designated residential area in compliance with "The Plan"
as identified in the amended Consent Order and Stipulation of
§ 190-158 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-159
186:628
Settlement to be entered in "537 Freehold Corp. v. Township of
Freehold," Docket No. L-50871-89 and all matters consolidated
therewith. The application for development of the planned commercial,
hotel/motel and restaurant area shall be contiguous to and directly
accessible from County Route 537 and shall include Block 70, Lots
20.01 and 20.02 and the northwesterly portions of Block 70, Lots 17.01,
18 and 20. The application for development shall include a residential
area on the southeasterly portions of Block 70 including Lot 11.01
and portions of 17.01, 18 and 20 southeast of drainage ditch, stream
and wetlands area that extends from a pond at the northern edge of
the tract approximately 1,400 feet east of C.R. 537 to a point at the
southern edge of the tract approximately 2,700 feet east of C.R. 537
along the southern property line of Lot 20 as depicted on a survey of
the tract and made a part of the Consent Order.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) Village Center development. Village Center planned development
shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65c. The Planning Board shall be authorized to grant
general development plan approval in accordance with § 190-17C
of this chapter to provide the increased flexibility desirable to
promote mutual agreement between the applicant and the
Planning Board on the basic scheme of a planned commercial
development and setting forth variations from the ordinary
standards for preliminary and final approval as herein provided.
Uses permitted within the Village Center planned development
area shall be:
(a) Office buildings as permitted per § 190-146, Corporate, Multi-
Use Development Zones, CMX-10, CMX-4, CMX-3 and CMX-2.
(b) Retail stores, including "big box" or "retail stack storage" and
wholesale clubs including ancillary garden centers, outdoor
display area for seasonal sale of plants, Christmas and holiday
trees, yard ornaments, garden supplies and seasonal yard and
garden equipment.
(c) Restaurants, with a minimum floor area of 3,000 square feet,
subject to the conditional use requirements of § 190-212,
except that: [Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-12]
[1] The conditional use requirement set forth in § 190-212A,
requiring a minimum of 5,000 square feet of floor area for
each restaurant use, is reduced to 3,000 square feet of
floor area for each restaurant use in a Village Center
planned development;
[2] The conditional use requirement set forth in § 190-212B,
requiring a minimum of 225 seats for each restaurant use,
§ 190-159 JUNK DEALERS § 190-159
186:629
is reduced to 100 seats for each restaurant use in a Village
Center planned development; and
[3] The conditional use requirement set forth in § 190-212C,
which prohibits take out service areas, does not apply to
restaurants in a Village Center planned development.
(d) Hotels and motels, which may include a restaurant, conference
facilities, banquet facilities, health and fitness facilities and
retail services for the benefit of guests, subject to the design
standards provided for in § 190-204B(4) [fire safety plan], (5)
[security plan] and (6) [architectural plan]. A minimum planted
buffer of 25 feet shall be provided as a visual screen to hotel
and motel rooms, pools and exterior patios, and other meeting
or public congregation areas, to be planted of conifers and
other plant materials.
(e) Banks and financial institutions, including drive through
facilities. [Added by 4-26-2005 Ord. No. O-05-12]
(f) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 2007-713940).
Only for purposes of allocating uses between retail and office
in the Village Center Zone, as set forth in the Amended
Stipulation of Settlement, the floor area in excess 34,000
square feet of the fitness and recreational sports center is not a
retail use. This allocation and classification of uses shall have
no application in any other zoning district within the Township.
[Added 6-17 -2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
(2) Residential development (not to exceed 30 residential building lots)
in accordance with the regulations set forth below, provided that
there shall not be a roadway interconnection between the
residential and commercial development areas except for an
emergency access road.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Signs in accordance with Article XVII, Signs, § 190-173 et seq.
(2) Fences.
(3) Garbage and recycling enclosures and waste compactors provided
that the compactor units are located entirely within the principal
building.
D. The maximum permitted floor area in the Village Center planned
development shall be 500,000 square feet, with a maximum of 403,573
square feet being utilized for retail. A minimum of 90% of the retail
space shall be comprised of stores with a minimum of 60,000 square
feet, and the balance of the planned development comprised of stores
with a minimum of 9,000 square feet. If less than 403,573 square feet is
proposed for retail use, the square footage not so utilized may be
§ 190-159 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-159
186:630
utilized for office, hotel/motel and/or restaurant uses. This additional
3,573 square feet does not increase the total development size beyond
the 500,000 square feet provided for in this Subsection D. Restaurants,
banks and financial institutions are not retail uses. Multiple retail
stores, restaurants and/or banks and financial institutions can be
located in a single multitenant building, provided that said building and
said retail stores, restaurants, and/or banks and financial institutions
otherwise conform to the requirements of § 190-159. [Amended by
4-26-2005 Ord. No. O-05-12; 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-5]
E. Commercial development shall comply with the following area, yard
and building requirements: [Amended by 4-26-2005 Ord. No.
O-05-12]
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 500 feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 500 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 500 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 15% (all buildings); 60% (all impervious
surfaces).
(6) Floor area ratio: 18.0.
(7) Maximum building height:
(a) Retail (big box): 40 feet/one story.
(b) Retail (buildings less than 60,000 square feet): 35 feet/one
story.
(c) Office: 40 feet/three stories.
(d) Hotel: 50 feet/5 stories.
(8) Minimum yard depth. Principal and accessory buildings:
(a) Front yard: 100 feet. See Note (2).
(b) Side yard: 100 feet. See Notes (1) and (2).
(c) Rear yard: 100 feet. See Notes (1) and (2).
§ 190-159 JUNK DEALERS § 190-159
186:631
Note 1. Any portion of commercial or other nonresidential
development in a VC Zone that abuts existing
residential properties within a residential zone shall
have a minimum side and rear yard of 300 feet for
internal roadways and parking lots and a minimum of
building setback of 350 feet from residential property
lines. The three-hundred-foot yard area shall be
landscaped and shall include evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs that will supplement
existing vegetation or provide a new planted area not
less than three rows of evergreen and other plant
materials that will provide a visual screen between
the residential and VC planned development uses.
No parking, loading, internal driveways or storage
shall be permitted within the three-hundred-foot
landscape area. A decorative fence not less than six
feet in height shall be provided where necessary and
as requested by the Planning Board to provide a
visual screen from existing residential properties
within a residential zone. Detention and retention
systems and appurtenances thereto including
wingwalls, outfalls, maintenance and emergency
access drives, etc., shall be permitted within the
landscape area.
Note 2. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in Subsection E(8)(a), (b) and (c) and in Note 1 above,
in a Village Center planned development, the
minimum yard depth of every front yard, side yard
and/or rear yard which abuts a road under the
jurisdiction of the Township is reduced to 25 feet.
(9) Minimum width of planted screen: 40 feet.
(10) Minimum size of principal building:
(a) Retail (big box): 60,000 square feet.
(b) Retail: 20,000 square feet.
(c) Office: 20,000 square feet.
(d) Restaurant: 3,000 square feet.
(e) Banks and financial institutions: 2,500 square feet.
F. Parking shall be permitted within the front yard setback in the Village
Center development, provided that such parking shall not be located
within 50 feet of Freehold Smithburg Road (Monmouth County Route
537).
§ 190-159 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-159
186:632
G. Residential development shall comply with the area yard and building
requirements of the R-25 Residential Zone District, except that the
minimum lot area for an interior lot shall be 30,000 square feet and the
minimum area for a corner lot shall be 35,000 square feet.
H. Where the Village Center Development abuts existing residential
properties within a residential zone any existing natural wooded area
should be retained to the greatest extent practicable.
I. The Village Center Development shall provide a coordinated Colonial
architectural design, including building facade, signage, and
landscaping.
J. An Architectural Review Committee may be appointed by the Planning
Board to review and make architectural recommendations to the board
for building, signage, and landscaping.
K. Where preliminary and final site plan approval for the overall Village
Center development of the project has been obtained, the property may
be subdivided into lots within the approved Village Center development
area having minimum dimensions as follows, which subdivision may be
granted on a main subdivision without further public hearings:
(1) Minimum lot area: 100,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot dimensions: lot frontage, width and depth 150 feet,
measured from principal internal access road.
(3) Impervious surface coverage (including maximum building
coverage). Principal and accessory buildings, roadways and
parking areas combined shall not exceed the coverage shown on
the approved final site plan. Landscape areas for buildings, parking
islands and other areas within the subdivided area shall not be less
following subdivision than the approved final site plan.
(4) Minimum yard depths. Zero feet for principal and accessory
buildings where buildings are connected by common or back to
back walls, enclosed or covered walkways.
(5) Minimum size of principal building in square feet: 20,000 square
feet gross floor area.
(6) Floor area ratio: FAR shall not apply to individual subdivided
parcels.
(7) Public and private utility structures supporting the common uses
on the property shall have minimum setback and yard depths to lot
lines of zero feet.
L. The following conditions must be met before the municipal agency can
approve the above area, yard and bulk requirements:
§ 190-159 JUNK DEALERS § 190-159
186:633
§ 190-160. SC Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone.
An SC Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone District is hereby established
to provide supplemental development regulations in the areas so designated
to protect and preserve scenic corridors throughout the Township.
(1) All applicable requirements of the preliminary and final site plan
approval other than as provided for above, shall apply to the
subdivided lots as if the site plan approved parcel had not been
subdivided.
(2) Any areas designed in the approved site plan to be used in common
with other approved site plan uses, or for the benefit of the public,
shall be required of the subdivided lots.
(3) All improvements required by Article IX, § 190-70 et seq., as
approved on final site plan approval for the unsubdivided parcel
shall continue to apply; and so long as the recording of common
usage easements or agreements are made a condition of
subdivision approval, the subdivided lots shall be deemed to
comply with Article IX of this chapter.
(4) All off-street parking, loading and unloading requirements that
apply to the approved final site plan for the unsubdivided parcel
pursuant to Article XIV of this chapter shall be deemed to be in
conformity as to the subdivided lots, so long as the recording of
common usage easements or agreements are made a condition of
approval.
A. Purpose. The intent of the Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone is to
promote Township-wide aesthetic efforts to maintain the rural/
suburban character of the Township, to protect environmentally
sensitive lands, to preserve open space and to strengthen existing
street tree and natural vegetation preservation efforts. The specific
purposes of the Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay District are:
(1) Maintain and enhance the rural character of Freehold Township;
(2) Protect environmentally sensitive lands along roadway corridors;
(3) Provide for linear aquifer recharge areas along existing and future
roadways;
(4) Enhance water quality from roadway drainage;
(5) Maintain and enhance Township and regional air quality;
(6) Provide interlinking wildlife habitat corridors in rural areas of the
Township;
(7) Establish natural vegetation links between major open space areas
of the Township.
§ 190-159 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-160
186:634
B. Definition of Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone.
(1) The SC Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone District will be
applicable to all areas in Freehold Township designated as scenic
roadway corridors as identified in the study prepared by Townplan
Associates entitled "Freehold Township Scenic Roadway Corridor
Study" dated March 15, 2002, and as delineated by the SC Scenic
Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone District Map dated April 2, 2002,
which is incorporated in accordance with § 190-99 of this chapter.
(2) The standards as provided within the SC Scenic Roadway Corridor
Overlay Zone shall be considered more restrictive than the
underlying zone, as applicable.
C. Standards and conditions for development. The objective of the SC
Scenic Corridor Overlay Zone is to establish, protect and preserve an
area of natural vegetation along each side of a designated roadway. All
development within the SC Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone
shall meet the following standards in addition to those required for the
applicable underlying zone district:
(1) Front yard setbacks. Front yard setbacks shall be in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Schedule C, Schedule of Area,
Yard and Building Requirements, at the end of this chapter. The
required setbacks in Schedule C shall be considered minimum
setbacks, and every effort should be made to meet a setback of 150
feet where practicable.
(2) Undisturbed buffer.
(a) A planted scenic corridor buffer area is to be provided adjacent
to all designated scenic corridors. The buffer width shall be in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C at
the end of this chapter. Within the required scenic corridor
buffer area no disturbance is permitted except for installation
of driveways and utilities. Existing vegetation is to be
preserved and maintained in its natural state wherever
practicable. Supplemental plantings shall be required during
site plan or subdivision approval. Exceptions shall be permitted
for existing agricultural lands or scenic vistas, which shall
generally not be required to provide additional landscape
materials other than required street trees. In some cases,
supplemental landscaping may be discouraged or prohibited to
protect existing views and vistas.
(b) Grading shall not be permitted within the scenic corridor
buffer, except to provide driveway and utility access to the lot
or site. No more than one driveway cut shall be permitted per
lot. Driveway widths shall be set at the minimum necessary for
safety purposes. Subdivision and site plan review shall
encourage designs that do not require direct access to a
designated scenic corridor, where practicable.
§ 190-160 JUNK DEALERS § 190-160
186:635
(c) Scenic corridor.
[1] The scenic corridor buffer shall be measured from the
right-of-way line of the designated scenic roadway. No
buildings, structures, signs, parking facilities, fences or
other development shall be allowed within the buffer area,
except for the following:
[a] Sidewalks.
[b] Bike paths.
[c] Pedestrian trails.
[d] Landscaping.
[e] Underground utilities.
[f] Ground-mounted lighting.
[g] Mailboxes.
[h] Driveway access
[2] The above-listed improvements are permitted within the
buffer only after approval from the Township.
[3] All refuse containers, garbage collection areas, and
ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be located at
the rear of the building and completely screened from view
of the designated scenic roadway corridor by evergreen
trees and shrubbery or an enclosure with a finished
exterior of materials of the same type as used on the
primary structure.
[4] Utility installations must minimize visual impact within the
scenic corridors, and tree trimming required to maintain
existing overhead utility lines be performed in accordance
with acceptable measures.
[5] Site design review. Applications for projects within the
Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone shall be subject to
review by the Township's Shade Tree Commission in
addition to standard review requirements.
[6] No grading is permitted within the Scenic Roadway
Corridor Overlay Zone, except that associated with an
approved site design plan.
D. Permitted uses. The uses permitted in the Scenic Roadway Corridor
Overlay Zone shall be the same uses permitted in the applicable
underlying zoning districts, except those prohibited uses listed below.
§ 190-160 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-160
186:636
§ 190-161. Variable lot option and cluster regulations.91
E. Permitted accessory uses. The accessory uses permitted in the Scenic
Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone shall be the same as the accessory uses
permitted under the applicable underlying zone districts, with the
following prohibitions:
(1) Telecommunication antenna.
(2) Unscreened rooftop telecommunication equipment.
F. Uses permitted by conditional use. The conditional uses permitted in
the Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone shall be the same as the
conditional uses permitted under the applicable underlying zone
districts except those prohibited uses listed below.
G. Prohibited uses.
(1) Telecommunication antenna.
(2) Billboards, flashing signs, portable signs, internally illuminated
signs, and pole signs.
(3) Outside storage of inventory, materials, and equipment.
H. Maintaining rural roadways. Scenic Corridor roadways that are under
the jurisdiction of Freehold Township may be maintained in a rural
condition upon resolution of the Township Committee that such
roadways or designated portions of do not have to be reconstructed or
upgraded to Township standards except for purposes of public safety,
drainage and aesthetics. A list and map of rural condition roadways
shall be maintained in the Township Engineer's office delineating the
roadway or portion of roadway that is declared to be a rural condition
roadway by resolution of the Township Committee and including
citations of the applicable resolutions for reference purposes.
A. Application. Variable lot size adjustment regulations may be applied in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection to modify lot areas, lot
widths and depths, front yard, and rear yard requirements in the R-120
and R-80 Zone Districts at the option of the applicant, but only if the
Planning Board finds that the proposed development fulfills the
requirements set forth in Subsection B below.
B. Planning Board determination of eligibility.
(1) In the event a developer determines to submit a development
application utilizing the clustering provisions of this subsection, the
Planning Board must first determine if the proposed development
plan meets the following conditions and is, therefore, eligible to
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 190-160 JUNK DEALERS § 190-161
186:637
§ 190-161.1. Mobile/Manufactured Housing MH. [Added
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-37]
continue to be processed under the cluster provisions. The
requisite provisions are as follows:
(a) The property planned for development must be located in an
R-120 or R-80 Zoning District.
(b) The minimum size of the tract of land proposed for
development under this subsection shall be 100 acres.
(c) All proposed open space areas must:
[1] Be immediately adjacent to existing open space areas
owned by the state, county or local government; or
[2] Be or contain an historic landmark as defined in § 190-231
or, in the opinion of the Planning Board, would qualify as a
historic landmark.
[3] Be essential to prevent development on steep slope or
mature forest areas.
[4] Will not result in narrow bands of open space which will be
difficult to maintain, have limited utility or encourage
encroachment from owners of neighboring lots.
[5] Will not result in a development project which will appear
significantly different in character from other developed
properties in close proximity to the proposed development
project.
(2) The Planning Board's determination of eligibility shall be set forth
in a written resolution containing specific findings to support its
determination.
C. Appeal of Planning Board determination on eligibility. Any Township
resident or other interested party may, within 10 days of the date of the
adoption of the Planning Board's resolution concerning eligibility under
this subsection, appeal such determination to the Township Committee.
To the maximum extent possible, the procedure to be followed in the
event of such an appeal shall be the same as that provided by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17, except as may be specifically modified herein.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the MH Mobile/Manufactured Housing Zone is
to provide for planned mobile/manufactured housing development for
seniors in accordance with the licensing provisions of Chapter 213,
Manufactured/Mobile Homes, and to permit development of singlefamily
residences in accordance with the R- 40 Residential Zone
standards.
B. Permitted uses.
§ 190-161 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-161.1
186:638
§ 190-161.2. Riparian Zone.
(1) Manufactured/mobile home housing units within manufactured/
mobile home parks pursuant to Chapter 213, Manufactured/Mobile
Homes.
(2) Residential uses as permitted in § 190-131, Residential Zone R-40.
C. Uses permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:
(1) Supportive-care housing for low- and moderate-income senior
citizens and the handicapped.
D. Area, yard and building requirements: as specified in Schedule C.92
A. Purpose and authority. The purpose of this section is to designate
riparian zones and to provide for land use regulation therein in order to
protect streams, lakes, and other surface water bodies of the Township
of Freehold and to comply with N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires
municipalities to adopt an ordinance that prevents new disturbance for
projects or activities in riparian zones as described herein. Compliance
with the riparian zone requirements of this section does not constitute
compliance with the riparian zone or buffer requirements imposed upon
any other federal, state or local statute, regulation or ordinance.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOIL — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid.
Acid-producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or
lower. After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of
3.0 or lower. Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils
in New Jersey can be obtained from local Soil Conservation District
offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal
entity applying to the Planning Board or the Construction Office
proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this section, and that would be located in whole or in part within
a regulated riparian zone.[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
CATEGORY ONE WATERS OR C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set
forth in those standards, for protection from measurable changes in
water quality characteristic because of their clarity, color, scenic
setting, and other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
92.Editor's Note: Schedule C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-161.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-161.2
186:639
exceptional water supply significance, or exceptional fisheries
resources.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure
or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed
and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of
a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
LAKE, POND OR RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of
a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys; that
is, an impoundment, whether naturally occurring or created in whole
or in part by the building of structures for the retention of surface
water. This excludes sedimentation control and stormwater retention/
detention basins and ponds designed for treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.4(h), C1 waters as shown on the
USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and
including their point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's GIS
hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water Resource
Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys. There is no riparian zone
along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any manmade lagoon or oceanfront
barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or (SWRPA) — A
three-hundred-foot area provided on each side of a surface water body
designated as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial
stream, intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein
and shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys
within the associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
§ 190-161.2 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-161.2
186:640
SURFACE WATER BODY (BODIES) — Any perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond or reservoir, as defined herein. In
addition, any regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or state open waters identified in a letter
of interpretation issued under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Division of Land Use Regulation shall also be
considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — Species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq., or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1,
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as
trout maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
C. Establishment and protection of riparian zones.
(1) Except as provided in Subsections D and E below, riparian zones
adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be protected from
avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
(a) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed.
(b) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
[1] Any trout production water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries);
[2] Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
[3] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains documented habitat for a threatened or
endangered species of plant or animal, which is critically
dependent on the surface water body for survival, and all
upstream waters (including tributaries) within one linear
mile as measured along the length of the regulated water;
and
[4] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains acid-producing soils.
§ 190-161.2 JUNK DEALERS § 190-161.2
186:641
(c) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet
wide shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
(2) If a discernible bank is not present along a surface water body, the
portion of the riparian zone outside the surface water body is
measured landward as follows:
(a) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline;
(b) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the normal water
surface limit;
(c) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the mean high water
line; and
(d) Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland
complex, through which water flows but which lacks a
discernible channel, the riparian zone is measured landward of
the feature's centerline.
(3) The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for
the initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a
site, and for identifying the area of the riparian zone on any plan
submitted to the Township of Freehold in conjunction with an
application for a construction permit, subdivision, land
development, or other improvement that requires plan submissions
or permits. This initial determination shall be subject to review and
approval by the municipal engineer, governing body, or its
appointed representative, and, where required by state regulation,
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Variances. To the extent allowed by the Stormwater Management Rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13),
and the Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:38), new disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone
established by this ordnance may be allowed through the Planning
Board review and approval of a variance, provided the disturbance is
proposed to be located on a preexisting lot (existing as of the effective
date of this section) when there is insufficient room outside the riparian
zone for the proposed use otherwise permitted by the underlying
zoning; there is no other reasonable or prudent alternative to
placement in the riparian zone, including containing variances from
setback or other requirements that would allow conformance with the
riparian zone requirement; and upon proof by virtue of submission of
appropriate maps, drawings, reports and testimony, that the
disturbance is: [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(1) Necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare;
§ 190-161.2 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-161.2
186:642
(2) To provide an environmental benefit;
(3) To prevent extraordinary hardship on the property peculiar to the
property; or
(4) To prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, by not allowing a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
E. Exceptions. To the extent allowed under the Stormwater Management
Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:13), and the Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:38) and subject to review and approval by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to the extent required by
those rules, the following disturbances for projects or activities in the
riparian zone established by this section are allowed:
(1) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
(2) Linear development with no feasible alternative routes;
(3) Disturbance that is in accordance with a stream corridor
restoration or stream bank stabilization plan or project approved
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection;
(4) Disturbance necessary to provide for public pedestrian access or
water dependent recreation that meets the requirements of the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E; or
(5) Disturbance with no feasible alternative required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or federal oversight
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11a et seq. or the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C.,
Sections 9601 et seq.
F. Appeals, conflicts and Severability.
(1) Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone boundary
determination under this section may appeal to the Planning Board
under the provisions of this section. The party contesting the
location of the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of
proof in case of any such appeal.
(2) Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the
Planning Board under this section may appeal to the Township
Committee of the Township of Freehold. The party contesting the
determination or decision shall have the burden of proof in case of
any such appeal.
§ 190-161.2 JUNK DEALERS § 190-161.2
186:643
(3) Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances or other local
requirements that are inconstant or in conflict with this section are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict,
and the provisions of this section shall apply.
(4) Severability.
(a) Interpretation. This section shall be so construed as not to
conflict with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(b) Notwithstanding that any provision of this article is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
all remaining provisions of the Ordinance shall continue to be
in full force and effect.
(c) The provisions of this section shall be cumulative with, and not
in substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and
land use regulations.
G. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) A prompt investigation shall be made by the Zoning Officer of any
person or entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon
inspection, a condition which is in violation of this section is
discovered, a civil action may be brought in the Special Part of the
Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief
sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional
limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of
appropriate process. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
preclude the right of the Township of Freehold, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal
Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this section
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the
violation of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued
pursuant to this section. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the Zoning Officer is hereby
authorized to issue one or more summonses for any violations of
this section. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offence.
(3) Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be liable for
the penalties as set forth in Chapter I, Article II, § 1-3.
§ 190-161.2 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-161.2
186:644
ARTICLE XIV
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading Requirements
§ 190-162. Off-street parking requirements.
A. At the time of construction, enlargement, alteration or increase of
capacity, or change in the use of any building, structure or property in
the Township, there shall be provided improved and usable off-street
parking spaces in accordance with the requirements specified in this
subsection as well as Chapter 177, Handicap Parking, of the Code of the
Township of Freehold, which is incorporated herein by reference.
B. None of the off-street parking facilities shall be required for any
existing building or use unless such building or use is enlarged or
expanded in which case the provisions of this chapter shall apply only to
the enlarged portion of the building or use.
C. Parking facilities may be located in any yard area in all zones unless
otherwise provided for in this chapter. In single-family residential
zones, any parking facilities with a capacity of more than four vehicles
shall be permitted only in a side or rear yard.
D. No required off-street parking area shall be encroached upon by any
buildings, open storage, or any other uses than the parking of motor
vehicles.
E. No parking spaces, access drive or aisle shall be located closer than 10
feet to any street line, or closer than five feet to any side or rear
property line, or within any required buffer area.
F. All off-street parking spaces, aisles, and access drives shall be graded,
paved in accordance with pavement and drainage standards
established in the land subdivision sections.93
G. The surface of pavement in any parking area with a capacity of more
than four vehicles shall be marked with solid white or yellow painted
lines in such a manner as to indicate each individual parking stall and
the direction of traffic flow in each access drive and aisle.
H. No ingress or egress drive shall enter upon a public road or highway at
a point closer than 50 feet to any street intersection or closer than 30
feet to any other access drive on the same property or any other
property. These distances shall be measured between the curbline or
the pavement edge nearest to the other drive or road in question.
I. In multiple-family residential zones, ingress and egress drives shall
have a width of at least 12 feet for one-way drives, and at least 20 feet
for two-way drives. No ingress or egress drive shall have a width
greater than 30 feet.
93.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Land Subdivision Procedures, § 190-46 et seq., of this chapter.
§ 190-162 JUNK DEALERS § 190-162
186:645
J. Aisles providing direct access to parking stalls shall have minimum
widths as specified herein:
(1) For sixty-one-degree parking up to and including ninety-degree
parking: 24 feet.
(2) For forty-six-degree parking to sixty-one-degree parking: 16 feet.
(3) Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles providing access to
other than ninety-degree parking stalls, except that two-way traffic
may be permitted in aisles serving parallel parking spaces,
provided the aisles have a minimum width of 18 feet.
K. In the case of mixed or multiple uses on a single property, the total
requirements of off-street parking spaces shall be in the sum of the
requirements of all the various uses computed separately.
L. The parking areas of adjacent properties may be interconnected by not
more than two driveways having a width of not less than 20 feet nor
more than 30 feet.
M. In all multiple-family residential zones, all parking areas and related
access drives shall be adequately illuminated during the hours between
sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. All such illumination
shall be adequately shielded in such a manner as to protect any
residential properties from glare generated from the illumination.
N. No lawn area, buffer strip or other unpaved area shall be used for the
parking of motor vehicles except on an emergency basis. If the
minimum required parking areas do not prove sufficient to
accommodate all vehicles parking the property, such additional parking
spaces shall be provided as to permit all vehicles to park on a paved
area in accordance with the standards established in this section.
O. Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 9.5 feet by 19 feet and shall be
striped with four-inch striping; provided, however, that parking lots
with 1,000 or more spaces approved prior to January 1, 2000, with nine
feet by 18 feet spaces with a twenty-five-foot aisle and marked with
hairpin striping may be continued and, if expanded or modified, shall be
permitted to maintain the nine-by-eighteen space dimension with a
twenty-five-foot aisle and hairpin striping consistent with the previously
approved parking lot design. Parking spaces for handicapped vehicles
shall comply with the design and user access requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act. Parking spaces at the ends of parking
aisles which abut grassed or landscaped islands shall provide for an
additional width of one foot or provide for decorative access surface at
the level of the grassed or landscaped island (such as pavers, grasscrete)
for vehicular passengers. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-9]
P. Parking spaces within parking garages shall be a minimum of nine feet
by 18 feet with twenty-five-foot aisles. Parking garages shall conform
§ 190-162 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-162
186:646
§ 190-163. Minimum parking spaces. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-6; 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25; 3-17-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-4]
Use
Minimum
Number
of Spaces Per
Single or multifamily
dwellings
Per New Jersey Site
Improvement Standards
(N.J.A.C. 5:21)
Mobile homes Per New Jersey Site
Improvement Standards
(N.J.A.C. 5:21)
Auditoriums, houses of
worship, theaters, stadia,
community centers, union
halls, and similar places of
assembly
1 4 seats or for every 4 persons
who may be legally admitted,
whichever is maximum
Automobile service stations 2 Plus 1 per 200 square feet of
floor area
Banks, financial and
business offices and
professional offices
1 For each and every 200
square feet gross floor area
on first floor plus 1 per 300
gross square feet on any
additional floors
Barber- and beauty shops 1 1/2 Barber or beauty chair, plus 1
per employee
Bowling alleys 5 Alley
Cemeteries 1 400 square feet of gross floor
area for office
Drive-in restaurants, carhops
1 Every 3 customer tables or
booths, plus 1 for every 2
counter seats, plus 1 for
every 2 employees
Health clubs 1 100 square feet, plus 1 per
employee
Hospitals 1 4 beds, plus 1 per 2
employees and staff on
maximum shift
with the New Jersey State Fire Code. [Added 3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-9]
§ 190-162 JUNK DEALERS § 190-163
186:647
Use
Minimum
Number
of Spaces Per
Hotels, motels, rooming
houses and boardinghouses
1 Sleeping or dwelling unit,
plus 1 per employee, plus
parking for any ancillary use
based on the standards of this
section
Industrial or manufacturing
establishments
1 1/2 Every employee on maximum
shift
Laundromats 1 2 washing machines
Life care facilities
Nursing home 1 4 beds, plus 1 per employee
for maximum shift
Congregate care/assisted
life
1 3 beds, plus 1 per employee
for largest shift
Individual living/personal
care
1 2 beds, plus 1 per employee
Manufacturing 1 300 square feet
Mixed-use industrial/flexoffice
1 Every 1.5 employees on the
maximum shift for
manufacturing area, plus 1
for every 5,000 square feet
for storage area, plus 1 per
200 square feet of office area
Motor vehicle sales and
service
1 200 square feet of floor area
Restaurants, luncheonettes
cafeterias, bars, diners,
nightclubs and taverns
1 2 persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load
established by fire, building
or health codes
Retail and service stores,
except as otherwise
specified
1 125 square feet of floor area
Retail furniture and
appliance
1 300 square feet of floor area
§ 190-163 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-163
186:648
Use
Minimum
Number
of Spaces Per
Supermarkets, convenience
stores and self-service food
stores
2 100 square feet of floor area
for the first 10,000 square
feet, plus 1.5 per 1,000
square feet for the floor area
greater than 10,000 square
feet (storage areas and food
preparation and processing
areas may be excluded)
Swim clubs 1 2 memberships
Veterinarian/veterinarian
hospitals
6 Doctor or examination room,
whichever is greater
Warehouse 1 5,000 square feet
NOTE: When and wherever any of the uses above are so combined or
commingled in such a manner so as to constitute a shopping center,
shopping plaza or other combination of commercial, office, industrial or
other facilities, the following parking requirements shall apply, in lieu of
those stated heretofore:
Use Number of Spaces
Shopping center containing more
than 10,000 square feet but less
than 100,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area
5.5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area between 10,000
square feet and 100,000 square feet
when the center includes a
convenience store; centers which do
not include a convenience store and/
or supermarket shall provide a
minimum of 5.0 parking spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross leasable
floor area
Shopping center containing greater
than 100,000 square feet and up to
350,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area
5.5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area for the first
10,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus
5.0 per 1,000 square feet for gross
leasable area between 100,000 and
350,000 square feet; centers which
do not include a convenience store
and/or supermarket shall provide a
minimum of 5.0 parking spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross leasable
floor area
§ 190-163 JUNK DEALERS § 190-163
186:649
Use Number of Spaces
Shopping center containing greater
than 350,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area
4.5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area(1)
Other As specified by the Planning Board
based upon recognized national
parking standards, including Urban
Land Institute, Parking Generation
by Institute of Traffic Engineers or
other nationally recognized parking
standards
NOTES:
(1) A parking management plan (PMP) shall be submitted and approved
by the reviewing board which details peak day parking requirements
and plans for employee off-site, remote or peripheral area parking;
shuttle bus service for employees and/or customers; valet parking
for customers; shared parking with non-shopping-center facilities,
including commuter parking facilities; and other planned programs
for reducing peak-period parking requirements at the designated
customer parking areas.
§ 190-164. Off-street loading requirements.
A. Every building erected for commercial or industrial purposes or any
other use involved in the receipt or distribution of merchandise,
materials, or supplies, shall provide and permanently maintain offstreet
loading and unloading space in accordance with the
requirements. These do not apply to such activities as personal service
establishments, professional offices, business offices and similar uses,
provided that these activities and uses can demonstrate that they do not
normally send or receive any materials or supplies by means of large
trucks or by tractor-trailer.
B. Every use requiring off-street loading space shall provide such spaces
at the side or rear of the principal building in accordance with the
following schedule: [Amended 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-4]
Square Feet of Floor Area
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Loading Spaces
0 to 2,500 0
2,500 to 10,000 1
10,000 to 25,000 2
Each additional 20,000 or
fraction thereof
1 additional
§ 190-163 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-164
186:650
C. Each truck loading space shall measure at least 12 feet in width and 45
feet in length, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet in
height.
D. In shopping centers, commercial uses may utilize common loading
spaces and nonpublic driveways, other than fire zones, during out of
normal business hours of operation for loading and off-loading. The
number of spaces to be provided will be in accordance with the above
schedule based on gross leasable floor area rather than total floor area.
E. Required off-street loading spaces and access drives shall be paved,
drained, and located in accordance with requirements established in
this chapter.
F. Wherever possible access to truck loading spaces shall be separated
from access automobile parking areas, particularly for any uses which
require large volumes of trucking traffic.
§ 190-164 JUNK DEALERS § 190-164
186:651

ARTICLE XV
Fence and Buffer Regulations
§ 190-165. Fence regulations.
A. Fences in residential zones may be erected, altered or reconstructed to
a height not exceeding six feet above ground level when located to the
rear of the front building line and not exceeding three feet in height
when located in front of the building line or in a front yard. For the
purpose of erecting a fence on a corner lot, the facade where the main
(front) door is located shall be considered the front of the house. A
fence up to six feet in height may be erected to the rear and side of the
house adjacent to the side street as follows: The fence may begin at the
rear corner of the house nearest the intersection to a distance
calculated at half the required front setback for the zone, and then run
parallel with the side street and extend to the property line. (Also see
§ 190-108 for lots having frontage on two parallel streets.) Fences on
residential lots abutting designated scenic roadway corridors must also
satisfy the requirements of the SC Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay
Zone.
B. Fences in business and/or industrial zones may be erected to a height
not to exceed six feet above ground level in any yard, except that open
wire fences may be erected to a height not to exceed eight feet above
ground level for security purposes. Fences in business and/or industrial
zones that are located on property abutting a designated scenic
roadway corridor, must also satisfy the requirements of the SC Scenic
Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone.
C. All fences must be erected entirely within the property line. No fence
shall be erected within any public right-of-way.
D. On farms only, open wire fences may be erected to a height not to
exceed six feet in height within any part of the farm premises. Any other
type fence may be erected to a height not to exceed four feet when
located within 25 feet of any street line, and six feet when located more
than 25 feet from a street line. Fences on farms abutting designated
scenic roadway corridors must also satisfy the requirements of the SC
Scenic Roadway Corridor Overlay Zone.
E. Barbed wire fences shall not be permitted except on farms and in the
industrial zone. When used in the business and/or industrial zones,
barbed wire may only be used when needed for security purposes and
must be mounted on top of a fence having a minimum height of six feet
above ground level. Barbed wire fences shall not be permitted within a
Scenic Corridor Overlay Zone District.
F. Electrically charged fences may be used only on farms. All electrically
charged fences shall be posted with signs designed to warn persons of
their presence and nature.
§ 190-165 JUNK DEALERS § 190-165
186:653
§ 190-166. Landscaping and buffer regulations.
G. All fences shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright condition
and shall be erected with the framework or supporting structure facing
the inside of the lot.
H. No fence shall be erected which is embedded with or made of pieces of
glass, sharpened metal, or sharp or otherwise hazardous material, nor
shall any fence be erected which is intended to injure persons or
animals. (This prohibition shall not apply to barbed wire fences.)
A. Where any commercial property abuts a residential zone, a landscape
buffer strip in accordance with schedule of area, yard and building
requirements under the heading width and buffer zone shall be
permanently maintained along the property line abutting the
residential zone.
B. Buffer areas shall consist of lawn areas and massed evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs planted in a manner that will provide a
continuous visual screen throughout the entire year. The Planning
Board shall determine the interval of spacing between plants based
upon the species of tree or shrub. In no event shall the species chosen
take longer than five years to provide a continuous visual screen.
C. Evergreen and deciduous shrubs shall have a minimum height of three
feet when planted.
D. Required buffers may be used for no other purpose than as a buffer. The
only structures which may be erected within a buffer area are fences as
elsewhere regulated in this chapter.
E. The height of shrubs planted in a buffer area shall be measured from
the ground level around the base of the shrub to the topmost part of the
shrub, once the shrub has been properly planted in the ground.
F. All nonpaved areas on properties used for any purpose other than
farming shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, grass, and
other suitable landscaping materials.
G. Where an area required for a buffer is already wooded, it shall be
suitably supplemented with trees, shrubs, grass and other landscaping
materials to meet the intent of this section.
H. Where any property abuts a designated scenic roadway corridor, a
buffer shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements set
forth in the SC Scenic Corridor Overlay Zone District.
§ 190-165 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-166
186:654
ARTICLE XVI
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
§ 190-167. Purpose.
§ 190-168. Nonapplicability to amateur radio stations and to
receive-only antennas.
The provisions of this article shall not govern any antenna that is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is
used exclusively as a "receive only antenna" in accordance with Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) regulations. (See § 190-104C.)
A. The purpose of this article, together with § 190-206 for the siting of
wireless telecommunications towers and antennas is to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers in appropriate locations;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the Township;
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of approved tower facilities as a
primary option rather than construction of new or additional singleuse
towers;
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
(7) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
(8) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
and
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these goals, Freehold Township shall give due
consideration to the Township Master Plan, Zoning Map, existing land
uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the
location of towers and antennas.
§ 190-167 JUNK DEALERS § 190-169
186:655
§ 190-169. Antennas and towers permitted on Township property.
Wireless communications towers and antennas which are located on
property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the Township of
Freehold and which are approved by the Township Committee or a Freehold
Township Fire District and which are approved by the Board of Fire
Commissioners, shall be deemed to be permitted as a municipal facility in
any zone district.
§ 190-170. General requirements.
A. Principal or accessory use. Wireless telecommunications towers and
antennas may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A
different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not
preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Township as part of the application an inventory of
its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas,
that are either within the jurisdiction of Freehold Township or within
one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. The Township may share
such information with other applicants applying for approvals under
this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within
the jurisdiction of Freehold Township; provided, however, that the
Township is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing
or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
D. Uniform construction code; safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is
maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state
and municipal codes including the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If,
upon inspection, the Township concludes that a tower fails to comply
with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the
owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such
standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30
days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
E. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
§ 190-169 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-170
186:656
of a wireless communication system in Freehold Township have been
obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Township.
F. Public notice. For purposes of this section, any variance request,
conditional use application or request for site plan approval shall
require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property
owners of properties that are located within the corresponding
separation distance listed in § 190-206I in addition to any notice
otherwise required by this chapter.
G. Signs. No advertising signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
H. Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements
of § 190-206J.
I. Multiple antenna/tower plan. Freehold Township encourages the users
of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of
multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
J. Maximum height.
(1) The tower shall meet the following maximum height and usage
criteria:
(a) For a single user, up to 90 feet in height;
(b) For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and
(c) For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height.
(2) A licensed New Jersey professional engineer must certify that the
tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users
proposed by the applicant.
K. Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for site plan review pursuant to this chapter, applicants for
approval for a tower shall conform with the requirements and
specifications set forth in the Wireless Communication Facilities
Notification Checklist as adopted by § 190-4B(10)94 and submit the
following information: [Amended 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-6]
(1) A location plan drawn to scale and clearly indicating the location,
type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and
zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in
§ 190-206I adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks
94.Editor's Note: Said checklist is on file in the office of the administrative officer.
§ 190-170 JUNK DEALERS § 190-170
186:657
from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and
any other structures, topography, and parking.
(2) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(3) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and
unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(4) The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to § 190-206I shall
be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also
identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the
owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
(5) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(6) Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
(7) A description of compliance with this section, § 190-170C, D, F, H
and I, and with § 190-206B, C, D and Hand all applicable federal,
state or local laws.
(8) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas
for future users.
(9) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(10) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers
or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use
of the proposed tower.
(11) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Township based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event
the proposed tower is erected.
(12) A completed and executed Wireless Communication Facilities
Modification Checklist.
L. Factors considered in granting approval for towers. In addition to any
standards for consideration of site plans pursuant to this chapter and
requirements set forth in § 190-206, the municipal agency shall
consider at least the following factors in determining whether to issue
an approval:
(1) Height of the proposed tower;
§ 190-170 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-170
186:658
(2) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(3) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(4) Surrounding topography;
(5) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(6) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(7) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(8) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in this section, § 190-170K(10) of this
chapter.
(9) Whether the proposed tower is being deployed in response to an
emergency or temporary situation, and whether the applicant has
received federal exemptions from environmental notification,
antenna structure registration, or similar applicable federal
notification requirements. [Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-6]
M. Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less
than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anticlimbing device; provided, however, that the municipal agency may
waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
N. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which site plan approval is required; provided,
however, that the municipal agency may waive such requirements if the
goals of this section would be better served thereby.
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials
that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
property used for residences.
(2) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(3) Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such
as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the
property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
O. In approving the tower the municipal agency may impose conditions,
including the use of an alternative tower structure, to the extent the
municipal agency concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize
any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
§ 190-170 JUNK DEALERS § 190-170
186:659
§ 190-171. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Township of Freehold notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure
to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be
grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there
are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. Upon the dismantling and
removal of a tower, the property on which the tower was located shall
be restored to a safe and landscaped condition compatible with adjacent
properties.
§ 190-172. Preexisting towers and facilities. [Amended 6-28-2016
by Ord. No. O-16-6]
P. All towers and antennas shall also fully comply with the requirements of
§ 190-206.
A. Preexisting towers which are operating at the time of the adoption of
this article95 shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently
exist. Routine maintenance is permitted on such preexisting towers.
New construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting
tower shall comply with the requirements of this section. If the use of
the tower has terminated and the use is determined to be abandoned,
the requirements for removal in § 190-171 shall apply.
B. Required documentation for collocation applications. An applicant
requesting approval for a collocation, removal, or replacement of
equipment at an existing wireless communications tower, base station,
or other facility on which wireless communications equipment is
located, shall submit the following documentation to the Township
Committee for review:
(1) A location plan drawn to scale and clearly indicating the location,
type and height of the proposed equipment, on-site land uses and
zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in
§ 190-206I, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed
tower and any other structures, topography, and parking.
(2) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(3) The finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination of the existing structure and equipment.
95.Editor's Note: Art. XVI was adopted by Ord. No. O-02-34.
§ 190-170 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-172
186:660
(4) The finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination of the proposed structure and equipment.
(5) A description of compliance with this section, § 190-170C, D, F, H
and I, and with § 190-206B, C, D and H and all applicable federal,
state or local laws.
(6) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(7) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers
or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use
of the proposed tower.
(8) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Township based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event
the proposed collocation is permitted.
(9) If the application concerns property located within a historic
district, or property that is considered a historic landmark, as
defined in § 190-231, proof of compliance with § 190-233.
(10) A description of the type and quantity of equipment to be installed.
(11) A description of the number and size of any equipment cabinets to
be installed on the tower or base station.
(12) A description of the number and size of any equipment cabinets to
be installed on the ground.
(13) A description of any excavation required.
(14) A description of the change in tower height as a result of the
proposed collocation, removal, or replacement.
(15) A description of the change in the height of any other structure as a
result of the proposed collocation, removal, or replacement.
(16) A description of the change in width of the tower or structure at the
height of the proposed collocation, removal, or replacement.
(17) A description of the proximity of the equipment to any other
equipment on the same structure and of the visibility of the
proposed equipment from the surrounding property.
(18) A description of the noise level emitted by any proposed
equipment.
C. Review of collocation applications. Collocation applications shall be
reviewed by the Township Committee pursuant to the following:
§ 190-172 JUNK DEALERS § 190-172
186:661
(1) Timeframe for review. The Township Committee shall determine
whether an application for collocation, removal, or replacement of
equipment at an existing wireless communications tower or base
station constitutes a substantial change pursuant to § 190-172D
within 60 days of receipt of the application. Applications that do not
substantially change the tower or base station shall be approved
within this time period. This sixty-day period may be extended by
mutual agreement of the Township Committee and the applicant.
(2) Incomplete applications. The Township Committee may toll the
sixty-day timeframe set forth in Subsection C(1) by notifying the
applicant, within 30 days of receipt of submission of an application,
that the application is incomplete. Such notification shall set forth
all outstanding information, as well as the applicable code
provision, ordinance, application instruction, or publicly stated
procedure requiring the information to be submitted. The sixty-day
timeframe shall begin again upon receipt of the supplemental
submission.
(3) Subsequent incomplete applications. The Township Committee may
thereafter toll the sixty-day timeframe by notifying the applicant,
within 10 days of receipt of the supplemental submission, that the
applicant did not provide the information identified in the original
notice delineating missing information. Second or subsequent
notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information not previously delineated in the original notice of
incompleteness.
(4) Complete applications. The Township Committee shall, within the
sixty-day timeframe, approve all complete applications for
collocation, removal, or replacement of equipment at an existing
wireless communications tower or base station that do not
constitute a substantial change pursuant to § 190-172D, and that
do not otherwise violate applicable health and safety requirements.
If the Township Committee determines that an application
constitutes a substantial change to an existing wireless
communications tower or base station, it shall notify the applicant
of same, and proceed to consider the application according to the
provisions of this article; the sixty-day timeframe does not apply to
substantial changes.
(5) Applications on improper towers. Notwithstanding Subsection
C(4), above, the Township Committee is not obligated to approve an
application for collocation, removal, or replacement of equipment
on a tower or base station that was constructed or deployed
without proper review, was not required to undergo siting review,
or does not support transmission equipment that received another
form of affirmative state or local regulatory approval.
(6) Failure to act. If the Township Committee does not approve or deny
an application for collocation, removal, or replacement of
§ 190-172 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-172
186:662
equipment at an existing wireless communications tower or base
station within 60 days of receipt of the application or any applicable
tolling periods thereafter, the applicant may notify the Township
Committee in writing that the review period has expired. Upon the
Township Committee's receipt of this notice from the applicant, the
application shall be deemed granted.
D. Collocation applications constituting a substantial change.
(1) A proposed modification shall constitute a substantial change to an
existing structure if it meets any of the following criteria:
(a) For towers outside of public rights-of-way, it increases the
height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater;
for those towers in the rights-of-way and for all base stations, it
increases the height of the tower or base station by more than
10% or 10 feet, whichever is greater;
(b) For towers outside of public rights-of-way, it protrudes from
the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the
width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater; for those towers in the rights-of-way and
for all base stations, it protrudes from the edge of the structure
more than six feet;
(c) It involves installation of more than the standard number of
new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to
exceed four cabinets;
(d) It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site
of the structure;
(e) It would defeat the existing concealment elements of the
structure; or
(f) It does not comply with conditions associated with the prior
approval of construction or modification of the structure unless
the noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in
width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that does not
exceed the corresponding "substantial change" thresholds
identified above.
(2) Any such change shall be determined by measuring the change
from the dimensions of the structure as originally approved or as of
the most recent modification that received local zoning or similar
regulatory approval prior to the passage of the Middle Class Tax
Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, whichever is greater.
E. Fees and compensation for co-location, removal or replacement
applications. [Added 5-22-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-6]
§ 190-172 JUNK DEALERS § 190-172
186:663
(1) Any applicant seeking to co-locate, remove, or replace equipment
at an existing wireless communications tower, base station, or
other facility on which wireless communications equipment is
located shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, which
represents the Township's costs in processing said application.
(2) The application fee shall be deposited with the Township as part of
the application filed pursuant to this section.
(3) All applicants seeking to co-locate, remove, or replace equipment
at an existing wireless communications tower, base station, or
other facility on which wireless communications equipment is
located shall establish and maintain an escrow deposit in the
amount of $3,000 with the Township. The Township shall be
entitled to reimbursement from the escrow account for all direct
and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the Township in
connection with any review of the application. Any interest earned
on the deposit shall accumulate and be credited to the escrow
amount being held by the Township. In the event the escrow or
deposit shall be reduced to $1,000 or less, upon notice from the
Township's Chief Financial Officer, the applicant or licensee shall
replenish the escrow account to $3,000 within 15 days of the date
of the notice. Upon written request made by the applicant upon the
Township's Chief Financial Officer, it shall be entitled to an
itemized accounting of deposits and withdrawals to and from its
escrow fund. Such request may not be made more often than
monthly and may not cover a period of time more than 12 months
prior to the request.
(4) Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall
pay a permit fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, which
represents the Township's costs of processing said permit.
(5) The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this article are
separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local
and Township taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or
subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or
transmission of telecommunications services.
§ 190-172 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-172
186:664
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
[Added 10-5-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-3896]
§ 190-173. Purposes; restrictions; definitions. [Amended 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-3]
A. Purposes. The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate the use of
signs so that they are compatible with their surroundings, to promote
the aesthetic character of the Township, to establish signs that are
compatible with the architectural requirements for nonresidential
buildings and uses, to preserve the natural appearance of the Township,
to promote traffic safety, to maintain property values, to express the
identity of individual proprietors and of the Township as a whole, and to
regulate signs so that they are legible in the circumstances in which
they are seen and are constructed to standards which promote the
safety, health and general welfare of the public.
B. Restrictions. It shall be unlawful to erect, display or maintain any sign
that does not comply with the standards and regulations hereinafter set
forth.
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Any rigid or semirigid material with
or without a sign displayed thereon situated upon or attached to real
property or mobile objects and vehicles outdoors for the purpose of
furnishing a background, base or support on which a sign may be
posted or displayed.
FUNCTIONAL SIGN TYPES —
DIRECTORY OF OCCUPANTS SIGN — A sign or plate attached
to or painted upon the facade of a building listing the tenants
or occupants thereof and their respective professions or business
activities.
(1)
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign or device intended to direct or point
toward a place or which gives verbal directions, of any sort.
(2)
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign, symbol, trademark, structure
or similar device used to identify the occupant or any structure,
the product made, or the activity being pursued by any individual
business service, commercial or industrial activity.
(3)
OFFICIAL SIGN — Any sign, symbol or device erected and
maintained by the federal government, the State of New Jersey,
County of Monmouth or the Township of Freehold for the purpose
of informing or guiding the public or for the protection and
(4)
96.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. O-04-38 provided for moving the existing sign regulations,
previously codified in a separate chapter of the Code, into this chapter.
§ 190-173 JUNK DEALERS § 190-173
186:665
IMMORAL SIGN — A sign that has the quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct or sexual
excitement, when it:
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN COMPANY — A company in the
business of leasing outdoor advertising space and under the licensing
power of the Outdoor Advertising Tax Bureau of the Department of
Treasury of the State of New Jersey.
PHYSICAL SIGN TYPES —
POLITICAL SIGN — Temporary signs supporting candidates for office
or urging action on any other matter on the ballot of primary, general
and/or special elections.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means
of wheels; signs converted to "A" or "T" frames; menu and sandwich
board signs; balloons or helium- or air-filled material or plastic devices
used as signs or advertising; umbrellas used for advertising; signs
attached to or painted on vehicles and visible from the public right-ofpromotion
of health, safety, convenience and general welfare; or
any sign of a civic, fraternal or religious organization specifically
authorized by the Township Committee.
Predominately appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest
of minors in sex; and
(1)
Is patently offensive to contemporary standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable sexual
material for minors; and
(2)
(3) Taken as a whole, lacks literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
GROUND OR MONUMENT SIGN — A self-supporting sign
connected to the ground and independent of any other structure,
including pylon, pedestal or individual post-type supports.
(1)
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign attached to the building wall which
neither extends more than 15 inches from the face of the wall, nor
projects nearer to the ground surface than 10 feet, nor projects
above the roofline or storefront facade line, nor extends beyond the
ends of the facade or building.
(2)
WALL SIGN — A flat sign attached to or painted upon a building
wall which extends not more than 15 inches from the wall and is
not extended above the top or beyond the ends of the facade.
(3)
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign mounted inside a window for display to
the public passersby outside the window.
(4)
ROOF SIGN — A sign located wholly upon or over the roof of any
building.
(5)
§ 190-173 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-173
186:666
§ 190-174. Signs allowed without permit.
Only those signs which are exactly described in this section shall be allowed
without a permit. Any sign, whether temporary or permanent, not listed or
described herein, shall be permitted within the purview of this section.
way, unless said vehicle is used with such sign in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business; and pole or wind flags of plastic or other
lightweight material whether or not containing a message of any kind.
SIGN — The outdoor or indoor display of any writing, printing, picture,
painting, emblem, drawing or similar device intended to invite or draw
the attention of the public to any activity, goods, merchandise, property,
business, services, entertainment, amusement or industrial activity or
establishment.
SNIPE SIGN — Any sign, generally of a temporary nature, made of
any material when such a sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued
or otherwise attached to a tree, pole, stake or fence or to any other
structure.
A. Directional signs for the convenience of the general public to identify
parking areas, loading zones, entrances and exits and similar type
signs, which shall not exceed eight square feet in area. Business names
or personal names are allowed but shall not include advertising
messages.
B. Traffic signs, whether temporary or permanent, for the purpose of
regulating traffic, when installed by persons authorized by the
Township, by the County of Monmouth, by the State of New Jersey or by
the United States government.
C. Transportation signs, including public transportation stops, including
bus stops, when installed by the Township or a public transportation
agency.
D. Historical tablets, cornerstones, memorial plaques, and emblems which
do not exceed six square feet in surface area and which are installed by
government agencies, religious or other authorized organizations.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
E. Warning and no trespassing signs, not to exceed two square feet in
surface area.
F. Flags or emblems of religious, educational, governmental organizations
or individuals, which flags or emblems shall be flown from supports on
the buildings or grounds being occupied by the organization.
G. Name and number plates identifying the residents on a house,
apartment or mailbox, not to exceed 60 square inches.
H. Lawn signs identifying resident's name or street number, not to exceed
two square feet in surface area; if double face, a total of three square
§ 190-173 JUNK DEALERS § 190-174
186:667
feet for both sides; signs to be nonilluminated, except by light which
is an integral part of a lamppost if used as support; no advertising
messages permitted. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
I. Signs posted by governmental agencies pursuant to governmental
statute, order or regulation. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
J. Signs which are an integral part of vending machines, including
gasoline pumps and milk machines, which shall not exceed two square
feet.
K. Real estate signs, announcing the sale, rental or lease of the premises
on which the sign is located, such sign not to exceed four square feet of
surface. If double-faced, the sign shall not exceed a total of eight square
feet for both sides. The sign shall be nonilluminated. Such sign shall not
be closer to the lot line than one-half the distance between the building
line and the lot line, as defined by the zoning provisions of this chapter.
Such signs shall not be located closer to other such signs than one in
every 200 feet, measured either along the front of a lot or along the
sidelines of a lot. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
L. Political signs. Signs pertaining to federal, state, county or local
political candidates or questions to be voted upon by the residents of
the Township at an upcoming election, provided that: [Amended
5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-17; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(1) Erection/placement of the sign is with permission of the person(s)
or entity/entities who/which own or have legal control over the
property upon which the sign is to be erected/placed.
(2) Erection/placement of sign is removed not more than 14 days after
the election.
(3) Placement of signs on public property shall comply with each of the
following:
(a) There shall be at least 100 feet of separation between signs of
a particular candidate or campaign; and
(b) All signs must be farther than two feet from the curb, or, if no
curb, from the edge of the paved roadway; and
(c) No political sign shall be located or placed closer than 10 feet
to any other sign of a candidate or campaign.
(4) Notwithstanding the penalty prescribed by § 190-185 for violations
of the above standards, signs in violation are subject to removal by
any interested party without prior notice.
§ 190-174 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-175
186:668
§ 190-175. Signs prohibited in all areas.
The following signs or types of signs shall be prohibited in all areas of the
Township:
A. Signs using red, amber or green lights placed within 100 feet of traffic
control signals.
B. Signs using blinking, flashing, vibrating, moving, rotating or flickering
lights or illuminations, or varying in intensity of color or brightness,
except for time-temperature-date signs. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3]
C. Signs using reflective material which sparkles, glitters or reflects lights
in such a manner as to be deemed by the Zoning Officer and Chief of
Police of the Township to be a traffic hazard.
D. Signs with visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible
mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible
movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
E. Immoral signs or advertising matter of an indecent or obscene nature.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
F. Signs using words such as "stop," "look," or "danger," which are placed
in a manner or position which, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer of
the Township and the Chief of Police, interferes with traffic or acts as a
traffic hazard.
G. Any sign which causes confusion with existing governmental or duly
authorized signs.
H. Signs causing radio, television or other communication systems or
signal interference due to light or control mechanisms. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
I. Signs or sign structures that interfere in any way with free use of any
fire escape, emergency exit, stairway or standpipe, or that obstruct any
window to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point
below that required by any provision of the Uniform Construction Code,
this Code or other ordinance of the state or of the Township. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
J. Flags, banners, strings of banners, streamers or captive balloons,
pennants, ribbons, pinwheels or spinners, or other objects or material
fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure
by wind; A-type signs, sandwich-type signs, sidewalk signs, curb signs
or similar advertising devices. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-3]
K. Any sign spanning a public street except those temporary signs
advertising or drawing attention to a legitimate and recognized
§ 190-175 JUNK DEALERS § 190-175
186:669
charitable or official Township function. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3]
L. Signs or poles maintained by public utilities, or on trees and fences or
attached to signs or buildings owned by other persons.
M. Any series of two or more signs placed along a street or highway, or all
carrying a single advertising message, part of which is contained on
each sign.
N. No sign shall be located in any public right-of-way or in such a position
as to cause an obstruction of the view of traffic or otherwise to be
injurious to the public safety.
O. Signs directing people to a housing development (real estate directional
signs), except those meeting the conditions set forth in § 190-176H.
P. Signs placed or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked on a
public right-of-way, public property or private property so as to be
visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to
advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity located on
the same or nearby property. [Added 7-29-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-18]
Q. Signs with the optical illusion of movement by means of a design that
presents a pattern capable of giving the illusion of motion or changing
of copy. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
R. Strings of light bulbs used on commercially developed parcels for
commercial purposes, other than traditional holiday decorations used
during holiday seasons. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
S. Signs that incorporate projected images, emit any sound that is
intended to attract attention, or involve the use of live animals. [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
T. Signs that emit audible sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke or
steam. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
U. Signs that obstruct the vision of pedestrians, cyclists or motorists
traveling on or entering public streets or are judged to be a traffic or
pedestrian hazard by the Zoning Officer or Chief of Police. [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
V. Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair
the vision of any motorist, cyclist or pedestrian using or entering a
public way, or that are a hazard or a nuisance to occupants of any
property because of glare or other characteristics. [Added 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-3]
W. Searchlights used to advertise or promote a business or to attract
customers to a property. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
§ 190-175 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-175
186:670
§ 190-176. General requirements.
X. Signs that are painted, pasted or printed on any curbstone, flagstone,
pavement or any portion of any sidewalk or street, except house
numbers and traffic control signs. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-3]
Y. Signs placed upon benches, bus shelters or waste receptacles. [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
Z. Signs on a tower except "no trespassing" signs and identification signs.
[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
AA. Portable signs as defined in this chapter. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-3]
BB. Snipe signs as defined in this chapter. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-3]
A. Permits.
(1) All signs and advertising displays other than those expressly
excluded in § 190-175 of this article shall require sign permits
renewable annually. To obtain such permit, the owner of the
proposed sign shall make application to the Construction Official
on forms provided by him. The applicant shall also provide a sketch
of the proposed construction and shall pay the required fee.
(2) When the name or advertising message is divided between the
number of panels or parts it shall be considered as one sign. When
the sign has been installed, the Construction Official shall be
notified so that he may make a final inspection. After a permit has
been obtained, the copy, wording or pictures on a sign may be
changed without the necessity of obtaining a new permit or the
payment of additional fees provided such change does not create a
violation of § 190-175 of this article. If such sign becomes the
property of another person, no new permit shall be required for the
term of the existing permit. No sign may be enlarged without
obtaining a new permit which permit shall be issued and renewed
annually.
B. A permit to erect or maintain a sign may be revoked in accordance with
the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code.97
C. Construction. Freestanding signs shall be constructed in the manner as
set forth in the State Uniform Construction Code.
D. Construction of signs erected flat against buildings.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 115, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 190-175 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:671
(1) Any sign to be attached flat against the surface of a building shall
be constructed of durable materials. The sign shall be attached
securely to the building with nonrusting metal hardware.
(2) When a sign is to be installed on a masonry building, holes shall be
drilled in the masonry and proper nonrusting metal hardware of
the expansion type shall be used. Wood plugs shall not be used in
the drilled holes. Moldings or frames shall be considered as part of
the total allowable sign area.
E. Illumination. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-398]
(1) Wiring of illuminated signs shall meet the electric standards of the
Township and shall be inspected by the Department of Fire
Underwriters.
(2) Where illuminated signs are permitted, signs shall be illuminated
as follows:
(a) By lights placed inside a cabinet sign with an opaque or a
translucent background and translucent copy.
(b) By lights placed inside individual pan-channel letters.
(c) By halo lights placed behind individual reverse pan-channel
letters.
(d) By spotlights or floodlights which are directed to shine directly
on the sign. Such lights shall be directed and/or shielded so as
not to shine directly onto neighboring property or into the eyes
of passing motorists.
(e) By exposed incandescent bulbs, if such signs give time and/or
temperature.
(3) Illumination may be provided by floodlights, spotlights, ordinary
incandescent bulbs, fluorescent tubes or mercury vapor lamps,
however, regardless of the type of illumination employed, the sign
shall be properly shielded and located so as to prevent glare or
blinding effects upon any line of moving traffic and so as not to be
offensive to residents of the area.
(4) Nonconforming illumination, whether used for existing signs or
new signs, shall be corrected within 30 days from the mailing to the
owner by the Zoning Officer of a written notice to correct. Failure
to correct such illumination so as to make it conform with the
requirements of this section shall result in the removal of the
nonconforming sign at the expense of the owner of same.
F. Temporary signs of permanent type materials.
98.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections F through K as
Subsections E through J, respectively.
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:672
(1) Temporary signs making use of permanent materials such as wood
or metal shall require a permit.
(2) The conditions and limitations regulating the number, size,
location, and duration of temporary signs are set forth in the
various sections governing the areas of use.
G. Real estate directional signs. Any residential housing development
project located within the Township of Freehold or within one mile of
the Freehold Township border, offering residential housing units for
initial sale, and any individual residential unit owner or authorized
agent of such owner shall be permitted to erect real estate directional
signs providing there is compliance with all of the following
regulations: [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-65-48;
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-31]
(1) Each sign shall not exceed two square feet in surface area, shall be
of a freestanding type supported by one or two temporary posts.
(2) Overall height of the sign shall not exceed four feet above ground
level.
(3) No such eligible housing development project nor individual
residential unit owner or agent shall display more than six such
real estate directional signs within the Township of Freehold.
(4) There must be a distance of at least one-half mile separating each
sign for each housing development. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3]
(5) Each eligible housing development need apply for one permit
annually which shall be deemed to apply to all conforming signs
permitted under these regulations and must designate the specific
locations for each such sign. No such permit shall be required for
an individual residential unit which is located within the Township.
(6) Any such sign shall be considered in violation of this section if
erected in any other manner or if attached to any public utility pole,
other sign, fence, tree or wall.
H. Temporary signs for commercial establishments. No commercial
establishment shall be permitted more than two twenty-four-squarefoot
signs or other temporary advertising displays for the purposes of
promoting sales of seasonal-type products or to advertise the opening
of a new commercial establishment. Such signs may be displayed
outside the building itself for a period not to exceed 15 days. All
temporary signs and advertising displays shall require sign permits. To
obtain a permit, the owner of the proposed sign or advertising display
shall submit an application to the Zoning Officer. The applicant shall
provide a sketch of the proposed sign or display, shall submit a survey
or plot plan indicating where the sign or display will be installed on the
site, and shall pay a fee of $10 for a temporary sign permit. Signs using
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:673
wording such as "stop," "look," "danger," or displays which are placed
in a manner or position which, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer
interferes with traffic or acts as a safety or traffic hazard shall not be
permitted. All signs and advertising displays shall be removed by the
date specified on the temporary sign permit. The penalty for failure to
remove such signs and other advertising displays shall be as specified
in § 190-185.
I. Nonconforming signs. Existing permanent-type signs or displays which
do not conform to the requirements or standards provided in this
section may be displayed, maintained or copy changed (wording or
pictures), provided that they are properly maintained. In the event,
however, that such signs or displays are not maintained or as
established to be unsafe or in a state of neglect by the Zoning Officer of
the Township, and in the event that the condition has not been
corrected within 30 days from the time that the owner has been notified
in writing by the Zoning Officer of the condition, the sign or signs shall
be removed at the expense of the owner, and no permit shall be issued
for a similar nonconforming structure.
J. Maintenance of signs. All signs or displays shall be maintained. In the
event any sign or display is not maintained or is permitted to become
unsafe in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, or in the event that the
maintenance contract provided for is permitted to expire, and the
owner of such sign does not correct this situation within 30 days from
written notification by the Zoning Officer, such sign or signs shall be
removed at the expense of the owner.
K. Signs on a marquee, canopy or awning. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-3]
(1) Signs on a marquee. Notwithstanding the limitations of this article
on the projection of signs from the wall of a building, signs shall be
permitted on marquees subject to the following limitations:
(a) Such signs shall indicate only the name of the building or the
name of the principal occupant of the building or store front.
(b) Such signs shall be affixed flat to the face of the marquee,
projecting no more than three inches therefrom.
(c) Such signs shall not extend above or below the structure of the
marquee.
(d) Such signs shall be counted in determining the area of wallmounted
signs permitted on the wall from which the marquee
projects.
(2) Signs on a canopy or awning. Notwithstanding the limitations of
this article on the projection of signs from the wall of a building,
signs shall be permitted on canopies and awnings subject to the
following limitations:
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:674
(a) Such signs shall indicate only the name of the building or the
name of the principal occupant of the building.
(b) Such signs shall be painted or printed directly on the canopy or
on the front and/or side drop portion(s) of the awning or
canopy.
(c) Such signs shall be counted in determining the area of wallmounted
signs permitted on the wall from which the canopy or
awning projects.
L. Computation of sign area. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(1) Computation of sign area and number. Computation of sign area for
signs not covered by § 190-174, exempt signs, and except as
provided in Subsection L(2) of this section: The area of each face of
a sign shall be the area of the smallest circle, triangle or
parallelogram, which contains all letters, content, background and
structural elements of the sign. Sign area shall not include
structural elements which function solely as support for the sign or
cover of structural elements.
(2) Computation of sign area for signs which consist only of letters and
numbers which are individually painted on or otherwise attached to
a building wall, decorative landscape wall, screen wall, marquee,
canopy or awning. The area of each face of a sign which consists
only of letters and numbers which are individually painted on or
otherwise attached to a building wall, decorative landscape wall,
screen wall, marquee, canopy or awning shall be computed as in
Subsection L(1) of this section. However, the maximum area of
signs covered by this section shall be 20% larger than the
maximum area otherwise permitted by this article.
(3) Certain support structures exempted from computation of area of
freestanding signs. Support structures which are part of a
decorative landscape wall or screen wall shall not be considered to
be part of a freestanding sign.
M. Determination of the number of signs. Any collection of sign content,
sign background and sign structure may be considered to be one sign
face if the area of such sign face is measured as only one circle or only
one triangle or only one parallelogram, provided that the area so
measured conforms to the maximum sign area requirements of this
article. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
N. Placement, vertical dimension, construction, finish and colors of signs.
[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(1) It is the intent of the sign placement, vertical dimension,
construction and finish regulations to preserve and enhance the
aesthetic quality of the environment by reducing the visual
discordance which can result from:
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:675
(a) The haphazard placement of signs on buildings; and
(b) The use of an array of different sign constructions on one
building or connected stores or buildings. It is recognized that
this intent may be met by approaches other than those
specifically set forth in this section. Accordingly, this section
makes provisions for approval of signs which conform to the
intent of this section but which do not conform to the specific
requirements of Subsection N(2) and (3) of this section.
(2) Placement of signs attached to building walls in relation to building
lines. Signs shall be placed on a building so as not to break
important horizontal or vertical building lines.
(a) This requirement will be considered met if none of the
following types of lines are broken:
[1] Cornice line.
[2] Lintel lines, actual and extended.
[3] Sill lines, actual and extended.
[4] Belt course lines.
[5] Column and pilaster lines.
(b) This requirement may be considered met even if one or more of
the types of lines in Subsection N(2)(a)[1] through [5] of this
section are broken if the building is designed so that a
permitted sign cannot be located without breaking one or more
of the above lines and the sign or signs are placed to minimize
the breaking of important building lines.
(3) Vertical dimension of wall-mounted signs in relation to building
facade elements. The maximum vertical dimension of a wallmounted
sign shall be no more than 40% of the vertical face
dimension of the facade element (parapet, spandrel, fascia or other
facade element) on which it is mounted. This requirement shall be
considered met even if all or a portion of a sign exceeds in vertical
dimension 40% of the vertical dimension of the facade element on
which it is mounted if the building is designed so that a permitted
sign cannot be located without exceeding the forty-percent limit of
any building facade element.
(4) Coordination of construction type of wall-mounted signs. Whenever
more than two wall-mounted signs are permitted on any one
building or connected adjacent buildings comprised of several
fronts, all may be and all except one must be of the same
construction type (cabinet, individual pan-channel letters,
individual reverse pan-channel letters, or other). In addition, all
may be and all except one must have the same baseline if they are
individual letters mounted on the building facade, and must have
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:676
the same base and top line if they are of any other construction
type.
(5) Finish of sign background and sign structure. Low freestanding
signs shall have a background and structure which is of a material,
color and finish that is used extensively in the building to which the
sign is accessory. A material, color and finish will be considered to
be used extensively if it covers more of the nonglass portions of the
highly visible surfaces of the building than does any other material,
or if it covers at least 30% of the nonglass portions of the highly
visible surfaces of the building.
(6) Alternate approaches. Signs which do not conform to one or more
of the requirements set forth in Subsection N(1) through (5) of this
section may be approved if the review authority finds on the basis
of sufficient facts that the purposes and intent set forth in
§ 190-173 are met. Such a finding shall only be made based on a
written analysis and recommendation from a recognized design
professional and review and recommendation by the Sign
Committee to the Planning Board. [Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
O. Sign colors. The color of signs plays an important part in the overall
appearance of buildings, sites and streetscapes. Sign color schemes
should be uniform throughout the site. Colors must be from the
approved color palette for signs which are intended to enhance the
streetscapes in the Township. The color or colors of architectural
details may suggest signage-compatible colors for signs, sign frames
and or sign standards. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(1) Sign color requirements and guidelines:
(a) Signs with contrasting backgrounds color lettering are
required for maximum legibility.
(b) More than three colors will not be permitted.
(c) A dull or matte finish is recommended to reduce the glare and
enhance legibility.
(d) Sign supports shall be made of dark, neutral or subdued colors
to minimize their visual impact.
(e) Color schemes should be compatible with but provide contrast
to the colors of the building on the site.
(f) Dayglow or fluorescent colors are prohibited.
(2) Permitted sign colors. The following sign colors are permitted.
Colors from other manufacturers are permitted, provided that the
colors are the same as or very similar to the following approved
colors from the Sherwin Williams Preservation Palette, the Martin
Senour Colonial Williamsburg Paint Colors, and the 3M Palette as
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:677
listed below by manufacturer identification and/or by the Federal
Standard 595 Color Number which can be found at the Federal
Standard 595B Specification Reference Site at: http://www.fedstd-
595.com/FS-595-Paint-Spec.html. Permitted colors shall also
include matte black, bronze, gold and silver for background and
lettering.
(a) Background colors.
Martin Senour Paints -- Williamsburg Paint Colors
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Benjamin Powell House
Green
W85-1089
Benjamin Powell House
Red
W76-935
Bracken Tenement Blue
Slate
W83-1065
Brafferton Blue W74-1155
Brush-Everard Blue W74-1158
Burdett's Ordinary Black
Green
W85-0625 FS 14087
Campbell's Tavern
Charcoal Brown
W75-931
George Davenport House
Green
W85-1071
George Pitt House Green W84-1088
Governor's Palace Tan W82-1072
Holt's Storehouse Gray W83-1074
James Geddy Green W84-1075 FS 34096
James Southall Blue W72-1173
King's Arms Tavern Gray W83-1076 FS 26231
Levingston Kitchen Green W84-1077 FS 34159
Ludwell Tenement Sage W82-1079 FS 34424
Market Square Tavern
Dark Green
W85-0620
Palace Arms Red W1083 FS 30166
Palace Supper Room
Brown
W76-0205
Palmer House Brown W76-942
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:678
Martin Senour Paints -- Williamsburg Paint Colors
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Palmer House Green W84-1084 FS 34128
Palmer House Kitchen
Brown
W85-1085 FS 20059
Purdie House Gray W64-1169
Purdie House Gray Slate W83-1090
Sherwin Williams -- Preservation Palette
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Rookwood Dark Red SW 2801
Roycroft Copper Red SW 2839
Rookwood Red SW 2802
Roycroft Brass SW 2843
Rookwood Medium
Brown
SW 2807
Roycroft Bronze Green SW 2846
Rookwood Dark Brown SW 2808
Roycroft Bottle Green SW 2847
Rookwood Shutter Green SW 2809
Roycroft Pewter SW 2848
Rookwood Sash Green SW 2810
Rookwood Dark Green SW 2816
Aurora Brown SW 2837
Polished Mahogany SW 2838
3M Image Graphics -- Films for Opaque Applications
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Dark Grey 3650-41
Harvest Gold 7725-105
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:679
3M Image Graphics -- Films for Opaque Applications
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Black 3650-12
Dark Green 3650-56
Matte Black 3650-22
Bottle Green 7725-276
Deep Mahogany Brown 3650-19
Forest Green 7725-66
Russett Brown 3650-29
Bermuda Blue 7725-357
Putty 7725-59
Shadow Blue 7725-177
Deep Red 3650-23
Light Navy 7725-197
Burgundy 3650-58
Indigo 3650-27
(b) Lettering colors.
Martin Senour Paints -- Williamsburg Paint Colors
Interior Paint Colors
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Benjamin Powell House
Red
W76-935 Satin
Latex
Brafferton Blue W64-1155 Flat;
W74-1155 Satin
Brush-Everard Blue W64-1158 Flat;
W74-1158 Satin
Campbell's Tavern
Charcoal Brown
W75-931 Satin
Latex
James Southall Blue W62-1173 Flat;
W72-1173 Satin
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:680
Martin Senour Paints -- Williamsburg Paint Colors
Interior Paint Colors
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Palace Ballroom Ceiling
White
W61-0410 Flat;
W71-410 Satin
Palace Chambers Yellow W61-0406 Flat;
W61-408 Flat;
W71-406 Satin;
W71-408 Satin
Palace Dining Room Pearl
Blue
W61-0710 Flat;
W71-0710 Satin
Palace Supper Room
Brown
W76-0205 Satin
Latex
Palmer House Brown W76-942 Satin
Latex
Purdie House Gray W64-1169 Flat;
W74-1169 Satin
Raleigh Tavern Tan W61-1054 Flat;
W71-1054 Satin
Williamsburg Simulated
Whitewash
W970 Alkyd Flat
(package color)
Martin Senour Paints -- Williamsburg Paint Colors
Exterior Paint Colors
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Bracken Tenement
Biscuit
W81-1064
Burdett's Ordinary Black
Green
W85-0625 FS 14087
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:681
Martin Senour Paints -- Williamsburg Paint Colors
Exterior Paint Colors
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
George Davenport House
Green
W85-1071
George Pitt House Green W84-1088
Gold Leaf
Governor's Palace Tan W82-1072
Holt's Storehouse Gray W83-1074
James Geddy Green W84-1075 FS 34096
King's Arms Tavern Gray W83-1076
Livingston Kitchen Green W84-1077 FS 34159
Ludwell Tenement Sage W82-1079 FS 34424
Market Square Tavern
Dark Green
W85-0620
Palmer House Green W84-1084 FS 34128
Purdie House Gray Slate W83-1090
Sherwin Williams -- Preservation Palette
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Colonial Revival Tan SW 2828
Classical White SW 2829
Colonial Revival Yellow SW 2830
Colonial Revival Gray SW 2832
Roycroft Vellum SW 2833
3M Image Graphics -- Films for Opaque Applications
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
Translucent Frost 160-60
White 3650-10
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:682
3M Image Graphics -- Films for Opaque Applications
Name ID Number
Federal
Standard
595 Color
Number
White 7725-10
Matte White 7725-20
Eggshell 7725-130
Antique White 7725-90
Pearl Grey 7725-11
Fawn 7725-99
Beige 3650-49
Vista Yellow 7725-85
P. Sign design requirements and guidelines. In developing signs and
signage plans or programs for sites, applicants should utilize design
standards that will enhance the building, site and overall appearance of
the neighborhood and Township as a whole. Specific requirements and
guidelines that can help achieve this goal include: [Added 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(1) The design of signs should be compatible with the architectural
character of the related building and its site.
(2) Materials, colors and lettering on all signage for the identified
business or businesses should be compatible with the related
building or buildings.
(3) The graphic design should be simple in approach and reflect the
business's logo, merchandise or service.
(4) Signs should be readable from the street or internal driveway(s)
within shopping centers.
(5) No more than two type styles per sign face are permitted.
(6) Materials and design should be compatible with the design of the
building.
(7) Sign bases should be part of the overall sign design and should
complement the sign face and related building material.
(8) For longer messages, the use of uppercase and lowercase lettering
is recommended since it is easier to read than words which are all
uppercase.
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:683
(9) Where more than one business or occupant shares a building, it is
required that a master sign plan for the building be implemented
by the property owner.
(10) Building-mounted signs should be designed to enhance the facade
by blending with the architectural features of the building and not
merely applied to the surface.
(11) Signs should not cover or obscure decorative architectural details
or overwhelm the facade of the building.
(12) Sign bands should be of a consistent height and size along the
building facade and for multitenant buildings with more than one
facade sign.
Q. The content or advertising message carried by permitted signs shall
pertain to the business located on the same premises as the sign, or to
any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct
attention to a business operated for profit, or to a commodity or service
for sale, provided that signs erected on contiguous properties or
buildings may pertain to a business located on any such contiguous
property or building. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
R. For signs with changeable message panels or zip tracks, the changeable
message area of the sign shall not exceed 25% of the total sign area,
except for fueling product price signs and multiplex cinema signs,
which shall not exceed 75% of the total sign area. Reverse white or
light-colored lettering with no white background is required. Electronic
changeable-message boards shall be prohibited except as follows:
[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3; amended 5-28-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-16]
(1) Fueling product price signs (manual or electronic). Fueling product
price signs are subject to the following:
(a) One fueling product price sign shall be permitted per gasoline
or alternative motor vehicle fueling station for each roadway
for which an access driveway to the station occurs. It shall be
affixed to a permanent sign structure or to a building and shall
not be located closer than 20 feet to any side property line.
(b) The price sign shall be permitted to change price no more than
four times within a twenty-four-hour period. Changes in
numerical digits must be completed within 10 seconds.
(c) If illuminated, the fueling product price sign shall not be
illuminated with an exposed or a visible lighting source.
Prohibited lighting for electronic price signs shall include
lamps or bulbs in excess of 30 watts, exposed reflectorized
lamps or bulbs, lamps or bulbs not covered by a lens, filter or
sunscreen and lamps or bulbs that scroll, flash, zoom, twinkle
or sparkle.
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:684
(d) A fueling product price sign may be mechanically or remotely
operated utilizing light-emitting diode (LED) lighting subject to
the following:
[1] Changes to the price shall appear instantaneous, as
perceived by the human eye, without any special effects.
[2] LED characters shall not exceed 12 inches in height.
[3] LED character colors for fuel prices shall be in accordance
with common industry standards (i.e., red for gasoline and
green for diesel fuel).
[4] The LED sign shall not exceed a brightness level of 0.3
footcandle above ambient light as measured using a
footcandle (LUX) meter at a preset distance depending on
sign area.
[a] The measurement distance shall be calculated with
the following formula: The square root of the product
of the sign area and 100. An example of the formula
using a twelve-square-foot sign:
Measurement Distance = v(12 square feet x 100) =
34.6
[b] Light measurement shall be taken with the meter
aimed directly at the sign message face, or the area of
the sign emitting the brightness light.
[5] No LED sign shall be operated without a mechanism able
to automatically adjust the display's illuminative
brightness according to ambient light conditions by means
of a light detector/photo cell by which the sign's brightness
shall be dimmed.
[6] The LED sign shall not be operated without a written
certificate from a sign manufacturer or other approved
testing agency that the light intensity has been preset to
conform to the brightness and display standards
established herein and that the preset levels are protected
from end-user manipulation by password-protected
software or other method. An annual inspection shall be
performed and a certificate of compliance shall be issued.
[7] LED signs shall contain a default mechanism that will
cause the sign to revert immediately to black screen if the
sign malfunctions.
[8] LED signs shall be equipped with a nonglare panel
covering the LED display.
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:685
(2) Multiplex cinemas with four or more screens shall be allowed 16
square feet of sign area per screen to be used for marquee
identification of the movie playing. The display of movie posters
shall be allowed on the same side of the building as the main
entrance, with a maximum size of 12 square feet for each poster.
Permitted marquee signs identifying the movies playing and movie
posters shall not be included within the permitted sign area within
the applicable zone.
S. Gasoline or alternative motor vehicle fueling pump island signs.
Nonilluminated gasoline or alternative motor vehicle fueling pump
island signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3; amended 5-28-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-16]
(1) One fuel price or promotional information sign per fuel pump not to
exceed two square feet.
(2) Any other signs on the canopy or pump islands shall be subject to
the requirements for building-mounted wall signage.
T. Natural features located in a public right-of-way shall not be altered to
increase the visibility of a sign. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-3]
U. Registration of existing signs. All signs of more than eight square feet in
area shall be registered with the Zoning Officer by submission of a
sketch of the sign showing its dimensions, the distance between the
sign and all property lines, and the height of the sign. [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
V. Replacement of signs that are damaged or destroyed. In the event that
any nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed, it may be replaced
with the same sign, notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter.
In that event, the advertising message on the sign shall remain the
same. Where any such damaged or destroyed sign is to be replaced in
conjunction with a change of business or message, said replacement
sign shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this article.
[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
W. Abandoned signs. A sign, including its supporting structure or brackets,
shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the
sign is located when the business or the businesses which it advertises
is (are) no longer on the premises. Such sign, if not removed within 30
days from the termination of occupancy by such business, shall be
considered to be in violation of this chapter and shall be removed at the
owner's expense. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
X. Dilapidated signs. All signs shall be maintained in good working
condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The Zoning
Officer shall give written notice to remove or repair any sign which in
his/her opinion shows gross neglect or which becomes dilapidated.
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:686
Failure to repair, replace or remove the sign in violation within 30 days
shall be considered a violation of this chapter. [Added 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3]
Y. Sign submission with land use applications. All applicants for land use
approvals for developments in the enumerated zones shall submit
details of signs prepared in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter as a part of their subdivision or site plan application, which sign
submission shall be reviewed under the provisions of § 190-114.
[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
Z. Informal sign review. All applicants for issuance of sign permits,
whether in conjunction with subdivision or site plan application or any
other circumstance, may apply to the Sign Review Subcommittee for an
informal review of any proposed signage to identify areas of concern,
the need for exceptions or such other matters as may be related to the
configuration and location of a proposed sign. The information
disclosed and the positions taken by the respective parties during
informal reviews shall be nonbinding upon each. [Added 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3]
AA. Electronic graphic display signs are permitted only on a site with an
entertainment event center in accordance with the following: [Added
11-12-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-34; 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-4]
(1) Setback from residential. The leading edge of the sign must be a
minimum distance of 500 feet from an abutting residential district
boundary which it faces.
(2) Orientation. When located within 750 feet of a residentially used
lot, any part of the electronic graphic display sign must be oriented
so that no portion of the sign face is visible from an existing or
permitted principal structure on that lot.
(3) Setback from other electronic graphic display signs. Electronic
graphic display signs must be separated from other electronic
graphic display, electronic changeable copy signs or video display
signs by at least 50 feet, with the exception of two-sided signs.
(4) Duration. Any portion of the image on the electronic graphic
display sign must have a minimum duration of 10 minutes
(changing a maximum of six times per hour) and must be a static
display.
(5) Motion. No portion of the image may flash, scroll, twirl, change
color, or in any manner imitate movement.
(6) Electronic display area. The electronic graphic display area shall
not exceed 60% of the total sign area.
(7) Limitation of characters. The narrative script of the electronic
graphic display sign comprised of letters, numbers or other
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-176
186:687
symbols shall not exceed 40 characters. The date and reservation
information on the sign shall not be part of the character limitation
or emergency or public service announcements.
(8) Limitation of Content. Content displayed on the electronic display
sign shall be limited to signage and advertising provided by the
entertainment event center and is limited to events, promotions
and activities that will occur on the site within four months of
signage display. Advertising matter of an indecent, immoral or
obscene nature is prohibited as defined in § 190-3, Definitions,
"obscene material."
(9) Background. The electronic graphic display sign shall be comprised
of a matte finish background to decrease reflection for safety
purposes.
(10) Displays of static messages. The change of static message
sequence must be accomplished instantaneously as seen by the
human eye and shall not use blinking, fading, rolling, shading,
dissolving, or similar effects as part of the change.
(11) Emergency/public service announcements. Electronic display signs
may be utilized for public service announcements and emergency
service announcements including police and fire, at the request of
the Township of Freehold for up to 50% of the display time (a
maximum of three times per hour).
(12) Luminance. This is the "brightness" of the electronic graphic
display signs as seen from a particular angle of view. This is
measured in candelas per square meter, also termed "nits." All
electronic graphic display signs shall have installed ambient light
monitors and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically
adjust the brightness level of the sign based on ambient light
conditions. The sign must not exceed a maximum illumination of
5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a
maximum illumination of 350 nits (candelas per square meter)
between dusk and dawn as measured from the sign's face at
maximum brightness.
(13) Dimmer control. Electronic graphic display signs must have an
automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change
from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period
between 1/2 hour before sunset and 1/2 hour after sunrise as those
times are determined by the National Weather Service.
(14) Audio. Audio speakers are prohibited in association with an
electronic graphic display sign.
(15) Any electronic graphic display sign that malfunctions, fails or
ceases to operate in its usual or normal programmed manner,
causing motion, movement, flashing or any similar effects, shall be
§ 190-176 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-176
186:688
§ 190-177. Signs permitted in R-9; R-12; R-15; R-20 and R-25
Residential Zones.
shut off immediately and restored to its normal operation
conforming to the requirements of this subsection within 48 hours.
(16) Electronic graphic display signs shall meet all other sign
requirements of the zone in which they are located and all other
requirements as listed in Article XVII, Signs.
(17) Utilization of electronic graphic display signs is subject to approval
by the Township Engineer and/or Chief of Police for traffic and
pedestrian safety purposes.
(18) Emergency generator. The electronic graphic display sign must be
permanently connected to an emergency generator to provide
backup power to the sign in the event of power outages. The
operation of the emergency generator is limited to the time period
during power outages.
A. An informational sign or bulletin board, which may be illuminated, of
not more than 20 square feet in area for a religious or similar public
facility or institution, including hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living
facilities, senior rental apartments, private schools, service
organizations, recreational facilities, and other such uses, together with
incidental signs which may be illuminated, not to exceed four square
feet in area, necessary to provide direction or describe specific
buildings in connection with such uses. No signs shall be located nearer
to any lot line than 15 feet. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-3]
B. A business sign of not more than two square feet of surface area for
single-faced or a total of four square feet for double-faced signs in
connection with a business or professional office located in a home.
(1) Such sign may be mounted flat against the face of the building or
on a single freestanding post as a lawn sign, and shall not be
located closer to any lot line than 1/2 the distance between the lot
line and the building line.
(2) If the building has more than one use, all names shall appear on
one sign, which sign shall have a maximum of four square feet per
side or a total of eight square feet for double-faced signs. Sign may
be illuminated and shall state the name of the occupant, his
business or profession and house number only. Freestanding signs
shall not exceed six feet in height above ground level. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
C. Temporary signs for fund-raising events for religious organizations,
hospitals, public functions or political activities shall not exceed 32
square feet in surface area, to be located on the premises of the
organization sponsoring the event. Signs shall be nonilluminated,
§ 190-176 JUNK DEALERS § 190-177
186:689
§ 190-178. Signs permitted in R-E, R-R, R-80, R-60 and R-40
Residential Zones. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-3]
freestanding, and shall be removed within 15 days upon termination of
event. Such signs shall not be closer to any lot line than 1/2 the distance
between the lot line and the building line. The sign or signs shall not
exceed eight feet in height above ground level.
D. A business or store which has been allowed in this area may have one
illuminated, flat sign against the building, and if located on a corner,
two such signs shall be permitted, one facing each street.
(1) The area of each sign shall not exceed 10% of the area of the side of
the building to which the sign is attached or 32 square feet,
whichever is the lesser.
(2) Such business or store, instead of having a sign affixed to the
building, may have an illuminated freestanding sign which shall not
exceed 10 feet in overall height.
E. In the case of a development under construction, one nonilluminated
temporary freestanding real estate sign of not more than 64 square feet
of sign surface may be permitted on the premises where the
construction is taking place. Upon completion of the total number of
houses or units to be constructed in the development, all signs and
supports shall be removed.
F. The rental or sales office of such residential development may have one
illuminated sign identifying it as a rental or sales office only. Such sign
shall not exceed 12 square feet for a single-faced sign or 24 square feet
for a double-faced sign.
(1) No freestanding sign shall be located closer to any lot line than 1/2
the distance between the lot line and the building line.
(2) The overall height of any such sign shall not exceed five feet above
ground level.
(3) Each such sign shall be removed no later than 10 days from the
date of the homes or units planned for the development have been
sold or rented.
A. Those signs permitted in § 190-177 of this article shall also be
permitted in this section. The rules and regulations pertaining under
§ 190-177 shall also pertain under this section.
B. In addition to the signs permitted in Subsection A above, the following
types of signs shall also be permitted in this section:
(1) Two illuminated freestanding signs identifying a farm and
advertising the sale of farm or dairy products, which sign shall be
located on the premises where the goods are to be sold. Each sign
shall not exceed 16 square feet in the case of a single-faced sign.
§ 190-177 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-178
186:690
§ 190-179. Signs permitted in Highway Development B-2 and B-10,
Hospital H-1, Corporate Multi-Use CMX-2, CMX-3 and CMX-3/A,
Professional Office P-1 and P-2 and office uses in the R-40/P
Residential/Professional Zone. [Amended 12-8-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-32; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(a) In lieu thereof, there shall be permitted one double-faced sign,
each face of which shall not exceed 16 square feet of face
surface.
(b) The overall height of each such sign shall not exceed eight feet
above the ground level.
(2) One illuminated sign advertising the sale of farm produce, which
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet of surface area. Such sign shall
be attached flat against the face of the farm stand or farm building
where the produce is to be sold.
(3) Two single-faced, freestanding, nonilluminated, temporary real
estate signs of not more than 32 square feet for each sign; or, in lieu
thereof, one double-faced sign of not more than 16 square feet of
surface area for each face. Such sign or signs shall be permitted
only in the case where it pertains to the sale, lease or rental of the
property on which it is located. Lots having a frontage of 400 feet
or more may display no more than two single-faced signs which
shall not exceed an area of 32 square feet each, or in lieu thereof,
one double-faced sign, each face of which shall not exceed 32
square feet of surface on each side. No such sign shall be closer
than 15 feet to any lot line. The overall height of each such sign
shall not exceed 10 feet above ground level. Each such sign shall be
removed upon the sale, leasing, or rental of the property.
(4) Temporary nonilluminated single-faced, freestanding informational
signs not to exceed 32 square feet in area advertising an event of a
public organization or official Township function of public interest.
Such signs may not be located closer than 500 feet to each other
and such signs shall be removed upon the termination of the event.
No such sign shall be attached to any utility pole, tree, fence, or
other sign.
A. Subject to the following limitations, all signs permitted in §§ 190-177
and 190-178 shall be permitted in this section.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter and in furtherance
of the goals of § 190-114 of this chapter, the following restrictions,
limitations and conditions shall apply to signs in these zones:
(1) Each sign in the enumerated zones shall be of a general design and
shall contain lettering appropriate to and visually compatible with
the architectural style of the building to which it is affixed or which
it services.
§ 190-178 JUNK DEALERS § 190-179
186:691
(2) The placement of signs shall be appropriate to and visually
compatible with the architectural style and architectural elements
of the buildings.
(3) The colors of backgrounds and letters on signs shall be appropriate
to and visually compatible with colors used on the building.
C. In addition to the signs permitted under Subsection A hereof, the
following sign or signs shall also be permitted:
(1) Wall signs. Each business or commercial use may have one or more
illuminated flat signs displayed on the face of the building or space
which it occupies. The aforesaid sign shall advertise only the
business and product occupying the space. If the property is
located on a corner lot, such signs shall be permitted on the sides of
the building facing each street.
(a) Size. The permitted size of wall signs shall be based on a
percentage of the wall areas computed by the length times the
height in the geometric figures which determine the actual
area. The wall length shall be the building, or that portion
occupied. The height of the wall for computing purposes shall
not exceed 15 feet for one-story structures or 25 feet for twoor
more story structures. One wall shall be the front wall; other
walls shall be figured on the basis of one-half of the percent
allowable given the front wall.
Wall Signs: Allowable Size
Square Footage Percent Allowable
0 to 3,500 7.5
3,500 to 4,500 8.0
4,500 to 5,500 8.5
(b) Maximum allowable size. The maximum allowable size of a wall
sign shall not exceed 495 square feet.
(c) No wall sign shall be mounted at a distance measured
perpendicular to said wall face greater than 24 inches.
(d) No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any required wall
opening.
(2) Freestanding signs.
(a) Each business or commercial use may display one
freestanding, illuminated sign, provided that such business is
not part of a planned center of three or more units. Such sign
shall advertise only the business or use occupying the space.
The size of the sign face or faces shall be determined by the
linear dimension of the side of the lot facing the street or
highway in accordance with the following table:
§ 190-179 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-179
186:692
CHART A
Frontage
(feet) Type of Sign
Maximum Size
(square feet)
Up to 50 One single-faced 32
One doublefaced
32 for each face
Up to 100 One single-faced 32
One doublefaced
32 for each face
Up to 200 One single-faced 96
One doublefaced
96 for each face
Up to 300 One single-faced 144
One doublefaced
100 for each face
Up to 400 One single-faced 160
One doublefaced
160 for each face
400 and over One single-faced 200 maximum
One doublefaced
200 for each face
maximum
(b) Freestanding signs shall comply with the minimum side and
corner yard setbacks of the applicable zoning district as an
accessory structure but in no event shall a sign be closer than
15 feet to any lot line or building line.
(c) All freestanding signs shall be located at least five feet from all
buildings.
(d) Signs shall not exceed the following heights; provided,
however, that when freestanding signs are placed in raised
decorative planters not exceeding four feet, the height shall be
measured from the height of the planter structure:
[1] Route 9: 30 feet.
[2] Route 537 and Route 33: 20 feet.
[3] Route 79 and all other streets: 10 feet.
(3) Real estate signs. Two single-faced, freestanding, nonilluminated
temporary real estate signs shall be permitted, which signs shall
not exceed 32 square feet of surface area for each sign; in lieu
thereof, there shall be permitted one double-faced sign which shall
not exceed 32 square feet of surface area for each face. The sign or
§ 190-179 JUNK DEALERS § 190-179
186:693
§ 190-180. Signs permitted in planned multiple-store shopping
areas.
signs shall pertain only to the sale, lease or rental of the property
on which it is located. Lots having a frontage of 400 feet or greater
may display two single-faced signs which shall not exceed an area
of 64 square feet each; or, in lieu thereof, one double-faced sign,
each face of which shall not exceed 64 square feet in surface area.
No such sign shall be closer than 15 feet to any lot line.
A. Any shopping center comprising four or more units and having a
frontage of up to 300 linear feet on any street or highway shall be
permitted one freestanding, illuminated, double-faced sign designating
the name of the center or occupants of the unit and their principal
product. Such shall have a maximum area of 100 square feet for each
sign face.
(1) Any shopping center of four or more units having a frontage of 300
or more linear feet on any street or highway shall be permitted one
freestanding, illuminated, double-faced sign having a surface area
of not more than 200 square feet for each sign face.
(2) If the center faces upon more than one street, there shall be
permitted one sign for each street adjoining the center, provided
that no sign shall be closer than 300 feet to any other sign.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(3) No sign shall be closer than 15 feet to any lot line. No sign shall be
more than 20 feet in overall height above the average grade of the
property within five feet, inclusive of planters. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
B. No sign shall exceed 10% of the area of the front face of the building or
face of the space being occupied for the first 500 square feet of such
facing. Such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in size for buildings
which do not exceed 1,000 square feet in face area. In the event the
face area of the building exceeds 1,000 square feet, the sign affixed to
such building shall not exceed 7.5% of such building face area. The face
of the building, as used herein, shall mean that part of the building
containing the front entrance to the building. Such sign shall advertise
only the business or use occupying such space. [Amended 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-3]
C. A wall sign equal to one-half of the permitted signage area for the front
face of the building shall be permitted for each building face which
faces a side or rear street. Such sign shall advertise only the business or
use occupying such space. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-399]
D. Temporary signs permitted in various nonresidential zones.
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C as Subsection D.
§ 190-179 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-180
186:694
(1) Temporary billboard type signs shall be allowed for commercial,
industrial or office uses in the B-2, LI-3, M-1, P-1 and CMX Zones to
announce the approved project to be built on the site where the
gross leasable or saleable building area exceeds 200,000 square
feet and the size of the approved development exceeds 50 acres
and has at least 500 feet of frontage on a public highway. The
granting of a permit for such signs is subject to the following:
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-5-48]
(a) Prohibitions contained in § 190-175.
(b) No sign shall be closer than 50 feet to the lot line.
(c) No sign shall be erected within 300 feet of any residential zone
line.
(d) Lighting of the sign shall be by ground lighting structures
illuminating the face of the sign or by light fixtures which are
attached to a part of the sign structure. There shall be no use
of flashing lights or moving parts on any sign.
(e) No sign shall be higher than 40 feet in height above ground
level including supporting structures.
(f) No sign shall be located in any public right-of-way or in such a
position as to cause an obstruction of the view of traffic or
otherwise to be injurious to the public safety.
(g) All signs shall be maintained in a good and clean condition.
(h) Natural features located in a public right-of-way shall not be
altered to increase the visibility of a sign.
(i) No sign shall be larger than the following sizes:
[1] If single-faced and set parallel to the adjacent roadway:
650 square feet.
[2] If double-faced and set perpendicular to or at an angle less
than 180° to the adjacent roadway: 300 square feet for
each face.
[3] V-shaped signs where one or a combination of signs within
100 feet of each other face different directions so that the
projection of the closest ends of the two signs would cause
a "V" if extended: 400 square feet for each face.
(j) If the qualified project fronts on more than one public roadway,
there shall be permitted one sign for each roadway adjoining
the approved project, provided that no sign shall be closer to
any other sign than 250 feet other than the V-shaped sign.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
§ 190-180 JUNK DEALERS § 190-180
186:695
§ 190-181. Signs permitted in RMZ Regional Mall Zones.
(2) Permits for such temporary signs shall be reapplied for on an
annual basis, and the temporary sign permit shall be terminated by
a thirty-day notice from the Township to the permit holder upon the
first to occur of the following: [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-3]
(a) The installation of permanent signs for the project.
(b) The failure to apply for and/or have the temporary sign permit
renewed annually.
(c) The completion of the project evidenced by final certificate of
occupancy being issued.
(d) Failure to restore and maintain a sign.
(3) The granting of a temporary sign permit shall not grant to the
permit holders or its successors in interest any right to maintain
billboard-type signs or other signs in the same location as the
temporary sign after the temporary sign permit has been
terminated.
(4) Permittees shall pay a temporary sign license fee to the Township
and post with the Township a performance guarantee per sign to
guarantee its ultimate removal as provided in Chapter 150, Fees,
§ 150-55C, Temporary signs permitted in various nonresidential
zones. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
A. Permitted signs.
(1) Signs of a permanent or temporary nature such as described in
§ 190-174C, D, E, F, I and K.
(2) Traffic signs, whether temporary or permanent, for purposes of
regulating traffic within interior driveways, parking and loading
areas installed by owner or owner's representative. Traffic signs so
utilized shall, wherever possible, utilize signage design and
verbiage which is in accordance with NJDOT standards for public
traffic signs.
(3) Signs identifying stores within an enclosed mall on the facade or
store window of the store but not visible from the exterior of the
mall building unless the store has an exterior entrance. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(4) Construction signs on the exterior of buildings at or on
entranceways provided they are nonilluminated or illuminated
from within and each is no more than 50 square feet in area, and
that each is maintained for no more than 14 days following the
conclusion of the construction involved and the issuance by the
Township of a final certificate of occupancy for the use constructed.
§ 190-180 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-181
186:696
(5) Signs on machines which are an integral part of building interior
located vending machines, provided that they do not collectively
exceed three square feet in area per machine.
(6) Along each public roadway that the mall fronts on directly, or on a
contiguous parcel to the mall for which a sign structure easement
has been obtained, the mall owner shall be permitted to erect one
freestanding, illuminated, single-faced, double-faced or triple-faced
sign designating the name and/or logo of the regional mall
shopping center subject to the following:
(a) Lighting of the sign shall be by floodlights or spotlights at
ground level or by internal or back lit forms of illumination.
(b) The sign shall be a maximum of 40 feet in height, including the
support structure.
(c) No sign shall be erected closer than 50 feet from the edge of
the right-of-way of any public roadway or closer than 25 feet to
any adjacent lot line, other than a lot line for a lot owned by the
mall owner.
(d) The enclosed face of each side of the sign shall not exceed 300
square feet.
(e) Where there is insufficient room at a public roadway entrance
to install a sign in accordance with Subsection A(6)(a) through
(d) above, the mall owner may install an entrance sign
designed in accordance with Subsection A(8) and all of
Subsection B.
(7) Separate mall-related activity signs may be placed by the mall
owner at each of the main access roads to the mall on property
owned by the mall owner or contiguous thereto, providing
information as to events on the mall or contiguous properties,
public interest messages, or for other directory and informational
purposes as freestanding signs providing for one, two or three
faces with a maximum printed area of 50 square feet per side,
being a maximum of six feet high and being either internally or
back lit illuminated. These signs, if provided for as an enclosed sign
contained within the mall signs set forth in Subsection A(6) above
so that this sign is combined within the enclosure of the
freestanding mall signs, may be one- , two- or three-sided and 180
square feet maximum sign area on each side.
(8) Additional directional signs utilizing the appropriate logo may be
placed at various locations along the access roads and parking
areas for directional purposes. These signs shall be freestanding,
no more than eight feet in height and containing no more than 32
square feet of sign space on each side. They shall be internally
illuminated, backlit or illuminated by ground spotlights or
floodlights.
§ 190-181 JUNK DEALERS § 190-181
186:697
(9) Mall identification signs may be painted on permanent utility
structures with the express consent of the utility structure owner
entity on one, two or more sides limited however to mall
identification, logo and location script subject to the following:
(a) The total amount of painted sign space shall not exceed 30% of
the solid face area of the utility structure;
(b) Illumination may be by spotlight and/or floodlight either
ground-mounted or structure-mounted.
(10) The mall building itself, as well as each anchor department store
structure attached to the mall building, may display one or more
signs on the exterior of each wall of the building to identify its
company name, logo and/or principal function or service. These
signs shall be applied flat against the building facade or extend out
from the building wall by not more than 15 inches at a location that
is not extended above the top of the parapet or beyond the ends of
the facade of any walls. Such signs shall be backlit, illuminated
from within and/or under parapet or ground- , flood- or spotlighted.
Such signs shall not exceed 15% of the exterior face area of each
side of the building. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(11) Non-mall or non-mall attached buildings in the RMZ Zone shall be
permitted those signs set forth below:
(a) Each principal structure may display one or more signs, to
identify the occupants and their principal function or service,
flat against the building facade, facing each street on which
the lot fronts; provided however, that the total area of all such
signs shall not exceed 10% of the surface area of each side of
the building to which the signs are attached; and providing no
facade sign shall be located on the rear facade of a building
unless any loading and trash areas are adequately screened
from view from adjoining public roadways and the building
rear facade is finished with the same materials as the exterior
walls of the structure.
(b) Each lot may have one double-faced or triple-faced,
freestanding, internally illuminated or nonilluminated
monument-type sign not exceeding 20 feet in height and 45
square feet in area per sign face. For a retail commercial
development or shopping center containing more than 300,000
square feet of floor area on a lot with more than 2,000 feet of
frontage, two freestanding signs may be erected. The signs
may be single-faced or double-faced and may contain not more
than 200 square feet in area per sign face. The face of all
freestanding signs shall be of a recognized geometric shape
and shall not contain characters or graphics exceeding three
inches in relief from the sign face. No freestanding sign shall
§ 190-181 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-181
186:698
be located closer than 25 feet to any property line or building
line.
(c) For uses which exceed 25,000 square feet of gross floor area
additional directional signs as set forth in Subsection A(8) may
be installed.
(d) Theaters, cultural and recreational centers may erect one
freestanding or attached sign of the type and size set forth in
Subsection A(7) above, in addition to a similar sign on their
own lot, along each public roadway on which the RMZ Zone
fronts where the sign location is not within 300 feet of a
residential zone.
(e) One temporary real estate sign shall be permitted to advertise
a property for sale, rental or lease. Such sign shall be located
only on the aforesaid property which is for sale, rental or lease.
Such sign shall not exceed 150 square feet in surface area if it
is a single-faced sign or 300 square feet if a double-faced sign.
B. Prohibited signs. All signs prohibited by § 190-175 as well as all signs
not specifically permitted above are prohibited.
C. Application and approval procedures.
(1) Applications for signs provided for in Subsection A(1), (2), (3), (4),
(5) and (9) of this § 190-181 shall be allowed without the necessity
of filing for a sign permit.
(2) Applications for signs provided for in Subsection A(6), (7), (8), (10)
and (11) of this § 190-181 shall be applied for to the Planning Board
of the Township of Freehold by the filing of an architect's rendering
of the types of signs to be installed setting forth architectural
schematics of the signs providing for the height, width, amount of
enclosed surface area on each side of the sign, color scheme,
illumination, construction details and such other information as is
necessary to determine compliance with the terms and provisions
of this subsection together with a site plan setting forth the
proposed locations of each of said signs which should be
superimposed on a copy of the approved site plan for the mall
development and such contiguous properties as are necessary.
Approval of the signs shall be by a sign permit issued by the
Construction Code Official after review and approval by the
Planning Board.
(3) For all other signs permitted for in this subsection as well as for
signs not specifically provided for herein, application shall be
submitted, provided the same information as set forth in
Subsection C(2) above, to the Construction Code Official who shall
submit the same to the Planning Board for their review and
approval. The ultimate sign permit for such a sign shall however be
issued by the Construction Code Official.
§ 190-181 JUNK DEALERS § 190-181
186:699
(4) Any applicant who is before the Planning Board for final site plan
approval shall submit a sign plan to the Planning Board as part of
the final site plan application, in which event the signage plan
proposed shall be transmitted to the Construction Code Official for
determination of conformance with the provisions of this
subsection.
D. Fees for signs.
(1) There shall be no original and/or annual fee for those signs
provided for in Subsection C(1) above.
(2) There shall be an initial review fee as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, and an annual fee thereafter in accordance with § 150-15D of
Chapter 150 for signs provided for in Subsection C(2) above.
(3) There shall be an initial review fee as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, and an annual sign permit fee in accordance with § 150-15D
of Chapter 150 for each sign provided in Subsection C(3) above.
(4) Any fees provided for herein for initial review shall be paid at the
time that the application is filed and shall be nonrefundable. Any
annual fee that may be assessed for specific signs shall be paid
coincident with the issuance of the sign permit on a prorated basis
for the balance of the then current calendar year, and the annual
fee shall be paid on or before the 15th day of January of each year
thereafter.
E. General standards.
(1) All signs, unless specifically stated otherwise in this subsection,
shall relate solely to the ownership, trade name, logo, use or
occupancy of the property upon which the sign is located and/or
affixed; other than for recreational facility and informational and
event signs; and/or directional signs where properties are
interconnected by common driveways and/or common parking
areas. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(2) Graphic content of the sign may be modified without obtaining a
new sign approval, provided that the proposed graphic content if
originally submitted would have complied with the applicable
provisions of this section and further provided that any condition of
approval of a specific sign receiving conditional recommendation of
the Planning Board shall not be modified without additional review
and recommendation by the Planning Board as to the graphic
content modification.
(3) Any illuminated sign located adjacent to or across the street from
any residential district and visible from such residential district
shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. unless the use to which the sign pertains is open for business
during those hours.
§ 190-181 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-181
186:700
(4) No signs shall contain blinking, flashing, flickering, tracer or
sequential lighting.
(5) All wiring for permanent illuminated signs shall be installed and
maintained so that it is not within public view. Exterior and/or
external conduit which is exposed to public view shall not be used
unless the Construction Code Official determines that there is no
other practical way to run the conduit so that it is not within public
view.
(6) No sign or sign structure shall obstruct a fire escape, a door,
window or other required accessway. No sign shall be maintained
at any location which by reason of its position, size, shape, content
or color may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or
be confused with any traffic control sign, signal or device where it
may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic on public roadways,
or obstruct any site triangles required as part of site plan
approvals.
(7) No sign, except publicly owned or authorized signs, shall be placed
in or extend into over any public right-of-way.
(8) All signs provided for shall be securely affixed in a permanent
manner to the ground, building, or to pylons adequately set within
the ground. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(9) No signs shall be affixed to any roof, tree, fence, utility pole or
other similar structure unless approved by the Construction Code
Official. No signs shall be placed upon a motor vehicle, be animated
or moving, be contained on advertising fliers, banners, or
pinwheels or be otherwise portable or be painted on any pavement
surface unless it is necessary on a temporary and/or permanent
basis for traffic control.
(10) The area of a sign shall be determined as follows:
(a) Signs supported by bracing or pylons shall exclude the
supporting structure on which no sign material or sign backing
occurs.
(b) If the sign face contains backing, the area of the sign shall be
measured by computing the area of the sign backing.
(c) On signs without backing, the area shall be measured by
computing the area of the smallest geometric figure which
encompasses all words, letters, figures, emblems and other
elements measured with a clearance of at least four inches
from the top, sides and bottom exterior points from any such
element. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(11) The height of signs shall be measured between the highest grade at
ground level within 10 feet of all sides of the sign and the highest
§ 190-181 JUNK DEALERS § 190-181
186:701
§ 190-182. Signs permitted in Industrial M-1 and M-2, Light
Industrial LI and LI-3, Research Office Laboratory ROL Zones.
point of the highest element of the sign, excluding any incidental
structural elements. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
(12) A sign approval once issued shall continue unless the specific sign
structure permitted is abandoned, removed, moved more than five
feet, or increased in size to a size which exceeds the allowed face
size or height of the sign at any time. Replacement, renovation,
maintenance and/or repair of a permitted sign shall not affect the
sign permit.
(13) Replacement of existing signs. In the event that any nonconforming
sign is destroyed, it may be replaced with the same sign
notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter. In that event,
the advertising message on the sign shall remain the same. Where
any such damaged or destroyed sign is to be replaced in
conjunction with a change of business or message, said
replacement sign shall conform in all respects with the
requirements of this chapter. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-3]
A. An occupant of a planned industrial park or of a separate industrial use
may display flat signs or letters on its building to identify the company
and its principal products.
B. Each industrial use or occupant in this zone may display one
freestanding sign identifying the company and its principal products in
accordance with the standards established in Chart A herein
(§ 190-179B). In the case of a business use abutting a state highway,
such sign or signs may have any area and be of a size in accordance
with the table set forth in § 190-179. Any such industrial use or
occupancy which faces upon more than one street or highway may
display one such sign for each street or highway. When the property
frontage exceeds 400 feet, such industrial use or occupant may display
two signs, the total area of which shall not exceed one square foot for
each linear foot of frontage. No freestanding sign shall exceed 40 feet in
height above ground level. No freestanding sign shall be located closer
than 15 feet to any property line or building line.
C. A planned industrial park shall be permitted one freestanding sign to
identify the industrial park not exceeding 200 square feet in size. Such
identification sign may be illuminated and may be single-faced or
double-faced. The sign structure on which identification of the tenants
or occupants is placed shall not exceed 80 square feet in area for each
surface area of such tenant or occupant sign. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3]
§ 190-181 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-182
186:702
§ 190-183. Signs permitted in Corporate Multi-Use CMX-4 and
CMX-10 Zones.
D. Industrial uses may display entrance, exit, shipping and receiving
directional signs which may be illuminated. No such sign shall exceed
16 square feet in surface.
E. One temporary real estate sign shall be permitted to advertise a
property for sale, rental or lease. Such sign shall be located only on the
aforesaid property which is for sale, rental or lease. Such sign shall not
exceed 50 square feet in surface area if it is a single-faced sign or 100
square feet if a double-faced sign. In the case of state highways such
sign may be equal to one square foot in size for every linear foot of
frontage, up to a maximum of 600 square feet of area. Such sign shall
not exceed 15 feet in height above ground level. Such sign shall not be
closer than 15 feet to any lot line. Such sign shall be removed within 30
days from sale, rental or leasing of the property.
A. Each principal structure within a CMX District may display one or more
signs, to identify the occupant or tenant and its principal function or
service, flat against the building facade, facing the street on which the
lot fronts; provided, however, that the total area of all such signs shall
not exceed 10% of the surface area of that side of the building to which
the sign is attached. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
B. Each lot may have one double-faced, freestanding, internally
illuminated or nonilluminated sign not exceeding 10 feet in height and
64 square feet in area per sign face. The face of all freestanding signs
shall be of a recognized geometric shape and shall not contain
characters or graphics exceeding three inches in relief from the sign
face. No freestanding sign shall be located closer than 15 feet to any
property line or building line.
C. Sign colors shall conform to § 190-176O, Sign colors. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
D. Any lot which has frontage on more than one street may display an
additional freestanding sign and additional building facade signs in
accordance with the above standards for each street on which it fronts;
provided, however, that no additional signage shall be permitted on a
side of any building which abuts a residential zone.
E. A CMX corporate multi-use development park shall be permitted one
ground or monument sign, at each major entryway to the park, to
identify the office park. Each sign may be double-faced and internally
illuminated or nonilluminated and shall not exceed 120 square feet in
area nor eight feet in height. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-3]
F. One temporary real estate sign shall be permitted to advertise a
property for sale, rental or lease. Such sign shall be located only on the
§ 190-182 JUNK DEALERS § 190-183
186:703
§ 190-184. Outdoor advertising. [Amended 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-37; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
Outdoor advertising companies as defined in this section shall not be
permitted to locate billboard-type signs in the Township.
§ 190-185. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-23-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-16; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3]
Each day of violation may be considered a separate offense. Violation of
any of the provisions of this article shall result in a penalty for the first
offense as stated in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, or loss of privilege
of displaying the sign or signs in question for a period of one month, or
both. For a second offense or any subsequent offense, the penalty shall be
as stated in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, or a loss of privilege of
displaying the sign or signs for a period of up to three months, or both.
§ 190-186. Preexisting nonconforming signs. [Amended 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-3]
Signs erected prior to February 22, 2011, shall be deemed permitted
nonconforming signs as to location and size, provided that all owners of
such signs shall obtain permits for their continued utilization in accordance
with § 190-176 hereof, within 90 days after February 22, 2011.
§ 190-187. Interpretation.
The provisions of this section are the minimum requirements for promotion
of health, safety and public welfare, and whenever the requirements of this
section are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
§ 190-188. Deviations from requirements. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-3; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
Deviations from the requirements of this article may be permitted upon
application to and approval of the Planning Board, through the Zoning
Officer of the Township. Any such application for a deviation shall be
considered as applications for variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
aforesaid property which is for sale, rental or lease. Such sign shall not
exceed 50 square feet in surface area if it is a single-faced sign or 100
square feet if a double-faced sign. In the case of state highways such
sign may be equal to one square foot in size for every linear foot of
frontage, up to a maximum of 600 square feet of area. Such sign shall
not exceed 15 feet in height above ground level. Such sign shall not be
closer than 15 feet to any lot line. Such sign shall be removed within 30
days from sale, rental or leasing of the property.
§ 190-183 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-188
186:704
ARTICLE XVIII
General Regulations for Multifamily Uses
§ 190-189. Garden apartments.
§ 190-190. Townhouses.
A. No garden apartment shall exceed 35 feet in height and two stories.
B. Off-street parking facilities for the use of residents and guests shall be
provided at a ratio of two parking spaces for each apartment dwelling
unit.
C. There shall not be permitted any rental basement apartment units with
any part below the outside finished ground level.
D. Garden apartment dwelling units with fewer than two bedrooms shall
have a minimum gross habitable floor area of 750 square feet.
Apartment dwelling units with two bedrooms shall have a minimum
gross habitable floor area of 900 square feet.
E. No single detached building shall contain greater than 12 units.
A. No more than eight townhouses shall be attached in a series.
B. No more than two contiguous townhouse dwelling units shall be located
on the same setback line.
C. Variations in front setbacks between contiguous townhouse dwelling
units as required shall not be less than two feet.
D. There shall be a variety of design and architectural modes and setbacks
for the purpose of presenting an aesthetically desirable overall effect
over the entire townhouse complex with varied elevations, designs and
structural appearances and without uniformity. Additionally, none of the
townhouses shall be permitted to have flat roofs.
E. No townhouse dwelling unit of a single story shall have less than 800
square feet gross habitable floor area. No townhouse dwelling unit of
two stories shall have less than 1,200 square feet of gross habitable
floor area, with a minimum of 600 square feet on the first floor.
§ 190-189 JUNK DEALERS § 190-190
186:705

ARTICLE XIX
Conditional Use Permits
§ 190-191. Minimum requirements.
A. In recognition of the fact that certain necessary uses and operations
may be, or may become, inimical to the health, safety and general
welfare of the public, if located without special consideration of their
relationship with and effect upon the surrounding area and uses
therein, procedures and regulations are hereby established for
conditional use permits to be granted as a conditional exception to
certain provisions of this chapter as provided under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
The following standards and requirements are hereby established as
minimum requirements supplementary to all other requirements of this
chapter pertaining to performance standards, off-street parking
facilities, signs, fences, and buffers.
(1) Application for any conditional use permit as provided in this
chapter shall be made to the Planning Board.
(2) Upon hearing and considering the matter, the reviewing board may
direct the Zoning Officer and the Construction Official to issue
conditional use and building permits, if in its judgment any one of
such cases will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the Township and is deemed necessary for its
convenience may be permitted in specified zones only upon receipt
of a conditional use permit, and provided that the following
standards are met, together with any other requirements deemed
necessary by the Planning Board and any other applicable
requirements of this chapter.
B. Reinspection of premises. In such instances where conditional use
permits have been issued, the Township reserves the right to reinspect
the premises for which such conditional use permit has been granted
through its Zoning Officer at such times as it may deem necessary.
C. The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional
use within 95 days of the date upon which the application is deemed
complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(1) The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include
any required site plan review pursuant to Articles V and VI
(§ 190-31 et seq.) of this chapter. The time period for action by the
Planning Board on conditional uses pursuant to Subsection A of this
subsection shall apply to such site plan review. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued
on request of the applicant and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
§ 190-191 JUNK DEALERS § 190-191
186:707
§ 190-192. Swim clubs.
Swim clubs as defined by this chapter may be permitted in specified
residential zones only upon receipt of a conditional use permit, and
provided that the following standards are met, together with any other
requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Board, and any other
applicable requirements of the chapter:
§ 190-193. Public or private schools.
Public or private schools including colleges may be permitted in specified
zones only upon receipt of a conditional use permit, and provided that the
following standards are met, together with any other requirements deemed
necessary by the Planning Board and any other applicable requirements of
this chapter:
required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer
for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(2) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required, in the case of a subdivision, or in the
case of a site plan, the Township reviewing board shall condition
any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report
on the application by the County Planning Board by its failure to
report thereon within the required time period.
A. The standards of the Board of Health and any other Township or state
agency established for the regulation of swimming pools and swimming
clubs shall be complied with.
B. No swim club shall be located on a site having an area of less than five
acres and a minimum street frontage of 300 feet.
C. No swimming pool, sun deck, dressing room, or other structure shall be
located closer than 75 feet to any property line.
D. A swim club site shall have direct access onto an existing or proposed
secondary arterial or major collector road as indicated on the Township
Master Plan, as amended.
A. The school shall be approved by the New Jersey Department of
Education.
B. A school site shall have direct access onto an existing or proposed
secondary arterial or collector road as indicated on the Township
Master Plan, as amended.
C. The minimum lot area for an elementary school shall be five acres plus
one additional acre for each 100 pupils.
D. The minimum lot area for all other schools shall be 10 acres plus one
additional acre for each 100 pupils.
§ 190-191 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-193
186:708
§ 190-194. Houses of worship. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-25; 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
Houses of worship shall be permitted in any residential zone upon receipt of
a conditional use permit and provided that the following standards are met,
together with any other requirements deemed necessary by the Planning
Board and any other applicable requirements of this chapter:
§ 190-195. Golf courses and country clubs. [Amended 12-27-2005
by Ord. No. O-05-48]
Golf courses and country clubs shall be a permitted use in the R-25 Zone,
R-E Zone, R-R Zone and the R-40 Zone, subject to site plan approval by the
Planning Board of the Township, and provided that the following standards
are met, together with any other requirements deemed necessary by the
Planning Board and any other applicable requirements of this chapter:
E. The minimum street frontage shall be 500 feet.
F. No building shall be located nearer than 100 feet to any property line.
A. The minimum area shall be three acres and a minimum frontage shall
be 250 feet with one-hundred-foot front setback, seventy-five-foot side
yards and seventy-five-foot rear yard.
B. The site shall have direct access to a street classified as a minor
arterial, major collector, minor collector or collector street in the
Township Master Plan, as amended.
C. Maximum building coverage for all buildings shall be 20%.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 40%.
A. The site shall comprise a minimum of 50 acres and shall provide as a
minimum a nine hole regulation golf link with a minimum playing
distance of 2,500 yards from the first tee to the last green.
B. The operation of the golf course shall be restricted to daylight hours
and shall not include what are commonly known as golf driving ranges,
miniature golf courses, or pitch-and-putt golf courses, par-three
courses.
C. The site shall have direct access to a road classified as a secondary
arterial, major collector road or minor collector road by the Township
Master Plan, as amended.
D. No building shall be erected nearer than 100 feet to any property line.
E. The operation may include, in addition to a clubhouse and other
buildings normally accessory to a golf course operation, a restaurant
which may be operated under the same ownership and management as
the golf course.
§ 190-193 JUNK DEALERS § 190-195
186:709
§ 190-196. Car wash facilities.100 [Added 3-17-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-3]
Car wash facilities as defined by the North American Industrial
Classification System and classified as NAICS 811192 restricted may be
permitted in the CMX-3 Zone District only upon receipt of a conditional use
permit, provided that:
F. The design and location of any restaurant constructed in conjunction
with a golf course shall be such that the restaurant will blend
harmoniously with the golf course and the area in which the golf course
is situated.
G. No restaurant shall be opened for operation prior to the completion of
the construction of the golf course.
A. Car wash facilities permitted shall be limited to the following specific
uses identified within NAICS 81192:
(1) Automotive washing and polishing.
(2) Car detailers.
(3) Car washes.
(4) Detailing services (i.e., cleaning and polishing), automotive.
B. The following conditions are met, together with any other applicable
requirements of this chapter and other chapters of the Code of
Freehold Township:
(1) The car wash facility shall be constructed as a masonry building
designed of the same facade material as other buildings located on
site, provided that the building meets the design standards of
§ 190-114, Architectural design requirements for commercial,
office and industrial development.
(2) The car wash facility shall be located a minimum of 400 feet from a
public street and any residential property.
(3) The car wash facility shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from
any public building, house of worship or building utilized for public
assembly and from any office building or potential office building
based upon minimum building setback requirements. (As an
example, if an existing building has a required rear or side yard
setback of 50 feet from the property line, the car wash facility
would be required to be set back 50 feet from the coterminous
property line. If a vacant property exists adjacent to the car wash
facility property which permits office uses and a twenty-five-foot
100. Editor’s Note: Former § 190-196, Golf training centers, was repealed 11-29-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-39.
§ 190-195 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-196
186:710
rear or side yard setback, the car wash would be required to be set
back 75 feet from the applicable property line or lines.)
(4) A drive-through car wash facility shall provide a stacking area
sufficient for not fewer than 15 automobiles or that number of
vehicles capable of being processed during a 1/2 hour period,
whichever is greater. A space of nine feet by 18 feet shall be
deemed adequate for each required space. Stacking of automobiles
shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way or any area
designated as a driveway or fire access lane.
(5) No part of the areas required herein for stacking and bypass lanes
in connection with a car wash facility or for exiting from the car
wash facility to the street shall be blocked or used for any other
purpose, except that a bypass lane may accommodate other
through traffic on the lot.
(6) The car wash building shall be self-contained to the greatest extent
feasible, and all fans, blowers, dryers, vacuums and other
mechanical equipment shall be located on the side of the building
not facing any public building, residence or office building.
Vacuuming facilities outside the building may not be located in any
required yard area.
(7) Adequate provision shall be made to prevent excessive noise from
emanating from the facility. The sound produced by any mechanical
equipment involved in the operation of a car washing facility shall
not exceed 75 dB(A) when measured next to an adjacent residential
district or other noncommercial use or 80 dB(A) when measured in
or adjacent to any commercial district.
(8) A drying cycle or hand-drying of vehicles shall be provided as a
mandatory component of the car wash service, and heated pads
and drainage grates shall be placed at or near each exit from an
automatic car wash facility to reduce the potential for icing on the
site and on public streets.
(9) Water conservation and water recycling methods shall be utilized
such that at least 80% of the water used in the washing/rinsing of a
vehicle is recycled.
(10) All discharge of water used in the washing of vehicles shall be to
the sanitary sewerage system and not into any storm sewer or
detention system. The proposed connection to the sanitary sewer
connection shall be submitted to and approved by the Water and
Sewer Utility Engineer.
(11) Parking spaces. A minimum of three spaces or one space for each
employee on a maximum shift, whichever is greater, is required. If
a car wash facility includes detailing, one additional parking space
shall be provided for each detailing station.
§ 190-196 JUNK DEALERS § 190-196
186:711
(12) Car wash systems employing high-pressure sprays shall:
(a) Include building drains sized to accept 200% of maximum
water flow and shall discharge into enclosed piping connected
to the recycling facility equipment prior to discharge to the
sanitary sewer system.
(b) Be arranged as to contain all spray within the car wash
structure.
(c) Have exit aprons equipped with grate drains and pitched for a
minimum of 20 feet toward the car wash structure at a
gradient of at least 1/4 inch per foot.
(13) An application for a car wash facility shall include the following
information with the application:
(a) A recycling system for all wash water, rinse water and
wastewater acceptable to the Planning Board, Water and
Sewer Utility Departments and Township Engineer. No car
wash shall be permitted which does not contain, within an
integral part of the car wash equipment and facility, an
acceptable water recycling system.
(b) Complete details, including the volumes of wash water, rinse
water and wastewater recovered and recycled from the
system, the total volume of water, in gallons, used in the car
wash process, the type of car wash detergent and chemicals
used and a completed detailed plan of the automatic car wash
operation, shall be provided. The applicant must document the
system demands and recycling capabilities to demonstrate that
the system recycles over 80% of water used in the vehicle
washing procedure.
(c) The method(s) for removal of contaminants, including but not
limited to grease, oil, solvents or flammable liquids, shall be
provided. The location of processed discharge wastewater into
the sanitary sewer system must be provided.
(d) The proposed hours of operation during the week and on
weekends.
(14) The facility shall provide a suitable meter on the recycling system
effluent line to allow the Township to monitor compliance with
recycling requirements. Water and sewer connection fees shall be
based on the prevailing Township connection fees per equivalent
unit (EU) as developed by the proposed facility based on the
maximum capacity (washes per hour) of the facility for the
maximum proposed daily hours of operation (whether occurring on
a weekday or weekend) times the net loss of water to the sanitary
sewer connection per vehicle following all recycling procedures,
§ 190-196 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-196
186:712
§ 190-197. Gasoline filling stations. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-16]
Gasoline filling stations provided that the following standards are met,
together with any other applicable requirements of this chapter:
§ 190-197.1. Gasoline filling stations with convenience stores.
[Added 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-5]
Gasoline filling stations with a convenience store, provided that the
following standards are met, together with any applicable requirements of
this chapter:
plus 15 gallons per day per employee, inclusive of hand-drying
staff.
A. The minimum site area shall be 80,000 square feet.
B. The minimum street frontage shall be 150 feet.
C. No gasoline filling station shall be located closer than 3,000 feet to any
other gasoline filling station. The distance shall be measured between
the property lines of the respective sides.
D. No pits, racks, or lifts shall be permitted out of doors nor shall any
repair work be performed out of doors.
E. Gasoline pumps shall be located at least 30 feet from any property line.
F. All fuel oil, or similar volatile substances shall be stored as per National
Fire Prevention Association standards.
G. No ingress or egress drives shall be located closer than 50 feet to any
street intersection nor closer than 30 feet to any other drive on the
same site or any other property. Such ingress and egress drives shall
have a width of at least 20 feet, but not more than 30 feet.
H. No paved area other than an ingress or egress drive may be located
within 10 feet of any property line.
I. All unpaved areas of the site shall be graded and planted with grass,
shrubs, trees or other suitable landscaping material.
J. No building shall be erected nearer than 50 feet to any street line nor
nearer than 20 feet to any side or rear property line.
K. Only those items necessary and related to the operation of a motor
vehicle or dispensed from vending machines shall be sold from gasoline
filling stations.
L. The gasoline filling station shall have an appropriately sized emergency
stand-by generator system as defined in § 190-3, capable of operating
fuel pumps, cash registers and lighted signage in the event of a power
outage for at least 18 hours. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-16]
§ 190-196 JUNK DEALERS § 190-197.1
186:713
A. The minimum site area shall be three acres.
B. The minimum street frontage shall be 300 feet. On corner lots, the
street frontage on the primary roadway shall be 300 feet and on the
secondary roadway the street frontage shall be 200 feet.
C. No pits, racks, or lifts shall be permitted out of doors, nor shall any
repair work be performed out of doors.
D. Gasoline pumps shall be located at least 50 feet from any property line.
E. All fuel, oil, or similar volatile substances shall be stored as per
National Fire Prevention Association standards.
F. No ingress or egress drives shall be located closer than 50 feet to any
street intersection nor closer than 30 feet to any other drive on the
same site or any other property. Such ingress and egress drives shall
have a width of at least 20 feet but not more than 30 feet.
G. No paved area, other than an ingress or egress drive, may be located
within 10 feet of any property line.
H. All unpaved areas of the site shall be graded and planted with grass,
shrubs, trees or other suitable landscaping material.
I. No building shall be erected nearer than 100 feet to any street line, and
no structure including canopies shall be erected nearer than 50 feet to
any front, side or rear property line.
J. Illumination shall be such that no direct glare from the lights shall fall
upon adjoining streets or properties.
K. The sale, rental or lease of new or used vehicles shall be prohibited.
L. There shall be no drive-through facilities associated with the
convenience store.
M. Outdoor solid waste disposal containers and dumpsters shall be
contained within masonry structures with the same fascia material as
the convenience store or gas station building.
N. Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump islands and the
building island only. The outside storage of oil cans and/or antifreeze
and similar products may be displayed on the respective islands, if
provided for in a suitable metal stand or rack.
O. Convenience stores shall be permitted, provided that:
(1) They contain not less than 2,000 square feet and not more than
5,000 square feet of gross floor area;
(2) Parking space is provided for each 100 square feet of floor area
devoted to the convenience store.
§ 190-197.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-197.1
186:714
§ 190-198. Veteran and service organization facilities.
Veteran and service organization facilities are permitted upon issuance
of a conditional use permit and compliance with the following standards,
together with any other requirement deemed necessary by the Planning
Board:
§ 190-199. Campgrounds.
(3) Parking and pedestrian circulation for the handicapped shall
conform with the Americans with Disabilities Act; and
(4) The location and access to the convenience store does not impede
or interfere with vehicular and pedestrian circulation to and from
fuel pumps.
P. Any gasoline filling station, gasoline service station, gasoline filling
stations with convenience stores dispensing gasoline and diesel fuel to
the public shall have an appropriately sized emergency standby
generator system as defined in § 190-3, capable of operating fuel
pumps, cash registers and lighted signs in the event of power outage for
at least 18 hours. Separate convenience store facilities need not have
an emergency standby generator system, to the extent that the facilities
set forth herein have such a system. [Added 7-23-2019 by Ord. No.
O-19-12]
A. Minimum area: three acres.
B. Planted buffer: 20 feet.
C. Front setback: 75 feet.
D. Rear setback: 50 feet.
E. Side yard: 50 feet.
A. Campgrounds may be permitted in specified zones only upon receipt of
a conditional use permit and provided that the following standards are
met, together with any other requirements deemed necessary by the
Planning Board and any other applicable requirements of this chapter:
B. The minimum site area for a campground shall be 25 acres.
C. No campsite within a campground shall be closer than 50 feet from a
property line.
D. Each campsite (including the parking space) within a campground shall
provide a minimum of 2,500 square feet of space.
E. Interior roads shall be built to design specifications approved by the
Planning Board depending on specific site characteristics; one-way
interior roads shall have a minimum graded width of 15 feet.
§ 190-197.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-199
186:715
§ 190-200. Adult uses. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25;
3-27-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-4; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
Adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, body painting studios,
exotic dance or strip clubs, modeling shops and tattoo shops may be
permitted in the specified zones only upon receipt of a conditional use
permit and provided that the following standards are met, together with any
other requirement deemed necessary by the Planning Board and any other
applicable requirements of this chapter:
F. An adequate supply of potable water, capable of supplying a total
capacity of at least 100 gallons per campsite per day; water closets
shall be provided at one or more locations in every campground.
G. The water points shall be convenient of access and shall be located not
farther than 300 feet from any campsite upon which any tent is
established therein; water shall be located on each and every site
whereupon a camping vehicle is established, and electrical service shall
be provided within 50 feet of any campsite wherein a camping vehicle is
established.
H. No ingress or egress drives shall be located closer than 50 feet to any
street intersection nor closer than 30 feet to any other drive on the
same site or any other property. Such ingress and egress drives shall
have a width of at least 20 feet, but not more than 30 feet.
I. No paved area other than an ingress or egress drive may be located
within 10 feet of any property line.
J. No building shall be erected nearer than 65 feet to any street line or
side or rear property line.
K. The site shall have direct access to a road classified as a secondary
arterial or major collector road by the Township Master Plan, as
amended.
L. No campground shall be located nearer than 2,000 feet from any other
campground property line to property line.
M. No campground shall be permitted which is not, or cannot be,
adequately screened from adjacent properties by vegetation and or
terrain.
N. At least two public telephones shall be provided in the campground.
O. Issuance of a grant of approval is required for all facilities by the State
Department of Health.
A. No establishment or business with a use encompassing those
encaptioned above shall be located closer than 3,000 feet to any school,
hospital, house of worship, library, or public building.
§ 190-199 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-200
186:716
§ 190-201. Cemeteries.
§ 190-202. Cluster development. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
Cluster residential development shall be permitted in the R-R and R-E
Zones only upon receipt of a conditional use permit and provided that the
following standards are met, together with any other requirements deemed
necessary by the Planning Board to achieve the purposes of the RR Rural
Residential and R-E Rural-Environmental Zones:
B. No establishment or business with a use encompassing those
encaptioned above shall be located closer than 3,000 feet to any adult
bookstore, adult motion-picture theater, body painting studio, exotic
dance or strip club, modeling studio or tattoo shop.
C. No establishment or business with a use encompassing those
encaptioned above shall be located closer than 2,000 feet to an area
zoned for residential use or business commercial use.
D. When any existing building is converted from any use to one of those
listed above under the general term "adult uses," then, in that event, a
full and complete site plan shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Cemeteries may be permitted in specified zones only upon receipt of a
conditional use permit, provided that the following standards are met
together with any other requirements deemed necessary by the
Planning Board and any other applicable requirements of this chapter:
(1) Applicant shall possess a current certificate of authority issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:27-1 et seq., New Jersey Cemetery Act of
2003, and shall be in full compliance with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
3:40-1.5 et seq.
(2) Grave sites shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any street
line and 50 feet from all other property lines.
(3) Principal and/or accessory structures, including mausoleums, shall
be set back a minimum of 200 feet from all property lines.
(4) Parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Board
and no parking shall be located closer than 100 feet to any street
line.
B. The location and operation of existing cemeteries are hereby
recognized and ratified. Any additions thereto, however, are subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 50 acres.
§ 190-200 JUNK DEALERS § 190-202
186:717
B. A lot yield map shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements
of the RR or R-E Zone to determine the number of lots permitted under
the applicable zone regulations.
C. Permitted single-family residences may be developed in accordance
with the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: R-E Zone, three acres; RR Zone, three acres.
(2) Minimum lot width and frontage: R-E Zone, 300 feet; RR Zone, 250
feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: R-E Zone, 500 feet; RR Zone, 250 feet.
(4) Maximum lot coverage RR and R-E Zones:
(a) All buildings: 5%.
(b) Accessory buildings: 3%.
(c) All impervious surfaces: 7%.
(5) Floor area ratio: 0.05.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(7) Minimum yard depths, principal and accessory buildings:
(a) Front yard: 150 feet.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 100 feet.
(8) Minimum developable area. All buildings and on-site septic systems
shall be located within a developable lot area of not less than two
acres in the R-E Zone and two acres in the RR Zone and shall be
located within an area that can be circumscribed by a circle not
less than 150 feet in diameter. Developable lot area shall not
include land that is within an existing one-hundred-year floodplain,
land that is located within an area designated as freshwater
wetlands by the NJDEP or U.S. Army Corps or Engineers, land
designated as a wetlands transition area by the NJDEP, land which
has slopes of 12% or greater, or land which has a seasonable depth
to seasonal high-water table of 48 inches or less.
D. All cluster developments shall provide a minimum of 40% of the total
tract area for permanent open space through permanent conservation
easements, dedication to Freehold Township, the County of Monmouth
and/or the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
E. The proposed dedicated open space area must be contiguous to open
space owned by Freehold Township, the County of Monmouth and/or
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and/or will be
accepted by one or more of these agencies.
§ 190-202 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-202.1
186:718
§ 190-202.1. R-40 cluster development. [Added 2-26-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-5]
Cluster residential development shall be permitted in the R-40 Zone only
upon receipt of a conditional use permit and provided that the following
standards are met:
A. The minimum lot area shall be 50 acres.
B. A lot yield map shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements
of the R-40 Zone to determine the number of lots permitted under the
applicable zone regulations.
C. Permitted single-family residences may be developed in accordance
with the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum gross density (du/ac): 0.9.
(3) Minimum lot width and frontage: 125 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage:
(a) All buildings: 25%.
(b) Accessory buildings: 5%.
(c) All impervious surfaces: 30%.
(6) Floor area ratio: 0.12.
(7) Maximum building height: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(8) Scenic corridor buffer: 35 feet.
(9) Minimum yard depths, principal and accessory buildings:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 30 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(10) Developable lot area shall not include land that is within an existing
one-hundred-year floodplain, land that is located within an area
designated as freshwater wetlands by the NJDEP, land designated
as a wetlands transition area by the NJDEP, land which has slopes
of 12% or greater, and land which has a seasonable depth to
seasonal high-water table of 48 inches or less.
D. All cluster developments shall provide a minimum of 40% of the total
tract area for permanent open space through permanent conservation
§ 190-202.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-202.1
186:719
§ 190-203. Planned commercial development.101 [Added 8-28-2012
by Ord. No. O-12-18; amended 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-5]
Planned commercial development is permitted upon issuance of a
conditional use permit, in compliance with the following standards:
§ 190-204. Motels and hotels. [Amended 6-22-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-23]
Motels and hotels, motor hotels, and similar commercial establishments
providing transient lodging or lodging and meals for the general public
may be permitted by this chapter in specified districts only upon receipt
of a conditional use permit and provided that the following special design
standards and conditions established herein are met:
easements and/or dedication to Freehold Township or the County of
Monmouth.
A. Minimum lot area: four acres.
B. Minimum frontage on a minor arterial roadway: 350 feet.
C. Planted buffer adjacent to residential development: 35 feet.
D. Planted buffer adjacent to nonresidential development: 15 feet.
E. Front setback: 75 feet.
F. Rear setback: 35 feet.
G. Side yard: 50 feet.
H. Minimum floor area per commercial use: 3,000 square feet; provided,
however, that the minimum floor area per commercial use may be
reduced to 1,500 square feet, provided that the facade of the building
includes articulated setbacks of a minimum of five feet for every 100
feet of facade and the architectural features of the front facade shall
give the appearance of separate buildings for every 200 feet of building
facade frontage.
I. Permitted uses: permitted uses in § 190-144, Commercial Zone B-2.
A. Purpose. Hotels and motels require special location and design
standards to ensure compatibility of this type of use with its immediate
surrounding uses.
B. Special design standard and conditions. The following special design
standards and conditions shall be provided:
(1) A motel, hotel or motor lodge shall provide a minimum of 100 guest
sleeping bedrooms.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 190-203, Life care and senior resident facilities, was repealed
12-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-32.
§ 190-202.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-204
186:720
(2) The minimum site area shall be four acres.
(3) The minimum street frontage shall be 300 feet.
(4) A minimum planted buffer of 25 feet shall be provided between the
hotel/motel use and rear and side yard lines of nonresidential zones
and 50 feet adjacent to residential uses within residential zones.
Such buffers shall be planted of conifers and other plant materials
so as to create a visual barrier to hotel and motel rooms, pools and
exterior patios, and other meeting or public congregation areas.
(5) A fire safety plan for evacuation of motel/hotel guests shall be
submitted to the Planning Board and Fire Prevention Bureau for
review and approval.
(6) A security plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board and Chief
of Police for review and approval.
(7) Architectural plans shall be provided incorporating sound, light
and visual protection plans for lodging areas. Elevations and
architectural details shall show the type of structure(s), facade
design and exterior fabric material and design compatibility with
area structures.
(8) Access to all guest rooms shall be from interior hallways. No guest
rooms shall access directly to the outside of the building. [Added
8-23-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-26]
C. A motel or hotel site that has a minimum of four or more acres may
include one freestanding building that may include one or more
restaurant, coffee shop, bagel shop or other prepared food
establishment, provided that the freestanding restaurant and/or food
service facility shall have a minimum combined floor area of 5,000
square feet but not more than 10,000 square feet, and further provided
that there shall be not less than 1,500 square feet for each food service
vendor and that no drive-through service shall be permitted. Any
freestanding building shall be located at or near the frontage on the
arterial or major collector street, shall provide parking that does not
impair the parking required for the hotel or motel, and its exterior
facade shall be designed with the same or compatible building facade
materials as the hotel or motel in accordance with the architectural
standards for commercial uses within this chapter.
D. Motels and hotels within the CMX-3 Zone shall have a floor area ratio
(FAR) that shall not exceed 0.20. Motel and hotel buildings shall not
exceed 45 feet and three stories in height, provided that any three-story
structure or three-story portion of any structure shall have a minimum
setback of 100 feet from any rear or side yard line that abuts a
residential zone.
E. Upon preliminary and final site plan approval for a hotel or motel use
that includes other permitted or conditional uses on the same property,
§ 190-204 JUNK DEALERS § 190-204
186:721
§ 190-205. Supportive care housing for low- and moderate-income
senior citizens and the handicapped.
a subdivision of the property may be approved in conjunction with
final site plan approval conditioned upon the approved hotel or motel
use obtaining building permits and initiation of construction on the
property, provided that the hotel or motel lot shall be not less than four
acres in area, and further provided that any lots subdivided for any
other permitted or conditional uses shall not be less than three acres in
area.
A. Supportive care housing for low- and moderate-income senior citizens
and the handicapped may be permitted by this chapter in the R-40 Zone
District only upon receipt of a conditional use permit, provided that the
following conditions established herein are complied with:
B. The purpose of the supportive care housing for senior citizens and the
handicapped is to provide for the special needs of low- and moderateincome
senior citizens and the handicapped within R-40 Residential
Zone District in accordance with the Freehold Township Fair Housing
Plan. Due to the unique requirements of senior citizens and physically
handicapped individuals, supportive care housing facilities can require
greater height, less parking, ancillary maintenance and support
facilities and special design standards not normally associated with
single-family dwellings permitted in the R-40 Residential Zone District
or with conventional for multifamily housing permitted in other
residential zone districts within Freehold Township. Special design
standards include building setbacks, buffers, screening, fire safety,
security, aesthetics, parking standards, building setbacks, density and
floor area ratio standards as follows:
(1) Minimum tract size shall be 200 acres and minimum buildable
development area shall be 40 acres. In calculating the minimum
tract size, contiguous areas of the tract located within a R-R Zone
District may be included as part of the tract area. Areas dedicated
or to be dedicated for conservation purposes may be considered in
calculating the minimum tract size even though held in the name of
a different entity, provided that the area was part of the lot on the
date of the passage of this section amendment and restricted for
conservation and against further development.
(2) The minimum street frontage on a collector or arterial roadway
according to the Freehold Township Master Plan shall be 500 feet.
(3) In addition to the primary access drive, a minimum of one
additional and separate emergency access road shall be provided
to the project site. The secondary access or emergency road shall
be capable of two-way traffic for emergency vehicles including
ladder and platform fire equipment in accordance with Township
roadway design standards and requirements of the Township
§ 190-204 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-205
186:722
Engineer, and requirements of the Bureau of Fire Prevention for
safety and emergency access.
(4) A planted buffer strip a minimum of 25 feet in width shall be
required at the perimeter of the supportive care housing facility
development area adjacent to existing developable residential zone
districts. Existing natural vegetation shall be utilized to the
greatest extent feasible and shall be supplemented where required
with evergreen plant materials in accordance with a landscape plan
to be approved by the Planning Board.
(5) A fire safety plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The
Board shall forward same to the Fire Prevention Bureau for review
and recommendations to the Board.
(6) A security plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The Board
shall forward same to the Police Chief for review and
recommendations to the Board.
(7) All buildings 35 feet or less shall be located a minimum of 200 feet
from the arterial or collector roadway and 50 feet from the
perimeter of the remainder of development area. Buildings greater
than 35 feet in height but not to exceed 60 feet or five stories in
height shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any public
roadway and not less than 100 feet from any residential property
line.
(8) Parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of 1/4 space per
dwelling unit plus one space for each employee on the maximum
shift.
(9) Supportive care housing structures shall be designed to minimum
standards for congregate care facilities as established by the New
Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency and the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing Regulations.
(10) The maximum number of units shall be 500.
(11) Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 25% of the
development area.
(12) Maximum impervious surface coverage shall not exceed 35% of the
development area.
(13) The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.50 of the development
area.
(14) At least 50% of the units shall be affordable to low- and moderateincome
households as defined in § 190-142. At least 50% of the
affordable units shall be affordable for low-income households.
§ 190-205 JUNK DEALERS § 190-205
186:723
§ 190-206. Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas.
(15) At least 75% of the units shall be age restricted pursuant to
§ 190-142; however, the minimum age shall be 62 years of age. The
balance of the units shall be restricted to the handicapped.
A. Antennas and towers that are not municipal facilities. Wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas that are not municipal
facilities (see § 190-169) may be conditionally permitted on
nonmunicipal property in the M-1 Industrial Zone upon submission and
approval of a site plan and conditional use permit in accordance with
the regulations set forth below:
B. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
C. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
D. State and federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas.
E. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located
in Freehold Township irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
F. Maximum height.
(1) The tower shall meet the following maximum height and usage
criteria:
(a) For a single user: up to 90 feet in height;
(b) For two users: up to 120 feet in height; and
§ 190-205 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-206
186:724
(c) For three or more users: up to 150 feet in height.
(2) A licensed New Jersey professional engineer must certify that the
tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users
proposed by the applicant.
G. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative
technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the municipal agency
that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the municipal agency related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area that meets an applicant's engineering requirements.
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures,
or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding
new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(7) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
H. Minimum required setback. The following minimum setback
requirements shall apply:
§ 190-206 JUNK DEALERS § 190-206
186:725
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line, but in no event shall
the tower be located in the minimum required yard area or buffer
area of the zone district.
(2) Guy wires and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback and buffer requirements.
I. Minimum separation requirement between uses. The following
separation requirements shall apply:
(1) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as
specified in Subsection I(2) below, except as otherwise
provided.
(b) Towers shall maintain a separation distance of 200 feet or
300% of the tower height, whichever is greater, from
residential dwelling units or from lands zoned for residential
use.
(2) Separation distances between towers. Separation distances
between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the
proposed tower and preexisting towers or other proposed towers.
The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or
following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and
the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower.
The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown
below in the table of required separation distances between
towers.
Required Separation Distances
Between Wireless Communications Towers
(in linear feet)
Monopole
Tower Type Lattice Guyed
75 Feet in
Height or
Greater
Less than
75 Feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole: 75
feet in height
or greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
§ 190-206 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-206
186:726
§ 190-207. Day-care facilities in conjunction with hospital, office
and light industrial uses.
Monopole
Tower Type Lattice Guyed
75 Feet in
Height or
Greater
Less than
75 Feet in
Height
Monopole: Less
than 75 feet in
height
750 750 750 750
J. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(1) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
structure, if over 200 square feet of gross floor area or 10 feet
in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
(b) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(c) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable Building Codes.102
(2) Antennas located on towers, utility poles, or light poles. The related
unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height,
and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard and
buffer requirements of the zoning district in which located and
shall be screened from view of all residential properties.103
A. Purpose. Day-care facilities for infants and children may be permitted
in specified zones only upon receipt of a conditional use permit and
provided that the following standards are met together with any other
requirement deemed necessary by the board to ensure that the health,
safety and welfare of the children are protected and maintained.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 115, Construction Codes, Uniform.
103. Editor's Note: Original Section 18-42.17, Accessory Apartments, and Section 18-42.18,
Professional Offices in R-40/P Residential Zones, which immediately followed this section,
were deleted at time of adoption of code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 190-206 JUNK DEALERS § 190-207
186:727
§ 190-208. Pool or billiard parlors.
Pool or billiard parlors may be permitted in the specified zones only upon
receipt of a conditional use permit and providing that the following
standards are met together with any other applicable requirements of the
ordinances of the Township of Freehold:
B. Day-care facilities shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Human Services in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.4 and
40:55D-66.5.
C. Day-care facilities shall be incorporated into a principal use structure,
except that for hospital facilities requiring a certificate of need, a
freestanding day-care facility may be provided as an ancillary use on
the same site as the main hospital facility. In other zones where daycare
facilities are allowed as a conditional use, temporary day-care
facilities for periods of not more than three years may be provided
where the minimum size of the building is no less than 2,500 square
feet upon such conditions and with such assurances as the Planning
Board may require to insure that the facility will be used only on a
temporary basis. Day-care facilities shall provide adequate parking and
pickup/dropoff areas.
D. Outdoor recreation space, tot lot equipment and play areas shall be
fenced and landscaped.
A. Proximity. The premises in which the pool or billiard parlor will be
located must be at least 750 feet from:
(1) Schools, houses of worship or other buildings of public assembly.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
(2) Any residential zone.
B. Area. The premises in which the pool or billiard parlor is to be located
must have at least 397 square feet of floor area per table up to 10
tables; for each table over 10, there must be at least 390 square feet of
floor area per table. Such floor area shall be exclusively devoted to the
table, the free unobstructed area to be maintained around the table,
aisleways and seating capacity for spectators. The foregoing area
requirement is independent of areas devoted to rest rooms, supply
rooms, offices or foyers and the like.
C. Location. All premises housing a pool or billiard parlor shall be on the
street floor of any building and shall be so arranged and lighted so that
a full view of the interior where all the pool or billiard tables are located
may be had from the public area outside the pool or billiard parlor.
D. Number of tables. No pool or billiard parlor shall be permitted to have
in excess of 20 tables.
§ 190-207 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-208
186:728
§ 190-209. Historic commercial projects.
In order to foster the preservation of historic resources located in Freehold
Township and to encourage the development of new buildings which are
complimentary to the community's history and character, certain types
of commercial development may be permitted as a conditional use. All
buildings and sites shall be designed and developed in a manner that will
be compatible with the architectural and visual characteristics of historic
buildings, sites or districts, including the scale, height, rhythm and location
of buildings, as well as the specific construction materials that are used.
All projects shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission in
accordance with the Standards of Review contained in § 190-233 of this
chapter. Where feasible, the Township of Freehold will provide assistance
E. Parking requirements. Without regard to parking requirements as set
forth in Article XIV, one parking space shall be provided for each 100
square feet of floor area. If the pool or billiard parlor is to be located in
premises which are a part of an established commercial center, the
burden will be upon the applicant to prove that there is sufficient
parking on the site to satisfy the requirements of Article XIV for all
other uses on the site and still have sufficient parking capacity
remaining in order to provide one parking space for each 100 square
feet of floor area for the premises in which the pool or billiard parlor is
to be located.
F. Compliance with licensing requirements. The applicant shall present
proof that either it has received a license from the Township of Freehold
in order to operate a pool or billiard parlor, pursuant to Chapter 191,
Licensing, Article I, and Chapter 240, Pool and Billiard Parlors, of the
Code, or will be making application for such license and agrees that in
the event it is unsuccessful in obtaining a license, any conditional use
permit granted hereunder shall be deemed null and void. The applicant
shall also satisfy the approving agency that it is familiar with all of the
regulations contained in Chapter 240, Pool and Billiard Parlors, of the
Code of the Township of Freehold, and has made provision for
complying with all such regulations within the premises which is the
subject of the application for the conditional use permit.
G. Conditions of conditional use permit. Any conditional use permit issued
by the approving agency pursuant to this section shall be made subject
to the continuing compliance of the applicant with not only the
provisions of this section, but also all provisions of Chapter 240, Pool
and Billiard Parlors, of the Code of the Township of Freehold.
H. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
religious, charitable, benevolent or nonprofit association or corporation
which operates or maintains up to three pool or billiard tables solely for
the recreation and amusement of its members for no charge or fee,
provided that such organization is bona fide in character and is not
intended as a means or device for avoiding the terms and provisions of
this section.
§ 190-208 JUNK DEALERS § 190-209
186:729
to the developer in obtaining grants, loans, tax credits, and other subsidies
that may be available for historic preservation. The following types of
commercial development may be permitted:
A. Restaurants and retail uses may be permitted in specified districts only
upon receipt of a conditional use permit and site plan approval by the
Planning Board, approval by the Historic Preservation Commission, and
provided that the following special design standards and conditions are
met, together with any other requirements deemed necessary by the
Planning Board, and any other applicable requirements of this chapter:
(1) The site shall be an historic landmark or a key or contributing site
located within an historic district. Properties which are classified
as sites of historic interest shall be eligible for a conditional use
permit, provided that a deed restriction is recorded in the County
Clerk's office in accordance with § 190-233C(2) of this chapter.
(2) The site shall adhere to the schedule of area, yard and building
requirements for the P-1 Professional Zone District with the
following exceptions:
(a) Front setback: 35 feet; however, open porches and outdoor
seating areas may project not more than 10 feet into a required
front yard area.
(b) Maximum building height: new construction shall be
compatible with the height of the historic landmark but in no
case shall building height exceed 35 feet and not more than
2 1/2 stories.
(c) Minimum size of principal building: no requirement for historic
landmarks: 3,000 square feet for new construction other than
additions.
(d) Maximum size of principal building: 10,000 square feet.
However, in order to encourage the construction of buildings
which are representative of traditional villages, buildings
which exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall utilize
an articulated facade to create the impression of smaller
connected buildings.
(e) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 60%; however, impervious
lot coverage may be increased to not more than 65%, provided
that the additional coverage is devoted to an outdoor plaza,
seating area, courtyard or other public amenity space.
(3) Retail stores.
(a) Retail stores limited to the following uses listed in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual of 1987 prepared by
the U.S. Office of Management and Budget shall be permitted:
[1] Country general stores (Industry Group No. 539).
§ 190-209 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-209
186:730
[2] Meat and fish (seafood) markets (Industry Group No. 542).
[3] Fruit and vegetable markets (Industry Group No. 543).
[4] Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (Industry Group No.
544).
[5] Dairy products stores (Industry Group No. 545).
[6] Retail bakeries (Industry Group No. 546).
[7] Miscellaneous food stores, including coffee and tea stores,
health food stores (Industry Group No. 546).
[8] Florists (Industry No. 5992).
(b) No individual retail store shall contain less than 3,000 square
feet of gross floor area and the total floor area devoted to retail
use shall not exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) Other uses. [Added 10-2-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-20104]
(a) Fitness and recreational sports centers (NAICS 713940).
(5) Architecture and site layout.
(a) Architectural styles shall be limited to those styles
representative of Freehold Township. New buildings, additions
and infill construction shall be compatible with existing
historic buildings in terms of height, setbacks, rooflines, scale
and proportion, building materials, and the pattern of
windows, door and other architectural features. Buildings shall
be compatible with one another; however, architectural
diversity shall be encouraged to create visual interest within
the project site.
(b) Buildings shall be oriented around an internal street,
courtyard, square, plaza, or similar public amenity space.
(c) Buildings shall be designed such that building facades are
oriented toward the street and parking areas which they face
as well as the internal public amenity space.
(6) Off-street parking shall not be permitted within 35 feet of any
street line. All off-street parking spaces shall be screened from view
from any street by a solid row of evergreen plantings with a
minimum height of 30 inches or other suitable landscaping. At least
one shade tree shall be planted for every six parking spaces and at
least one shade tree shall be planted for each 40 feet of frontage
along a public street.
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(4), (5) and (6) as
Subsection A(5), (6) and (7), respectively.
§ 190-209 JUNK DEALERS § 190-209
186:731
(7) Signage shall be in accordance with § 190-183 of this chapter.
B. Historic commercial villages may be permitted in specified districts
only upon receipt of a conditional use permit and site plan approval by
the Planning Board, approval by the Historic Preservation Commission,
and provided that the following special design standards and conditions
are met, together with any other requirements deemed necessary by
the Planning Board, and any other applicable requirements of this
chapter:
(1) The site shall be an historic landmark or a key or contributing site
located within an historic district. Properties which are classified
as sites of historic interest shall be eligible for a conditional use
permit, provided that a deed restriction is recorded in the County
Clerk's office in accordance with § 190-233C(2) of this chapter.
(2) The project shall include the relocation and renovation of not less
than one historic structure which shall be integrated into the
design of the site in accordance with the requirements of
§ 190-233G of this chapter.
(3) An historic preservation easement shall be provided to encompass
the historic buildings and structures, including additions and
adjoining infill construction located within 15 feet of the historic
buildings and structures located on the site. The historic
preservation easement shall not be less than 10% of the gross tract
area of the property. The historic preservation easement shall
include provisions for the rehabilitation and maintenance of the
historic buildings and structures located within the easement. The
easement may be dedicated to the municipality or to a nonprofit
agency. Land uses within the buildings and structures located
within the historic preservation easement shall be limited to those
specified in § 190-209B(4)(b) to (g) of this chapter. In addition,
retail uses limited to florists, bookstores, arts and crafts shops,
antique stores, bakeries, confectionery stores and similar retail
establishments selling historic or traditional goods and products
may be permitted within the buildings and structures located
within the historic preservation easement.
(4) The following uses may be permitted:
(a) Retail stores, shops and personal service establishments
limited to the following uses listed in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual of 1987 prepared by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget:
[1] Department stores (Standard Industrial Classification
Industry Group No. 531).
[2] Supermarket (Industry Group No. 541).
[3] Variety stores (Industry Group No. 533).
§ 190-209 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-209
186:732
[4] Miscellaneous general merchandise stores, including
catalog showrooms, general merchandise stores, country
general stores (Industry Group No. 539).
[5] Meat and fish (seafood) markets (Industry Group No. 542).
[6] Fruit and vegetable markets (Industry Group No. 543).
[7] Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (Industry Group No.
544).
[8] Dairy products stores (Industry Group No. 545).
[9] Retail bakeries (Industry Group No. 546).
[10] Miscellaneous food stores, including coffee and tea stores,
health food stores (Industry Group No. 546).
[11] Apparel and accessory stores (Major Group No. 56).
[12]Home furniture and furnishings stores (Industry Group
No. 571).
[13] Computer and computer software stores (Industry No.
5734).
[14] Record and prerecorded tape stores (Industry No. 5735).
[15] Musical instrument stores (Industry No. 5736).
[16] Miscellaneous shopping goods stores including sporting
goods stores, bicycle shops, bookstores, stationery stores,
jewelry stores, hobby shops, camera and photo supply
stores, gift shops, luggage and leather goods stores,
sewing stores and antique stores. (Industry Group No.
594).
[17] Florists (Industry No. 5992).
[18] Newsstands (Industry No. 5994).
[19] Optical goods (Industry No. 5995).
[20] Photographic studios (Industry No. 7221).
[21] Beauty shops (Industry No. 7231).
[22] Barbershops (Industry No. 7241).
(b) Restaurants, provided that drive-through facilities shall not be
permitted.
(c) Colleges and other institutions of higher education.
(d) Offices for professional, executive or administrative purposes.
§ 190-209 JUNK DEALERS § 190-209
186:733
(e) Museums and art galleries.
(f) Banks, financial institutions, insurance and real estate offices,
and travel agencies.
(g) Municipal and governmental facilities.
(5) Development on the site shall adhere to the schedule of area, yard
and building requirements for the P-1 Professional Zone District
with the following exceptions:
(a) Minimum lot size: 15 acres.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: no requirement for existing
structures or additions to existing structures, provided that no
addition shall be located any closer to the front property line
than the existing structure; new structures shall be set back at
least 65 feet from the front property line.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: no requirement for existing
structures or additions to existing structures, provided that no
addition shall be located any closer to the rear property line
than the existing structure; new structures shall be set back at
least 25 feet from the rear property line.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: no requirement for existing
structures or additions to existing structures, provided that no
addition shall be located any closer to the side property line
than the existing structure; new structures shall be set back at
least 25 feet from the side property line.
(e) Maximum building height: Building height shall be compatible
with existing structures but in no case shall building height
exceed 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories. Clock towers and similar
unoccupied architectural features or structures may be
erected to a height not to exceed 50 feet.
(f) Minimum width of buffer zone from residential zone districts or
uses: 30 feet.
(g) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 65%.
(h) Minimum size of principal building: no requirement for
existing and relocated historic buildings, or new structures
within a historic easement area. The minimum principal
building size for new structures shall be at least 2,000 square
feet.
(i) Maximum size of principal building: No building shall exceed
65,000 square feet. Building facades shall be staggered to
foster the appearance of smaller, connected buildings; no
single facade shall exceed 150 feet in length. Buildings may be
connected by a fire-rated party or connecting wall, provided
§ 190-209 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-209
186:734
that each building has a separate and distinct facade and
provided that no combination of individual buildings shall
exceed 300 feet in length along a linear plane without being
separated by a courtyard or other open area with a depth and
width of not less than 20 feet or without a variation in building
setback of not less than 20 feet.
(j) Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.18%.
(6) Site layout.
(a) The use of internal streets, courtyards, squares, plazas or
similar public amenity spaces shall be encouraged.
(b) Street furniture, including but not limited to fountains,
benches, trash receptacles, lighting fixtures, and brick pavers
shall be encouraged and shall utilize traditional design to
promote a uniform theme throughout the project.
(7) Architecture.
(a) Architectural styles shall be limited to those styles
representative of Freehold Township. New buildings, additions
and infill construction shall be compatible with existing
historic buildings in terms of height, setbacks, rooflines, scale
and proportion, building materials, and the pattern of
windows, doors and other architectural features. Buildings
shall be compatible with one another, however, architectural
diversity shall be encouraged to create visual interest within
the project site.
(b) Natural materials, including but not limited to brick, stone,
wood clapboard siding, cedar shakes, and wood shingles, shall
be used for all buildings. Imitation or synthetic materials may
be permitted where the appearance is similar to natural
materials.
(c) Architectural features, including but not limited to windows,
doors, and roofing shall be designed in a traditional manner
and shall be in proportion with the buildings on the site. The
use of architectural elements such as porches, balconies,
balustrades, towers, decorative fences and walls, bracketed
eaves, quoins, coping, corbelling, and decorative moulding are
encouraged where appropriate with the design of the building.
(d) Buildings shall be designed such that all building facades
which are oriented toward public or internal streets, off-street
parking areas, and public amenity spaces shall be designed as
the main front facades. Multiple building entrances are
encouraged to generate active pedestrian circulation
throughout the project site.
§ 190-209 JUNK DEALERS § 190-209
186:735
(e) Architectural plans shall be submitted showing all elevations
and architectural details for each building. All exterior building
materials shall be labeled on the plans and details shall be
provided regarding the color, texture, and appearance of these
materials.
(8) Off-street parking.
(a) Off-street parking shall not be permitted within 25 feet of any
public street. The twenty-five-foot area between off-street
parking and public streets shall be landscaped so as to
enhance the appearance of the perimeter of the commercial
village but not obstruct the visibility of the commercial village
from the public street.
(b) Off-street parking facilities shall be clustered throughout the
site rather than located in one centralized area. Individual
parking areas shall contain no more than 150 spaces and shall
be separated from other parking areas by a curbed and
landscaped island at least five feet in width.
(c) At least one shade tree shall be planted for every six parking
spaces appropriately disbursed throughout the site and at least
one street tree shall be planted for every 40 feet of frontage
along a public street.
(9) Signage shall be in accordance with § 190-183 of this chapter.
(a) A signage plan shall be submitted for all freestanding and
facade signs.
(b) Historical markers and bronze plaques shall be provided to
identify and describe the significance of the site and the
individual historic buildings and structures. The design and
wording shall be subject to review and approval of the Historic
Preservation Commission.
(c) Storefront window displays consistent with the overall theme
and architectural appearance of the historic commercial
village shall be encouraged; however, permanent signs located
on storefront windows or doorways shall not exceed 20% of the
area of the window or doorway in which they are displayed and
temporary signs located on storefront windows or doorways
shall not exceed 40% of the area of the window or doorway in
which they are displayed.
(10) In order to guide the design and development of historic
commercial villages, applicants shall submit conceptual site plans
and architectural plans prior to the submission of a formal
application.
§ 190-209 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-210
186:736
§ 190-210. Electrical cogeneration facilities.
Electrical cogeneration facilities are facilities which generate electricity,
steam or heat for industrial operation purposes and transmit electricity to
the public utility electrical system. Electrical cogenerating facilities shall be
permitted in accordance with an approved site plan and only upon receipt
of a conditional use permit where the following conditions are met:
A. A cogeneration facility shall be permitted only as an ancillary facility for
purposes of generating steam, heat and/or electricity a portion of which
shall be for a use or uses permitted within the M-1 and M-2 Zones.
B. The location of the electrical generating facility is to be wholly within
the M-1 and/or M-2 Industrial District with no structure to be located
within 500 feet of any residential zone.
C. The fuel for said facility is to be limited to piped natural gas as the
primary fuel and Number 2 fuel oil and kerosene as backup fuels.
D. On-site storage of fuel is to be limited to fuel oil tanks with a total
capacity not exceeding 25,000 barrels and separated from public
streets and adjoining properties in accordance with the criteria
established pursuant to 24 CFR Part 51, Safe Separation Standards for
Hazardous and Flammable Material.
E. Refueling trucks are to be restricted to a route which does not utilize
local residential streets.
F. A water supply source capable of meeting the worst case supply/
demand situation is to be secured prior to preliminary approval.
G. Cooling towers are to be located so as to minimize icing conditions on
or adjacent to public streets.
H. Exhaust stacks shall be designed to comply with U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency Good Engineering Practice (GEP) regulations to
ensure that ambient air quality standards are maintained but in any
event shall not exceed 2 1/2 times the maximum height of the tallest
building developed as part of the cogeneration facility.
I. Off-site electrical transmission lines situated within or adjoining public
street rights-of-way are to be mounted on structures not exceeding 75
feet in height except at crossings of intersections and where required
by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners or other regulatory
agencies where the maximum height shall not exceed 100 feet.
Alternatives are to be routed and designed to minimize any adverse
impact on public safety, property value or utilization, street widenings
or realignments, and aesthetic character.
J. Building height shall not exceed 75 feet.
§ 190-210 JUNK DEALERS § 190-211
186:737
§ 190-211. Funeral homes.
Funeral homes shall be permitted in the Professional Office P-1 Zoning
District only upon receipt of a conditional use permit and provided that the
following standards are met, together with any other requirements deemed
necessary by the Planning Board and any other applicable requirements of
this chapter:
A. The building and site design shall be compatible with and complement
the adjoining land uses.
B. A funeral home shall not be located within 3,500 feet of an existing or
proposed residential health care facility or hospital. Measurement shall
be from the proposed front door of the funeral home, along the shortest
route able to be traveled along a public street or roadway and
terminating at the existing or proposed front door of the residential
health care facility or hospital.
C. The structure shall be designed so that transporting of human bodies or
remains into the facility shall be totally enclosed within the structure.
D. No other principal use shall be allowed on the property that is not
related to the direct operation of the funeral home business, except that
of a caretaker's residence, so long as it is part of the main funeral home
structure and the resident thereof is an owner or employee of the
funeral home business conducted on the premises.
E. One loading space shall be provided adjacent to the structure for
receipt and delivery of supplies and materials utilized within the funeral
home other than for transport of human bodies or remains.
F. No parking shall be allowed in the front yard area of the premises.
G. The front yard setback shall not be less than 50 feet from the public
right-of-way line.
H. The buffer to surrounding residential zones or uses shall not be less
than 30 feet and shall be landscaped so that motor vehicle and
pedestrian activity on the site is screened year round.
I. The minimum parking required on site shall be computed as the greater
of the following:
(1) One parking space for each three seats in the chapel area(s); or
(2) One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross ground floor
plus one parking space for each 100 square foot devoted to chapel,
waiting and seating areas located on the second floor; or
(3) One space for each four persons legally admitted by the Fire Code
for the structure; or
(4) A minimum of 50 exterior visitor's parking spaces on site; and
§ 190-211 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-211
186:738
§ 190-212. Restaurants in Corporate Multiuse Development Zones
CMX-10, CMX-4, CMX-3, CMX-3A and CMX-2. [Amended 11-28-2006
by Ord. No. O-06-41; 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-18]
Restaurants shall be permitted as conditional uses within CMX Zones as
freestanding facilities and as facilities within mixed-use, planned
developments. Restaurants shall be designed in accordance with the
architectural requirements of § 190-114 and the following:
J. In addition to the parking required by Subsection I above, the following
shall be required:
(1) If a caretaker's residence is included, two additional spaces shall
be provided for the caretaker's use; and
(2) If provision is not made for garaging of the funeral home vehicles
within the building or by a separate enclosed garage as an
accessory building, two additional exterior parking spaces shall be
provided.
K. Site lighting shall be provided by a combination of pole mounted lights
which are compatible with residential uses, not exceeding 12 feet in
height from ground level. Ground-level lighting shall be provided for
unlighted sidewalk and/or pedestrian areas.
(1) The principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2, with a maximum
building height of 35 feet.
A. Full service restaurants; restaurants with liquor licenses.
(1) Minimum floor area devoted to each restaurant use: 5,000 square
feet.
(2) Minimum number of seats is 225.
(3) No separate take out service area is permitted.
(4) No drive-up windows are permitted.
B. Family-style restaurants; restaurants without liquor licenses.
(1) Minimum floor area devoted to an individual restaurant use: 2,500
square feet.
(2) Minimum floor area for each restaurant where two or more family
restaurants are located in the same building: 2,500 square feet.
(3) Minimum number of seats is 125.
(4) No separate take out service area is permitted.
(5) No drive-up windows are permitted.
(6) Video interactive devices, video games, and children entertainment
uses in conformance with Chapter 75, Article II, § 75-19, provided
§ 190-211 JUNK DEALERS § 190-212
186:739
§ 190-213. (Reserved)105
§ 190-214. Bulk document storage.
Bulk document storage facilities are hereby permitted within the M-1
Industrial Zone, provided that the use meets the following conditions:
that the area used for such uses shall not reduce the minimum
required restaurant floor area and shall not exceed 25% or 1,000
square feet of the total floor area, whichever is less.
C. In order to encourage restaurant use in conjunction with a planned
development of 10 or more acres, submitted to the Board as one
application, the following requirements shall apply to that application:
(1) Minimum required parking spaces for the restaurant use shall be
calculated as one for every eight customer seats and one for every
four employees.
(2) The calculation for floor area ratio and for lot coverage shall not
include atriums and other hallway areas connecting the restaurant
with the remainder of the planned development.
A. Minimum lot area. Minimum lot areas shall be the same as the
minimum lot area within the M-1 Industrial Zone.
B. Minimum yard requirements. Minimum yard areas shall be the same as
the minimum required yard areas within the M-1 Industrial Zone.
C. Maximum building height: 75 feet.
D. Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows:
(1) Office, administrative, processing area and other nonbulk storage
floor area: maximum floor area ratio (FAR) 0.10.
(2) For bulk document storage area. Maximum FAR: 0.30; provided,
however, that if the office, administrative and processing area is
less than FAR 0.10, the bulk storage area FAR may be increased so
that the combination of total FAR shall not exceed 0.40.
E. Parking. Parking for employees and visitors shall be determined upon
the following: 1 1/4 parking spaces per employee on the principal shift.
F. Loading spaces. The number of loading spaces shall be the same as
required in the district in which the facility is located.
G. Maximum lot coverage for all buildings: 40%.
105. Editor's Note: Former § 190-213, Congregate care and assisted care residential facilities,
was repealed 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-32.
§ 190-212 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-215
186:740
§ 190-215. Self-storage warehousing.
Self-storage or mini-warehousing as defined by the North American
Industrial Classification System and classified as NAICS 531130 may be
permitted in the CMX-3 Zone District only upon receipt of a conditional
use permit, provided that the following conditions are met together with
any other applicable requirements of this chapter and other chapters of the
Code of Freehold Township.
A. Planned self-storage warehousing facility complex. A self-storage and/
or mini-warehouse facility that is designed exclusively for such use.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be 15 acres.
(2) The rental storage area shall be a minimum of 80,000 square feet.
(3) No storage shall be permitted out of doors except for a designated
storage area for boats on trailers and recreational vehicles which
area shall not exceed 10% of the developable area of the site (area
not including steep slopes, freshwater wetlands, floodplains and
areas containing heritage trees).
(4) Mini-warehouses and self-storage facilities shall provide for the
dead storage of customer's goods and materials only. No business
activity other than the rental of storage space and the sale of
packing materials associated with moving and/or storage of goods
and materials shall be permitted.
(5) One operational manager's office and one resident manager's
dwelling shall be permitted as an accessory use to the principal use
of the mini-storage or self-storage warehousing use.
(6) The lot shall be located on and accessed from a street other than a
collector or arterial roadway.
(7) The minimum front yard shall be 100 feet. The minimum rear and
side yards shall be 75 feet; provided, however, that the minimum
rear and side yards may be 50 feet when the facility is located
adjacent to a nonresidential building in a nonresidential zone. All
other requirements for the CMX-3 Zone including floor area ratio,
maximum impervious surface, and minimum buffer requirements
shall apply.
(8) All yards shall be landscaped to provide appropriate visual
screening and/or buffering from residential developments within
500 feet of the facility. The visual screening may include masonry
walls, decorative fencing and/or planted screening. Planted
screening shall consist of a twenty-foot wide staggered row of
evergreen trees 10 feet on center and other plant materials to
provide a visual screen. Where existing heritage trees or other
mature vegetation serves as a planted screen, supplemental plant
§ 190-215 JUNK DEALERS § 190-215
186:741
materials can be provided as needed to effect a visual screen in lieu
of the twenty-foot wide evergreen screen.
(9) Facades of all structures facing public streets or visible from public
streets and residential uses, within 500 feet, shall be constructed of
materials which are of brick, decorative masonry, finished wood of
a combination of materials which will be compatible with the uses
in the area and shall be designed with a Colonial motif where
visible from a public street including any controlled access arterial
highway.
(10)No structures shall exceed 2 1/2 or 35 feet. All storage buildings of
more than one story shall provide elevators for goods and materials
to be stored. Buildings greater than one story shall provide one
loading space for every 20,000 square feet of gross floor area of
such building.
(11) Internal driveway aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet with parking
permitted on both sides of the driveway. A driveway aisle where
access is only on one side may be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
(12) All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare only
onto the premises and shall be only of sufficient intensity to
discourage vandalism and theft.
(13)No mini-warehouse or self-storage unit doors shall be constructed
to open to a public street or to a residential zone district.
(14)No outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be permitted except
for a designated storage area for boats, recreational vehicles and
other motorized vehicles, provided that such storage area does not
exceed 10% of the developed self-storage area, is fenced and is
screened from public roadways and residential uses within 500 feet
of the boat, recreational and other motorized vehicle storage area.
No repair or servicing of motorized vehicles shall be permitted
except for minor repairs in order to make a stored vehicle mobile
such as repair of flat tires, changing of batteries or repair of
required safety devices such as taillights, headlights and turning
signals. The use of boats, recreational vehicles, or other vehicles as
a residence or for any habitation purposes shall be prohibited while
the boat or vehicle is stored at the storage facility premises.
(15)Off-street parking shall include a minimum of two spaces for the
resident manager, one space for the operational manager's office,
four visitor parking spaces at the operational manager's office, one
parking space for each employee other than the operational
manager during peak periods plus one parking space per 2,000
square feet gross self-storage or mini-warehousing facility floor
area. One loading space shall be provided for every 20,000 square
feet of gross floor area of the storage facility.
§ 190-215 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-215
186:742
(16) Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be screened from public
streets and adjacent residential uses utilizing masonry material
similar to the facade of the building. Screening walls shall be of a
masonry material that is compatible in character with the building
material facade.
(17) All signs and advertising shall be in accordance with § 190-146F.
B. Mixed office and self-storage planned development. A mixed office and
self-storage planned development consisting of uses permitted in the
CMX-3 zoning district and self-storage, mini-warehousing and
document storage facilities constructed as masonry building(s) that are
designed of the same or similar facade material as other buildings
within the planned development and with internal access only of
individual self-storage/mini-warehouse rental units.
(1) Minimum lot area for the planned development shall be seven
acres. The minimum lot area for subdivided parcels within the
planned development shall be three acres.
(2) The self-storage/mini-warehousing area shall not exceed 75% of the
total planned development tract area and shall not exceed a
maximum of 100,000 square feet of gross rental floor area.
(3) No outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be permitted except
for a designated storage area for boats, recreational vehicles and
other motorized vehicles provided that such storage area does not
exceed 10% of the developed self-storage area, is fenced and is
screened from public roadways and residential uses within 500 feet
of the boat, recreational and other motorized vehicle storage area.
No repair or servicing of motorized vehicles shall be permitted
except for minor repairs in order to make a stored vehicle mobile
such as repair of flat tires, changing of batteries or repair of
required safety devices such as taillights, headlights and turning
signals. The use of boats, recreational vehicles, or other vehicles as
a residence or for any habitation purposes shall be prohibited while
the boat or vehicle is stored at the storage facility premises.
(4) Mini-warehouses and self-storage facilities shall provide for the
dead storage of customer's goods, documents and materials only.
No business activity other than the rental of storage space and the
sale of packing materials associated with moving and/or storage of
goods and materials shall be permitted.
(5) One operational manager's office and one resident manager's
dwelling shall be permitted as an accessory use to the principal use
of the mini-storage or self-storage warehousing use.
(6) The self-storage facility structures shall not be located within 200
feet of a public street or road and the minimum rear and side yards
shall be the same as the CMX-3 Zone.
§ 190-215 JUNK DEALERS § 190-215
186:743
(7) All yards shall be landscaped to provide appropriate visual
screening and/or buffering from residential developments within
500 feet of the facility. The visual screening may include masonry
walls, decorative fencing and/or planted screening. A planted
buffer of 25 feet shall be provided. The planted buffer for the selfstorage/
mini-warehousing facilities shall include a twenty-foot wide
staggered row of evergreen trees 10 feet on center and other plant
materials and decorative fencing to provide a visual screen from
residential properties and public streets and roads. Where existing
heritage trees or other mature vegetation occurs, such existing
plants shall be retained within the required buffer area and
supplemented with suitable plant materials as needed to effect a
visual screen in lieu of the required twenty-foot wide evergreen
screen.
(8) Facades of all structures facing public streets or visible from public
streets and residential uses, within 500 feet, shall be constructed of
materials which are of brick, decorative masonry, finished wood or
a combination of materials which will be compatible with the uses
in the area and shall be designed with a Colonial motif where
visible from a public street including any controlled access arterial
highway.
(9) No structures shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height. All
structures of more than one story shall provide elevators for
patrons and goods and materials to be stored.
(10) All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare only
onto the premises and shall be only of sufficient intensity to
discourage vandalism and theft.
(11)No mini-warehouse or self-storage unit doors shall be constructed
to open to a public street or to a residential zone district.
(12) A storage area for boats may be permitted on the site provided that
the boat storage area does not exceed 10% of the developed
storage area, is fenced and is screened from public roadways and
residential uses within 500 feet of the boat storage area.
(13)Off-street parking shall include a minimum of two spaces for the
resident manager, one space for the operational manager's office,
four visitor parking spaces at the operational manager's office, one
parking space for each employee other than the operational
manager during peak periods plus one parking space per 2,000
square feet gross self-storage or mini-warehousing facility floor
area.
(14) Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be screened from public
streets and adjacent residential uses utilizing masonry material
similar to the facade of the building. Screening walls shall be a
masonry material that is compatible in character with the building
material facade.
§ 190-215 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-215
186:744
§ 190-216. Automobile dealership repair and maintenance facilities.
Automobile dealership repair and maintenance facilities provided the
following conditions and standards are met, together with any other
requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Board and any other
requirements of this chapter.
§ 190-216.1. Alternative motor vehicle fueling stations. [Added
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-16]
Alternative motor vehicle fueling stations provided that the following
standards and any other applicable requirements of this chapter are met:
(15) All signs and advertising shall be in accordance with § 190-146F.
(16) The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for the planned development
shall be 0.15 for all uses permitted in the CMX-3 Zone. The
maximum floor area ratio for self-storage/mini-warehousing
facilities shall be 0.20 for one-story structures and 0.40 for twostory
or three-story structures.
A. The purpose of this use is to allow automobile dealerships located in
Freehold Township to store and provide sales preparation (cleaning,
washing, repairs, tune-up, etc.) of automotive vehicles on-site but
offered for sale and/or sold off-site.
B. All requirements of Schedule C, Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements, at the end of this chapter for the M-1 Zone shall be
deemed to be conditions applicable for this use.
C. Automobile dealership repair and maintenance facilities shall be
located entirely within the M-1 Zone and shall be located on and only
have access on Township roadways. No automotive repair and
maintenance facilities for automobile dealerships shall be located on or
have frontage on arterials or collectors roadways [including N.J. Route
33 and N.J. Route 33 Bypass, C.R. 55 (Kozlowski Road) and Halls Mill
Road].
A. The minimum site area shall be 80,000 square feet.
B. The minimum street frontage shall be 150 feet.
C. No pits, racks, or lifts shall be permitted out of doors, nor shall any
repair work be performed out of doors.
D. Alternative motor vehicle fueling pumps shall be located at least 30 feet
from any property line.
E. All alternative fuels or similar volatile substances shall be stored as per
National Fire Prevention Association standards.
F. No ingress or egress drives shall be located closer than 50 feet to any
street intersection nor closer than 30 feet to any other drive on the
§ 190-215 JUNK DEALERS § 190-216.1
186:745
§ 190-216.2. Aboveground storage tanks for fueling associated with
motor vehicle showrooms, offices and mechanical repair and
maintenance service facilities within CMX-3/A Zone. [Added
8-9-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-11]
Aboveground storage tanks for fueling associated with motor vehicle
showrooms and related facilities within the CMX-3/A Zone shall be
same site or any other property. Such ingress and egress drives shall
have a width of a minimum of 30 feet.
G. No paved area other than an ingress or egress drive may be located
within 10 feet of any property line.
H. All unpaved areas of the site shall be graded and planted with grass,
shrubs, trees or other suitable landscaping material.
I. No building shall be erected nearer than 50 feet to any street line nor
nearer than 20 feet to any side or rear property line.
J. Only those items necessary and related to the operation of a motor
vehicle or dispensed from vending machines shall be sold from
alternative motor vehicle fueling stations.
K. Alternative fuel tanks stored above ground shall not exceed 20 feet in
height.
L. No person, firm or corporation, other than the owner and those
authorized by the owner so to do, shall sell, fill, refill, deliver or permit
to be delivered, or use in any manner, any alternative fuel container or
receptacle for any gas, compound, or for any other purpose whatsoever.
M. No signage is permitted on alternative fuel storage tanks except for
required safety signage.
N. Alternative motor vehicle fueling stations shall have an appropriately
sized emergency stand-by generator system as defined in § 190-3,
capable of operating fuel pumps, cash registers and lighted signage in
the event of a power outage for at least 18 hours.
O. Compressed cylinder tanks used in connection with alternative fueling
facilities may be stored above ground.
P. Compression cylinder tanks used in connection with alternative fueling
facilities must be screened from adjacent streets, alleys, and residential
uses.
Q. No container shall exceed a size of 300 gallons' water capacity; no more
than six containers shall be included at an alternative fueling facility.
The containers shall be mounted horizontally.
R. Alternative motor vehicle fueling stations shall be limited to
unattended, self-serve facilities.
§ 190-216.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-216.2
186:746
permitted provided the following standards are met, together with any
other requirements of this chapter:
A. The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
B. The minimum size of the principal building shall be 50,000 square feet.
C. There shall be no more than one aboveground storage tank permitted
on the lot.
D. The minimum required setback for an above ground storage tank shall
be in accordance with the minimum accessory building setback in the
CMX-3/A Zone.
E. The aboveground storage tank shall be surrounded on three sides by a
masonry wall six feet in height comprised of the same or compatible
material with the exterior design of the building façade.
F. The aboveground storage tank shall comply with all applicable NJDEP
and USEPA rules and regulations.
§ 190-216.2 JUNK DEALERS § 190-216.2
186:747

ARTICLE XX
Affordable Housing
§ 190-217. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to implement the Housing Plan
Element and Fair Share Plan of the Township of Freehold in accordance
with affordable housing regulations established and, from time to time,
amended by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing in accordance
with the Fair Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, and New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing Procedural and Substantive Regulations contained in
N.J.A.C. 5:91, 5:92 and 5:93 et seq. and to provide a realistic opportunity
for the construction of affordable housing for households with low and
moderate incomes as required by the New Jersey Supreme Court in
Southern Burlington County N.A.A.C.P. v. Township of Mount Laurel, 92
N.J. 158 (1983) (Mount Laurel II) and the Fair Housing Law (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301).
§ 190-218. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the
meanings established in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3, Definitions, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
HOUSING REGION — The East Central Housing Region consisting of
Monmouth, Ocean and Mercer Counties in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93
and 5:91.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards included
in this article for home ownership and rental costs, occupied or reserved
for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to 50%
or less of the median gross household income for households of the same
size within the housing region in which the housing is located, and which is
subject to COAH affordability controls and this article.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards
included in this chapter for home ownership and rental costs, occupied or
reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income in
excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household income
for households of the same size within the housing region in which the
housing is located, and which is subject to COAH affordability controls and
this article.
§ 190-217 JUNK DEALERS § 190-218
186:749
OWNER — The current title holder of record of a low- or moderate-income
unit. This definition shall refer to and mean the title if record is the same
as reflected in the most recently dated and recorded deed of the particular
low- or moderate-income unit. Where appropriate, the term "owner" shall
also mean and refer to a person who owns a low- or moderate-income unit
as a landlord.[Added 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-9]
RENTAL UNITS — Units specifically built at the time of construction for
the sole purpose of being occupied by tenants and not owners of affordable
housing units.[Added 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-9]
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person who is 62 years of age or older.
§ 190-219. Affordable housing requirements.
A. Designation of administrative authority. For the purposes of
administering these affordable housing provisions, the Township
Administrator, or designated administrative agency (e.g., NJDCA
Affordable Housing Management Services and Monmouth County
Community Development Program), shall be the responsible agent of
the Township for the purpose of monitoring the occupancy, resale and
rental restrictions of low- and moderate-income housing units and shall
be referred to as the authority. The authority will be the power to take
enforcement action, as authorized by § 190-227 of this article, against
any owner or tenant of an affordable housing unit for violation of this
article, the Affordable Housing Plan or the COAH deed restrictions.
[Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-9]
B. Affordable housing regulations for development approvals. All
development approvals shall provide for affordable housing
opportunities, and requirements shall apply to approvals granted by the
Planning Board as follows: [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
(1) All approvals in affordable housing zones shall provide for the
required mandatory inclusionary development or of actual
construction or payment of an affordable housing development fee
or both in accordance with this article and the Freehold Township
Housing Plan Element and Fair Share Plan as approved by COAH or
the courts.
(2) All approvals of use variances, site plans, or subdivisions, including
extensions and substantial revisions, shall be made subject to
mandatory provision of affordable housing except for classes of
uses contained in Subsection B(4) below. A substantial revision to a
development approval shall, for the purposes of these affordable
housing regulations, be any revision which increases or decreases
the number of residential units or amount of nonresidential floor
space by more than 15%.
§ 190-218 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-219
186:750
§ 190-220. Requirements for affordable housing units.
The Freehold Township Fair Share Obligation will be divided equally
between low- and moderate-income households as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.20.
Furthermore, except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to
low-income tax credit regulations, developments which include affordable
housing units shall be subject to the following provisions:
(3) All final approvals not providing inclusionary units shall provide for
the payment of an affordable housing development fee except for
exempted development in Subsection B(4) below.
(4) Exempted from these provisions shall be development approvals
for the following classes of development:
(a) Nonprofit organizations which have received tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
providing current evidence of that status is submitted to the
Township Administrator, together with a certification that
services of the organization are provided at reduced rates to
those who establish an inability to pay existing charges.
(b) Federal, state, county and local governments.
(c) Public utilities under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Board
of Public Utilities to the extent that the construction for which
approval is sought is of a facility which shall house equipment
only and not to be occupied by any employees.
(d) Hospital uses which receive a certificate of need from the New
Jersey Department of Health.
A. Low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
(1) At least 1/2 (50%) of all affordable units within each inclusionary
development shall be affordable to low-income households; and
(2) At least 1/2 (50%) of all affordable rental units shall be affordable to
low-income households; and
(3) At least 1/3 of all affordable units in each bedroom distribution
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3, Bedroom Distribution, shall be
affordable to low-income households.
B. Affordability requirements for low- and moderate-income housing units.
(1) Low-income housing. Low-income sales and rental housing shall be
affordable, according to Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development or other recognized standards for home ownership
and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with gross household income equal to 50% or less of
the median gross household income for households of the same size
§ 190-219 JUNK DEALERS § 190-220
186:751
within the housing region in which the housing is located, and
subject to affordability controls.
(2) Moderate-income housing. Moderate-income sales and rental
housing shall be affordable, according to Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development or other recognized standards for
home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for
occupancy by households with a gross household income in excess
of 50% but 80% or less of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the
housing is located, and subject to affordability controls.
C. Age restriction. The sales and rentals of not more than 25% of the
affordable housing units constructed within the Township may be agerestricted
to senior citizens, aged 62 or older as defined by and in
accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act and N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1 and
as regulated by N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.12. A request to age-restrict housing
units may only be granted after the Planning Board has received the
consent of the Township Committee. In designing an age-restricted
affordable housing project, the applicant may propose constructing the
senior citizen restricted affordable units in the same building or
buildings in order to maximize the potential of preserving a more
tranquil lifestyle for the senior citizen residents; and to the foregoing
extent, the requirement of integration of the affordable units with
conventional units is modified. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
D. Bedroom distribution.
(1) Inclusionary developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(a) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units.
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units.
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units.
(d) At least 1/3 of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 shall be affordable to low-income
households.
(2) In the event the rules of the Council on Affordable Housing shall
provide for a bedroom mix different than the foregoing, the
requirements of COAH shall control and the foregoing shall be
deemed modified for all projects which have not received final site
plan or subdivision approval.
§ 190-220 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-220
186:752
§ 190-221. Certificates of occupancy.
Certificates of occupancy for developments which include affordable
housing units shall be subject to the following additional provisions.
(3) Age-restricted low- and moderate-income units may utilize a
modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of
bedrooms may equal the number of age-restricted low- and
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development. The
standard can be met by creating all one-bedroom units or by
creating a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit. Applications
to waive this standard shall be made in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-15, Waiver Provisions.
E. Location and design. Low- and moderate-income inclusionary housing
shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The low- and moderate-income housing units shall be sited on the
tract in locations at least as accessible to common open space and
community facilities as market-priced dwelling units. Rental units
may be concentrated for ownership and management reasons.
(2) The exterior design of the low- and moderate-income housing units
shall be harmonious in scale, texture, and materials with the
market-priced units on the tract.
F. Deed restrictions. Developers of housing units for low- and moderateincome
households shall enter into a written agreement, binding on all
successors-in-interest, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3 et seq.,
Resale/Rental Control, at the time of sale, resale, rental or re-rental
regardless of the availability of federal, state, county or Township
subsidy programs.
G. Heating requirements. Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the
same heating source as market units within inclusionary developments.
A. Phasing of affordable units. Affordable housing units shall be built,
occupied and receive certificates of occupancy in accordance with the
following schedule:
Percentage of Low- and
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
100
§ 190-220 JUNK DEALERS § 190-221
186:753
§ 190-222. Resale/re-rental controls. [Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-9]
A developer of an affordable inclusionary housing development shall
incorporate deed restrictions on all dwelling units sold or rented as units
affordable to low- and moderate-income households pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.2, Council on Affordable Housing Substantive Rules. Affordability
controls shall remain in force for 30 years in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.2, shall run with the land and shall place limitations upon the resale/
re-rental of affordable units in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4 through
5:93-9.16 and by means of any deed restrictions and/or lien documents
promulgated by the Council on Affordable Housing.
B. No initial occupancy of a low- or moderate-income housing sales unit
shall be permitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and no
certificate of occupancy for initial occupancy of a low- or moderateincome
housing sales unit shall issue unless there is a written
determination by the authority that the unit is to be controlled by a
deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by COAH.
C. A certificate of reoccupancy for any occupancy of a low- or moderateincome
housing sales unit resulting from a resale shall be required, and
the Township shall not issue such certificate unless there is a written
determination by the authority that the unit is to be controlled by the
deed restriction and mortgage lien required by the COAH.
D. The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required where there is a
written determination by the authority that controls are allowed to
expire or in that the repayment option is being exercised pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4.
A. Documentation. All owners and tenants of affordable units within the
Township of Freehold shall provide documentation to the authority on a
yearly basis commencing one year after the date of purchase or rental
of the affordable unit that the following payments on the unit, as
applicable, are current: first-purchase money mortgages, municipal
property taxes, public utilities, condominium, homeowners' or
cooperative association fees and all rent payments. Owners and tenants
of affordable units who fail to provide said documentation within 60
days of their yearly purchase or rental anniversary date shall be subject
to the fines specified in § 190-227A of this article.
B. Foreclosure. In the event of a foreclosure on an affordable unit, the
enforcement of a lien against an affordable unit or in the event that any
of the following payments, as applicable, are not current, owners and
tenants of affordable units within the Township of Freehold shall
immediately notify the authority: first-purchase money mortgages,
municipal property taxes, public utilities, condominium, homeowners'
or cooperative association fees and all rent payments.
§ 190-221 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-222
186:754
C. Exempt sales. Sales exempted from resale/re-rental controls shall
include the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the
transfer of ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a
judicial decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales
to third parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a
result of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's
deed to a Class A beneficiary; and the transfer of ownership by court
order.
D. Deed restrictions, notice of sale. All deed restrictions governing lowand
moderate-income housing units shall require the owner to notify
the authority and COAH by certified mail of any intent to sell the unit at
least 90 days prior to entering into an agreement for the first
nonexempt sale after controls have been in effect on the housing unit
for the period specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
E. Deed restrictions, sales options. The deed restrictions governing the
deeds of low- and moderate-income housing units shall include an
option permitting purchase of the affordable housing unit at the
maximum allowable restricted sales price at the time of the first
nonexempt sale after controls on affordability have been in effect on the
unit for the period specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2. The option to buy shall
be first available to Freehold Township, then the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Housing and Mortgage Finance
Agency, or a qualified nonprofit agency as determined by COAH.
F. Options. Rights shall be held and exercised in accordance with the
following provisions:
(1) Upon receipt of notice, the option to buy the unit at the maximum
allowable restricted sales price shall be available for 90 days. The
authority shall first notify Freehold Township, then the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Housing and Mortgage Finance
Agency, and COAH that the unit is for sale. If Freehold Township
exercises this option, it may enter into a contract of sale. If
Freehold Township fails to exercise this option within 90 days, the
first of the other entities giving notice to the seller of its intent to
purchase during the ninety-day period shall be entitled to purchase
the unit. If the option to purchase the unit at the maximum
allowable restricted sales price is not exercised by a written offer to
purchase the housing unit within 90 days of receipt of the intent to
sell, the owner may proceed to sell the housing unit (pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8). If the owner does not sell the unit within one
year of the date of the delivery of notice of intent to sell, the option
to buy the unit shall be restored and the owner shall be required to
submit a new notice of intent to sell at least 90 days prior to any
future proposed date of sale.
(2) Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price shall be exercised by certified mail and shall
be deemed exercised upon mailing.
§ 190-222 JUNK DEALERS § 190-222
186:755
(3) An eligible seller of a low- or moderate-income unit which has been
controlled for the period established in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, and who
has provided notice of an intent to sell may proceed with the sale if
no eligible entity as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4(c) and 5:93-9.7
exercises its option to purchase within 90 days. Subject to N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.9, the seller may elect the affordable resale option or the
repayment option.
(a) Affordable resale option. The seller may sell to a qualified lowand
moderate-income household at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price in accordance with existing COAH
regulations, provided that the unit is regulated by the deed
restriction and lien adopted by COAH for a period of up to 30
years.
(b) Repayment option. Provided that the municipality has not
suspended the repayment option, the seller may sell to any
purchaser at market price, provided that 95% of the price
differential is paid to the authority, as an instrument of
Freehold Township, at closing. Such sale shall be approved by
the authority.
(4) Municipal option. Freehold Township may elect to purchase a lowor
moderate-income unit provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, and may:
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
household purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed
the maximum allowable restricted sales price or rental,
provided that the unit is controlled by a deed restriction in
accordance with Technical Appendix E of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq.
or an alternative approved by COAH; or
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value subject to the provisions of
the following subsection.
(c) Upon purchase, Freehold Township may maintain the unit as
an affordable housing unit or convey it at fair market value in
accordance with the following:
[1] Notify COAH of any proposed sale and sales price 90 days
before closing;
[2] Notify COAH of the price differential as defined in COAH
regulations;
[3] Deposit the price differential in the Freehold Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(5) State option. When the Department of Community Affairs or
Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency elects to purchase a low- or
moderate-income unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, it may:
§ 190-222 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-222
186:756
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
household purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed
the allowable restricted sales price or rental; or
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing within the
housing region.
(6) Nonprofit option. Nonprofit agencies may apply to COAH at any
time for the right to purchase low- or moderate-income housing
units subsequent to the period of controls on affordability, provided
that the unit remains controlled by a deed restriction in accordance
with Technical Appendix E in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., or an
alternative approved by COAH. Nonprofit agencies that have been
designated by COAH shall be eligible to purchase low- or moderateincome
housing units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4 for the sole
purpose of conveying or renting the housing unit to a low- or
moderate-income household purchaser or tenant at a price or rent
not to exceed the allowable restricted sales price or rental. Lowincome
housing units shall be made available to low-income
household purchasers or tenants and the housing unit shall be
regulated by the deed restriction and lien adopted by COAH. The
terms and length of the controls on affordability shall be the same
as those required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
G. Nonexempt sales or rentals. Owners of affordable units intending to sell
or rent their units prior to the expiration of deed restrictions shall
comply with the following procedure: [Added 4-26-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-9]
(1) Prior to reselling or renting a low- or moderate-income unit, the
owner of an affordable housing unit shall provide written proof to
the authority that the resale or rental has been approved by the
authority.
(2) Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this article, the owner of an
affordable housing unit shall only resell or rent a low- or moderateincome
unit to a qualified purchaser or tenant as determined by the
authority or the authorized state agency.
(3) Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this article, the owner of an
affordable housing unit shall be responsible for guaranteeing that
the necessary documents are executed and filed at the closing of
title or rental of a low- or moderate-income unit to assure that the
unit remains affordable to and occupied by low- or moderateincome
households. Copies of all such documents shall also be
provided to the authority no later than 60 days after the date of
closing.
§ 190-222 JUNK DEALERS § 190-222
186:757
§ 190-223. Administration.
The affordable housing regulations shall be administered in accordance
with the following provisions:
(4) An owner of an affordable housing unit shall not permit the
occupation of its unit in violation of the COAH regulations, this
article or the Township's Affordable Housing Plan.
A. Determination of maximum affordable sales prices/rents. The
affordability of a low- or moderate-income unit shall be a function of the
rent or sales price which shall be established so as to ensure that
occupants do not pay a sum for shelter costs greater than
approximately 30% of gross annual income for rental units or
approximately 28% of gross annual income for sales units in accordance
with Council on Affordable Housing regulations as follows:
(1) Shelter costs for rental units shall include gross rent, including an
allowance for utilities so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly
income of the appropriate household size referenced in Subsection
A(4) below. Those tenant-paid utilities that are included in the
utility allowance shall be so stated in the lease. The allowance for
utilities shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for use in
New Jersey.
(2) Shelter costs for sales units shall include principal, interest, taxes,
condominium fees and insurance.
(3) Sales costs of a unit shall be based on a down payment of 5%.
(4) The initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner occupied
single-family housing unit shall be established so that after a down
payment of 5% (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of the
purchase price and a market rate of interest), the monthly
principal, interest, homeowner and private mortgage insurances,
property taxes (property taxes shall be based on the restricted
value of low- and moderate-income units) and condominium or
homeowner fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible gross monthly
income. Master deeds of inclusionary developments shall regulate
condominium or homeowner association fees or special
assessments of low- and moderate-income purchasers at a specific
percentage of those paid by market purchasers. The percentage
that shall be paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers shall be
at least 1/3 of the condominium or homeowner association fees
paid by market purchasers. Once established within the master
deed, the percentage shall not be amended without prior approval
from COAH.
§ 190-222 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-223
186:758
(5) Rental and sales costs shall be fixed for a unit depending on
bedroom number calculated on the following basis as to household
size:
(a) Efficiency units shall be affordable to one-person households.
(b) One-bedroom units shall be affordable to one-and-one-halfperson
households.
(c) Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to three-person
households.
(d) Three-bedroom units shall be affordable to four-and-one-halfperson
households.
(6) In the case of owner-occupied housing rehabilitation assistance,
affordability shall be based on unit occupancy by a low- or
moderate-income household.
B. Median income by household size.
(1) The maximum average rent and sales prices of low- and moderateincome
housing units within each inclusionary development shall
be affordable to households earning 57.5% of median income.
(2) Median income by household size will be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b). To compute
this regional income limit, the HUD determination of median
county income for a family of four is multiplied by the households
within the county. The resulting product for each county within the
housing region is summed. The sum is divided by the estimated
total households in each housing region. This quotient represents
the regional weighted average of median income for a household of
four. This regional weighted average is adjusted by household size
based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by
household size. The maximum average rent and price of low- and
moderate-income units within each inclusionary development shall
be affordable to households earning 57.5% of median income. The
municipal ordinance shall require moderate-income sales units to
be available for at least two different prices and low-income sales
units to be available for at least two different prices.
(3) In averaging 57.5% under Subsection B(2) above, developers and/
or municipal sponsors of rental units may establish one rent for a
low-income unit and one rent for a moderate-income unit for each
bedroom distribution.
(4) Determination of sales values. Values of sales units shall be
determined in accordance with the following provisions:
§ 190-223 JUNK DEALERS § 190-223
186:759
(a) Fair market value. Fair market value shall be established on
the basis of the unrestricted price of a low- or moderateincome
housing unit if sold at a current real estate market rate.
(b) Maximum allowable restricted sales price. The maximum
allowable restricted sales price shall be determined in
accordance with COAH regulations at the date of a proposed
contract of sale.
(c) Price differential. Price differential shall be established as the
difference between the maximum allowable restricted sales
price and the fair market value, as determined at the date of a
proposed contract of sale, after deducting reasonable real
estate broker fees.
(5) Assisted living residences as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3,
Definitions, shall conform to requirements contained in N.J.A.C.
5:93-5.16, Assisted Living Residence. Assisted living residences
shall enter into an agreement with Freehold Township and
Freehold Township shall enter into an agreement with the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs Housing Mortgage
Finance Agency to administer and monitor the low- and moderateincome
apartments in an assisted living residence.
C. Annual indexed increases while controls are in place; sales and rentals.
(1) The price of an owner-occupied housing unit may increase annually
based on the percentage increase in the regional median income
limit for each housing region. In no event shall the maximum resale
price established by the authority be lower than the last recorded
purchase price.
(2) With the exception of rentals constructed pursuant to low-income
tax credit regulations, the rent of a low- or moderate-income
housing unit may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the housing consumer price index for the United States.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income tax
credits.
D. Procedures for initial sales, resale prior to the expiration of controls,
and rentals.
(1) Low- and moderate-income sales units shall not be offered to
nonincome eligible households at initial sale without COAH
approval. Parties that petition COAH for such approval shall
document efforts to sell housing units to income eligible
households and shall adhere to the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C.
5:91-12, Motions.
§ 190-223 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-223
186:760
(2) Persons wishing to sell affordable units shall notify the authority
responsible for assuring affordability of the intent to sell. If no
eligible buyer enters a contract of sale for the unit within 90 days of
notification, the authority shall have the option to purchase the unit
for a negotiated price that shall not exceed the maximum price
permitted based on the regional increase in the median income as
defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development or other recognized standard adopted by COAH. If
the authority does not purchase the unit, the seller may apply for
permission to offer the unit to a non-income-eligible household at
the maximum price permitted. The seller shall document efforts to
sell the unit to an income-eligible household as part of this
application. In reviewing the request, the authority shall consider
the specific reasons for any delay in selling the housing unit and the
hardship to the seller in continuing to offer the affordable unit to an
income-eligible applicant. The inability to sell a unit for the
maximum permitted resale price shall not, in itself, be considered
an appropriate reason for allowing a housing unit to be sold to a
non-income-eligible household. If the request is granted the seller
may offer a low-income housing unit to a moderate-income
household and a moderate-income housing unit to a household
earning in excess of 80% of median. In no case shall the seller be
permitted to receive more than the maximum price permitted. In no
case shall a sale pursuant to this section eliminate the resale
controls on the unit or permit any subsequent seller to convey the
unit except in full compliance with the terms of this section.
(3) Owners of low- and moderate-income rental units shall not offer
rental units to non-income-eligible households without prior
approval of COAH. Parties that petition for such approval shall
document all efforts to rent to income-eligible households and
demonstrate to the satisfaction of COAH that alternatives, such as
a reduction in rent, are not feasible. Parties that petition COAH
shall adhere to the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:91-12,
Motions.
E. Approval required to exercise repayment option. If the sale will be to a
qualified low- and moderate-income household, the authority shall
certify the income qualifications of the purchaser and shall ensure the
housing unit is regulated by the restrictive covenant and lien required
by COAH.
(1) The authority shall examine any contract of sale containing a
repayment option to determine if the proposed sales price bears a
reasonable relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. In
making this determination, the authority may rely on comparable
sales data or an appraisal. The authority shall not approve any
contract of sale where there is a determination that the sales price
does not bear a reasonable relationship to fair market value. The
authority shall make a determination within 20 days of receipt of
§ 190-223 JUNK DEALERS § 190-223
186:761
the contract of sale and shall calculate the repayment option
payment.
(2) The authority shall adopt an appeal procedure by which a seller
may submit written documentation requesting the authority to:
(a) Recompute the repayment obligation if the seller believes an
error has been made; or
(b) Reconsider a determination that a sales price does not bear a
reasonable relationship to fair market value. A repayment
obligation determination made as a result of an owner's appeal
shall be a final administrative determination of the authority.
(3) The repayment shall occur at the date of closing and transfer of
title for the first nonexempt transaction after the expiration of
controls on affordability.
(4) Repayment proceeds shall be deposited in the Freehold Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Money deposited in the Freehold
Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund trust account from such
sale may not be expended until Freehold Township submits and
COAH approves a spending plan. COAH may approve the spending
plan if it determines that it provides a realistic opportunity for the
creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and moderateincome
housing.
F. Township rejection of repayment option. Freehold Township shall have
the right to determine that the most desirable means of promoting an
adequate supply of low- and moderate-income housing is to prohibit the
exercise of the repayment option and maintain controls on lower
income housing units sold within the Township beyond the period
required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2. Such determination shall be made by
resolution of the Township Committee and shall be effective upon filing
with COAH and the authority. The resolution shall specify the time
period for which the repayment option shall not be applicable. During
such period, no seller in Freehold Township may utilize the repayment
option permitted by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8. If the Township exercises the
rejection of repayment option outlined above, it shall:
(1) Provide public notice in a newspaper of general circulation; and
(2) Notify the authority and COAH of the Township Committee's action.
The authority shall ensure that the deed restriction on all affected
housing units reflects the extended period of controls.
G. Continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or maintain lowand
moderate-income housing units. When a housing unit has been
maintained as a low- or moderate-income unit after controls have been
in effect for the period specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, the deed
restriction governing the housing units shall allow the Township, the
state, nonprofit agencies and sellers of low- and moderate-income
§ 190-223 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-223
186:762
housing units to again exercise all of the same options as provided in
this article.
H. Affirmative marketing plan. Freehold Township shall provide for the
marketing of all low- and moderate-income housing units developed
pursuant to the provisions of this article in accordance with the
provisions of an affirmative marketing plan as described below:
(1) Marketing plan defined. The affirmative marketing plan is regional
marketing strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all
majority and minority groups, regardless of sex, age or number of
children, to housing units which are being marketed by a developer
or municipal sponsor of affordable housing. It is a continuing
program and covers the period of deed restriction.
(2) Information. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall include the
information provided in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.1(b).
(3) Marketing program. The marketing program shall be designed to
reach all segments of the eligible population within the housing
region. It shall be used in advertising and publicizing the
availability of housing in accordance with the marketing program
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3.
(a) The marketing process for low- and moderate-income units
shall begin at least four months prior to expected occupancy.
(b) In implementing the marketing program, there shall be at least
one paid advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation
within the housing region during the first week of the
marketing program. Such advertisement shall include such
items specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3(c).
(c) Applications for low- and moderate-income housing shall be
available in several locations, including, at a minimum, the
municipal administrative building(s), the municipal library and
at the developer's sales office. Applications shall be mailed to
prospective applicants upon request.
(d) If the cost of advertising low- and moderate-income units are to
be a developer's responsibility, the requirement shall be a
condition of the Township Planning Board approval.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(4) Marketing for initial sales and/or rental; composition of marketing
pool.
(a) Households that apply for low- and moderate-income housing
shall be screened for preliminary income eligibility by
comparing their total income to the low- and moderate-income
limits adopted by COAH. Applicants shall be notified as to their
eligibility status.
§ 190-223 JUNK DEALERS § 190-223
186:763
(b) Having screened applicants for preliminary income eligibility,
the authority may analyze the income and household sizes of
applicants to determine which applicants have the assets and/
or income necessary to purchase or rent each available low- or
moderate-income unit.
(c) The authority shall interview each applicant and utilize the
procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1 to verify the
applicant's income and household size; determine the
applicant's asset availability; and review the applicant's credit
history. Applicants shall be required to submit income
verification for each household member 18 years or older. This
process shall be utilized in establishing the final certified
applicant group.
(d) The process described in (a) through (c) above may begin no
sooner than one month after the advertising program outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3 begins. Households shall be selected to
proceed through the process described in Subsection H(4)(a)
through (c) above through a method of random selection.
Households shall be certified for low- and moderate-income
units using the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1. The
process described in Subsection H(4)(a) through (c) shall be
continued until all the low- and moderate-income units are
occupied.
(5) Continuing marketing activities.
(a) The types of activities to be undertaken after the completion of
initial occupancy of sales and rental units in order to fill
vacancies resulting from normal turnover shall include:
[1] Ensuring a sufficient supply of income eligible applicants
by continuing to implement the marketing plan throughout
the housing region, as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3. At a
minimum, the municipality shall maintain a current pool of
at least five income-eligible applicants for each low- and
moderate-income unit.
[2] Contacting each income-eligible applicant annually to
request updated information regarding income and family
size.
(b) As units become available, the authority shall select eligible
applicants for the units, as described in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.4(b)
through (d) until the units are occupied by low- and moderateincome
households.
(6) Monitoring and reporting requirements.
§ 190-223 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-223
186:764
(a) The Township shall collect information on each applicant for
low- and moderate-income housing on forms approved by
COAH. Such report shall include:
[1] Monitoring forms approved by COAH.
[2] An evaluation of the income and demographic
characteristics of each applicant of low- and moderateincome
housing, as well as the occupants of the units; and
[3] An evaluation of any necessary adjustments in the
affirmative marketing program as a result of the
evaluation in Subsection H(6)(a) above.
(b) The Township shall evaluate the results of its affirmative
marketing activities and file a report with COAH by February
28 of each year.
(c) COAH shall review and assess the effectiveness of the
Township affirmative marketing program. If it is deemed that
the affirmative marketing program is not effective, the
Township shall be required to amend the program.
I. General provisions concerning new construction of sales units. In
developing its Housing Plan Element, COAH requires that Freehold
Township shall adopt measures to assure that low- and moderateincome
housing units remain affordable to low- and moderate-income
households for a period of not less than 30 years. The authority shall do
so by requiring all conveyances of low- and moderate-income housing
units subject to this section to contain the restrictive covenant and
mortgage lien adopted by COAH.
J. General provisions concerning enforcement through certificates of
occupancy or reoccupancy of sales units.
(1) The authority shall issue written determinations for the purpose of
issuing certificates of occupancy for initial occupancy or
certificates of reoccupancy for low- and moderate-income housing
sales units where the authority finds that the unit is to be controlled
by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by COAH. The
authority shall make such determination within 10 days of receipt
of a proposed deed restriction and mortgage lien. Amendments to
the deed restriction and lien shall be permitted only if they have
been approved by COAH. A request for an amendment to the deed
restriction and lien may be made by the authority, the Township or
a developer.
(2) The authority shall not permit the initial occupancy of a low- or
moderate-income sales unit prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy in accordance with Subsection J(1) above.
§ 190-223 JUNK DEALERS § 190-223
186:765
(3) The authority shall issue written determinations for the purpose of
issuing certificates of reoccupancy for low- or moderate-income
housing sales units where the authority finds that the unit is to be
controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by
COAH. Purchasers of low- and moderate-income housing sales
units shall execute the deed restriction and mortgage lien prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy regardless of whether the
sellers had executed the deed restriction and mortgage lien
adopted by COAH upon acquisition of the property. The authority
shall make such determination within 10 days of receipt of a
proposed deed restriction and mortgage lien.
(4) The authority shall issue written determinations for the purpose of
issuing certificates of reoccupancy for low- and moderate-income
housing sales units where the authority finds that the unit is to be
sold and controls are allowed to expire or in which the repayment
option is being exercised pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4.
(5) The mortgage lien and the deed restriction shall be filed with the
Clerk of Monmouth County. The lien and deed restriction shall be
adopted by COAH unless amendments have been approved by
COAH.
(6) The deed restriction, including the repayment clause, and the
mortgage lien shall have priority over all mortgages on the
property except for a first mortgage placed on the property by the
mortgagee prior to the expiration of resale controls.
K. Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls; sales
units.
(1) Property owners of single-family owner-occupied housing may
apply to the authority for permission to increase the maximum
price for eligible capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household. In no event shall the maximum price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household. Property owners shall apply to the authority if an
increase in the maximum sales price is sought.
(2) At resale, all items of property which are permanently affixed to the
units and/or were included when the unit was initially restricted
(for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall to
wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable resale
price. Other items of property may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the authority at the
time of signing the agreement to purchase. The purchase of central
air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit
and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided that the price has been approved by the
authority. Unless otherwise permitted by the Council, the purchase
§ 190-223 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-223
186:766
of any property other than central air conditioning shall not be
made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property
has taken place at resale.
L. Subsidy to ensure affordability prior to the expiration of controls, sales
units. If the use of median income data adopted by the Council to index
the cost of housing renders a unit unaffordable to a low- or moderateincome
household at the time of resale, a municipality shall not lose
credit for the housing unit, provided that adequate controls on
affordability remain in place, but the municipality may subsidize the
housing unit to maintain affordability.
M. Impact of foreclosure on resale while controls are in place; sales units.
A judgment of foreclosure or a deed in lieu of foreclosure to a financial
institution regulated by state and/or federal law or to a lender on the
secondary mortgage market (including, but not limited to, the Federal
National Mortgage Association, the Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
the Government National Mortgage Association or an entity acting on
their behalf) shall extinguish controls on affordable housing units
provided there is compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.14. Notice of
foreclosure shall allow the authority, the municipality, the Department
of Community Affairs, the agency or a nonprofit entity to purchase the
affordable housing unit at a negotiated price not to exceed the
maximum permitted sales price and maintain it as an affordable unit for
the balance of the intended period of controls. Failure to purchase the
affordable housing unit shall result in COAH adding that unit to the
municipal present and prospective fair share obligation. Failure of the
financial institution to provide notice of a foreclosure action to the
authority shall not impair any of the financial institution's rights to
recoup loan proceeds, shall not negate the extinguishment of controls
or the validity of the foreclosure; and shall create no cause of action
against the financial institution.
N. Excess proceeds upon foreclosures; sales units. In the event of a
foreclosure sale, the owner of the affordable housing unit shall be
personally obligated to pay to the Authority responsible for assuring
affordability, any surplus funds, but only to the extent that such surplus
funds exceed the difference between the sales price at the time of
foreclosure and the amount necessary to redeem the debt to the
financial institution including costs of foreclosure.
O. Length of controls for rehabilitated, conversion and accessory
apartment housing units.
(1) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing units that are
improved to code standard will be subject to affordability controls
for at least six years.
§ 190-223 JUNK DEALERS § 190-223
186:767
§ 190-224. Affordable housing development fees. [Amended
3-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-8; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48;
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-4; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-24;
2-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-1; 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-34]
(2) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard shall be subject to affordability controls for at least
10 years.
(3) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income rental units shall
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a
period of 30 years. Affordability controls on rental units may
exceed the prescribed period if the developer agrees to a longer
period.
(4) Housing units created through conversion of a nonresidential
structure shall be considered a new housing unit and shall be
subject to 30 year controls on affordability.
(5) Affordability controls on accessory apartments shall be for a period
of at least 10 years. However, in order to be eligible for a rental
bonus (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.15), controls on affordability
shall extend for a period of 30 years.
(6) Alternative living arrangements shall be controlled in a manner,
suitable to the Council, that provides assurances that such a facility
will house low- and moderate-income households for at least 10
years. However, in order to be eligible for a rental bonus (pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.15(d), controls on affordability shall extend for a
period of 30 years.
A. Purpose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
(2) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and
the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
§ 190-223 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224
186:768
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and
32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
B. Basic requirements.
(1) This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
(2) Freehold Township shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes but is not
limited to an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act, which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123
(N.J.S.A.54:1-35a through N.J.S.A.54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
§ 190-224 JUNK DEALERS § 190-224
186:769
(a) Within applicable residential zoning districts of the Township
of Freehold, residential developers, except for developers of
the types of development specifically exempted below, shall
pay a fee of 1 1/2% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may
be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed
on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal
1 1/2% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units;
and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized
assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning
on the site has not changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2 1/2% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
§ 190-224 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224
186:770
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2 1/2% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2 1/2% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development:
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market-rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
the existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption Form.
Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated
by that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46
shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption
no longer applies and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by Freehold Township as a lien against the
real property of the owner.
§ 190-224 JUNK DEALERS § 190-224
186:771
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption, to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The construction official shall verify the
information submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF. The tax assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(5) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development, calculate the development fee, and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should Freehold Township fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at the building permit and that determined at
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
§ 190-224 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224
186:772
(9) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by Freehold Township. Appeals from a determination
of the Board may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by Freehold Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the chief financial officer for the purpose
of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with Freehold
Township's Affordable Housing Program.
§ 190-224 JUNK DEALERS § 190-224
186:773
(3) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account,
Freehold Township shall provide COAH with written authorization,
in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
municipality, the bank, and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
(4) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may
be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the Freehold
Township's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include but are not limited
to preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation,
new construction of affordable housing units and related costs,
accessory apartments, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in
the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Freehold Township for
past housing activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
Municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include downpayment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the Municipal Fair Share Plan to
§ 190-224 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224
186:774
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income. The use of development fees in this manner
shall entitle Freehold Township to bonus credits pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.7.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) Freehold Township may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including but not limited to
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
I. Monitoring.
(1) Freehold Township shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to
the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other
funds collected in connection with Freehold Township's housing
program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring
reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
J. Ongoing collection of fees.
(1) The ability for Freehold Township to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification
unless Freehold Township has filed an adopted Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification, and has received COAH's approval of its development
fee ordinance. If Freehold Township fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of
§ 190-224 JUNK DEALERS § 190-224
186:775
§ 190-224.1. Provision of affordable housing pursuant to COAH
Round 3 Growth Share Regulations. [Added 5-23-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-23]
substantive certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or
all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.
222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Freehold Township shall not impose
a residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its
substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall
Freehold Township retroactively impose a development fee on such
a development. Freehold Township shall not expend development
fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment
of compliance.
A. Purpose and findings. The purpose of this section is to facilitate the
provision of affordable housing in connection with residential and
nonresidential development in compliance with the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing Round 3 Rules approved December 20, 2004.
This section is based on the following findings of the Township
Committee:
(1) The New Jersey Supreme Court and New Jersey Legislature have
recognized in So. Burl. Co. NAACP v. Mount Laurel, 92 N.J. 158
(1983) ("Mount Laurel II") and the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq. ("FHA") that New Jersey municipalities have
responsibilities concerning the need to provide affordable housing
for low- and moderate-income households;
(2) The Legislature conferred upon the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing ("COAH") "primary jurisdiction for the
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning considerations in this State" [(N.J.S.A.
52:27D-304 (a)];
(3) In Mount Laurel II, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that
municipalities had the power to address the Mount Laurel
responsibilities that the Court had created through "inclusionary
devices" and rejected the notion "that inclusionary measures
amount to a taking without compensation" (see Mount Laurel II at
271);
(4) In Mount Laurel II, the Supreme Court also stated, "Zoning does
not require that land be used for maximum profitability and, on
occasion, the goals may require something less" (see Mount Laurel
II at 274 n. 34);
(5) In the case entitled Holmdel Builders Association v. Township of
Holmdel, 121 N.J. 550, 582 (1990), the Supreme Court referred to
§ 190-224 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224.1
186:776
its Mount Laurel II decision and emphasized that in designing
inclusionary ordinances, "no density bonuses, compensatory
benefits, or subsidies were specifically required;"
(6) In view of the principles established by the Supreme Court in these
landmark decisions, COAH recently adopted substantive
regulations that authorized municipalities to impose a set aside,
without any density bonuses or other compensatory benefits,
pursuant to which municipalities could require residential
developers to construct one affordable residential unit for every
eight market residential units the developer constructed [(N.J.A.C.
5:94-4.4 (a)];
(7) COAH specifically stated that "a municipality may adopt a zoning
ordinance requiring a maximum of one for every eight market-rate
residential units be affordable to low and moderate income
households, as long as the zoning has not allowed an increase in
density to accommodate affordable housing" (36 N.J.R. 5775);
(8) COAH has also authorized municipalities to require nonresidential
developers to produce affordable housing without any
enhancement or compensatory offsetting benefit based upon a
formula that would require the production of one affordable
residential unit for every 25 jobs projected to be created by the
nonresidential development [(N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.4 (a)];
(9) The Township of Freehold wishes to ensure that as developers build
residential and nonresidential projects, they provide affordable
housing consistent with COAH's regulations and policies described
above, policies soundly rooted in Supreme Court precedent; and
(10) Implementation of these policies will ensure that as the Township
grows with housing affordable to the middle and upper class, it will
also grow with housing affordable to lower-income households and
that as nonresidential development occurs, it will also provide
housing affordable for lower-income workers (see Mount Laurel II
at 211).
B. Applicability.
(1) This subsection of the affordable housing regulations of Freehold
Township sets forth mechanisms by which developers shall provide
for a fair share of affordable housing based on growth that is
associated with development taking place within Freehold
Township.
(2) Residential development. Except as exempted in Subsection C, all
residential development in any zone that results in the construction
of new market rate dwelling units shall be subject to the growth
share provisions of this section.
§ 190-224.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-224.1
186:777
(3) Nonresidential development. Except as exempted in subsection C,
all nonresidential development in any zone that results in an
increase in gross floor area of any existing nonresidential structure
or the construction of a new nonresidential structure shall be
subject to the growth share provisions of this section.
C. Exemptions.
(1) Developments that received preliminary or final approval from the
Planning Board prior to the effective date of this section.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(2) Nonprofit organizations which have received tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
providing current evidence of that status is submitted to the
Municipal Clerk, together with a certification that services of the
organization are provided at reduced rates to those who establish
an inability to pay existing charges.
(3) Federal, state, county and local governments.
(4) Public utilities under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Board of
Public Utilities to the extent that the construction for which
approval is sought is of a facility which shall house equipment only
and not to be occupied by any employees.
(5) Residential projects of fewer than nine units shall be exempt from
this section and shall be subject to the Township's affordable
housing development fee requirements in § 190-224 in its current
form or any future form.
(6) Nonresidential projects projected to generate fewer than 25 jobs
based upon the standards set forth in Appendix E to N.J.A.C. 5:94-1
et seq. entitled "UCC Use Groups for Projecting and Implementing
Nonresidential Components of Growth Share" shall be exempt from
this section and shall be subject to the Township's affordable
housing development fee requirements in § 190-224 in its current
form or any future form.
D. Residential growth share provisions.
(1) Quantification of affordable housing obligation for residential
developers. Except as otherwise provided below, in those
circumstances where an applicant seeks to develop land for
residential purposes and receives no right to increased density or
other compensatory bonus, said applicant shall produce and
develop on site one residential unit of housing affordable to lowand
moderate-income households for every eight market rate
residential units constructed (11.11%). Nothing herein shall relieve
applicants seeking to develop projects of eight or fewer units from
the requirements of the Township's affordable housing
development fee requirements in § 190-224 in its current form or
§ 190-224.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224.1
186:778
any future form. If the project is more than nine units and is not
evenly divisible by nine, the applicant shall not be required to
reserve any unit(s) for affordable housing and also pay a fee.
(2) Permissible manner of satisfaction of affordable housing obligation
of residential developers.
(a) Residential development. For all residential development, an
applicant shall satisfy its affordable housing production
obligation through on-site housing production in connection
with the residential project, which is one of the mechanisms
permitted pursuant to COAH's regulations.
(b) The other alternative mechanisms permitted under COAH's
regulations include the purchase of an existing market rate
home at another location in the community and its conversion
to an affordable price-restricted home in accordance with
COAH's criteria, regulations and policies; participation in
reconstruction and/or buy-down/write-down, buy-down/rentdown
programs; and/or contributing to the Housing Trust Fund
at a rate of 1% of the equalized assessed value of the new
construction of residential development. An applicant shall
only be entitled to satisfy its affordable housing obligation via
one or more of the alternative mechanisms set forth above if
the applicant first secures the written authorization of the
Township to comply via one or more of these alternative
mechanisms.
(c) Before the applicant's development application for final site
plan or subdivision approval is deemed complete consistent
with the Municipal Land Use Law and the Township of
Freehold Land Use Ordinances, the applicant must secure
written permission from the Township of Freehold as to the
exact manner in which alternative mechanism(s) will be used
to achieve the creation of one affordable residential unit for
every eight market rate residential units.
(d) Full and complete satisfaction of compliance with the
affordable housing requirements of the development shall be a
specific, automatic, essential and nonseverable condition of all
land use approvals. Pursuant to this condition, the applicant
must demonstrate that it has satisfied the Planning or Zoning
Board condition of approval for affordable housing prior to
obtaining the first building permit, and compliance with the
affordable housing condition shall be a continuing condition of
all Planning or Zoning Board approvals for development.
E. Nonresidential growth share provisions.
(1) Quantification of affordable housing obligation for nonresidential
developers. Except as otherwise provided below, in those
circumstances where an applicant seeks to develop land for
§ 190-224.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-224.1
186:779
nonresidential purposes and receives no right to an increased floor
area ratio (FAR) as defined § 190-3, Definitions, or other
compensatory benefit, the developer shall provide one non-agerestricted
affordable residential unit for every 25 jobs projected
to be created by its development. The calculation of the number
of jobs and employment opportunities shall be in accordance with
Appendix E to N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq. entitled "UCC Use Groups
for Projecting and Implementing Nonresidential Components of
Growth Share."
(2) Permissible manner of satisfaction of affordable housing obligation
of nonresidential developers.
(a) For all nonresidential development, the applicant may, at its
exclusive option, satisfy its affordable housing production
obligation through the various mechanisms COAH regulations
authorize, including on-site housing production in connection
with a residential component of the project in all nonindustrial
zones; the purchase of an existing market rate home at another
location in the community and its conversion to an affordable
price-restricted home in accordance with COAH's criteria,
regulations and policies; participation in reconstruction and/or
buy-down/write-down, buy-down/rent-down programs; and/or
contributing to the Housing Trust Fund at a rate of 2% of
equalized assessed value of the new construction for
commercial development.
(b) All nonresidential development in any zone creating fewer than
25 jobs may provide one low-income unit offsite or may make a
payment to the Township's Mount Laurel Trust Fund at a rate
of 2% of the equalized assessed value for the project.
(c) For developments that result in a number of jobs not evenly
divisible by 25 and where the developer elects to satisfy its
obligation through the construction of affordable housing, the
developer may construct the additional affordable unit on or off
site; or, alternatively, the developer may pay a fee of 2% of
equalized assessed value for the portion of the project which is
not addressed through the construction of affordable housing.
(d) Full and complete satisfaction of compliance with the
affordable housing requirements of the development shall be a
specific, automatic, essential and nonseverable condition of all
approvals. Pursuant to this condition, the applicant must
demonstrate that it has satisfied the Planning or Zoning
Board's affordable housing condition of approval prior to
obtaining the first building permit, and compliance with the
affordable housing condition shall be a continuing condition of
all approvals for development.
F. Mixed-use growth share provisions.
§ 190-224.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224.1
186:780
(1) For all projects which include a combination of both residential and
nonresidential development, the affordable housing obligation
created by the residential portion of the project is set forth in
Subsection D(1) above. The permissible manner of satisfaction of
the affordable housing obligation for the residential component is
set forth in Subsection D(2) above.
(2) The affordable housing obligation created by the nonresidential
portion of the project is set forth in Subsection E(1) above. The
permissible manner of satisfaction of the affordable housing
obligation for the residential component is set forth in Subsection
E(2) above.
G. General provisions for constructing affordable units.
(1) The affordable unit(s) to be produced pursuant to Subsections A, B,
C, D and E above shall be available to a low-income individual or
household should only one affordable unit be required. Thereafter,
each of the affordable units shall be divided evenly between lowand
moderate-income individuals and households except in the
event that the applicable formulas result in an odd number of
affordable units; in which event the unit shall be a low-income
residential unit.
(2) Affordable housing units being constructed on site or off site shall
meet the requirements of Freehold's Affordable Housing
Ordinance, and shall be in conformance with COAH's Third Round
Rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq. and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including, but
not limited to, requirements regarding phasing schedule, controls
on affordability, low/moderate-income split, heating source,
maximum rent and/or sales prices, affordability average, bedroom
distribution and affirmative marketing.
(3) It shall be the applicant's responsibility, at its sole cost and
expense, to arrange for a COAH and Township approved
qualification service to ensure full COAH compliance and to file
such certifications, reports and/or monitoring forms as may be
required by COAH to verify COAH compliance of each affordable
unit.
(4) To the greatest extent possible, affordable housing units being
provided within inclusionary developments shall be disbursed
throughout inclusionary developments and shall be located within
buildings designed to be architecturally indistinguishable from the
market rate units otherwise being constructed within the
development. To that end, the scale, massing, roof pitch and
architectural detailing (such as the selection of exterior materials,
doors, windows, etc.) of the buildings containing the affordable
housing units shall be similar to and compatible with that of the
market rate units.
§ 190-224.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-224.1
186:781
(5) Single-family attached buildings in the form of semidetached (sideby-
side) units or duplex (over and under) units buildings shall be
deemed to be permitted uses in the underlying zone when created
for the purpose of meeting the growth share obligation on site and
shall conform to the bulk standards set forth in the § 190-142, ML-8
and ML-7 Moderate- and Low-Income Housing Zones.
H. Permissible manner of satisfaction of affordable housing obligation of
mixed-use developers. For all projects which include a combination of
both residential and nonresidential development, the affordable
housing obligation created by the residential portion of the project is
set forth in Subsection D above. The permissible manner of satisfaction
of the affordable housing obligation for the residential component is set
forth in Subsection D above. The affordable housing obligation created
by the nonresidential portion of the project is set forth in Subsection E
above. The permissible manner of satisfaction of the affordable housing
obligation for the residential component is set forth in Subsection E
above.
I. Compliance with COAH rules. The affordable unit(s) to be produced
pursuant to Subsections C, D E, F and G above shall be available to a
low-income individual or household should only one affordable unit be
required. Thereafter, each of the affordable units shall be divided
evenly between low- and moderate-income individuals and households
except in the event that the applicable formulas result in an odd
number of affordable units; in which event the unit shall be a lowincome
residential unit. All affordable units shall strictly comply with
COAH's regulations and policies including, but not limited to, pricing,
phasing, bedroom distribution, controls on affordability, range of
affordability, affirmative marketing and income qualification. It shall be
the applicant's responsibility, at its sole cost and expense, to arrange for
a COAH and Township approved qualification service to ensure full
COAH compliance and to file such certifications, reports and/or
monitoring forms as may be required by COAH to verify COAH
compliance of each affordable unit.
J. Right to greater set aside if compensatory benefit.
(1) As to residential developers, nothing herein shall affect the
Township's ability to generate more affordable housing than the
one for eight standard set forth above in the event that the
developer secures a density bonus or other compensatory benefit
through zoning or through a use variance.
(2) As to nonresidential developers, nothing herein shall affect the
Township's ability to generate more affordable housing than the
one affordable residential unit for every 25 job standard set forth
above in the event that the developer secures an increased floor
area ratio (FAR) or other compensatory benefit through zoning or
through a use variance.
§ 190-224.1 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-224.1
186:782
§ 190-225. Elimination of cost-generating features.
Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
incorporates the need to eliminate unnecessary cost-generating features
from municipal land use ordinances. Accordingly, Freehold Township will
eliminate development standards that are not essential to protect the public
welfare and to expedite or fast-track municipal approvals/denials on certain
affordable housing developments. Freehold Township will continue to
eliminate the development standards that are to the components of N.J.A.C.
5:93-10.1-10.3.
§ 190-226. Housing development with affordable housing units.
Freehold Township has a fair share obligation of 1,092 affordable housing
units of which 1,036 are new construction. This section will apply to all
developments that contain existing or proposed low- and moderate-income
units (listed below) and any future developments that may occur in the
Township.
Name Street Location No. of Units
Wyndham Place Gully Road Block 86.180-182
Lot 1
96 affordable
sales units
Independence
Square
N.J. Route 33 Block 49.36
Lot 1
64 affordable
sales units
Strickland Farm Strickland Road Block 83.16
Lot 1
78 affordable
sales units
Block 83.17
Lot 1
Avalon Manor South Street Block 49
Lots 39, 40.01,
42, 43
30 affordable
rental units
Adelphia Greens Adelphia Road Block 81
Lots 6, 7, 7.01,
7.02
11 affordable
sales units
Monmouth
Crossing
Route 537 Block 85.36
Lot 12
14 assisted living
units
(3) Any requirement for residential or nonresidential developers in
excess of the ratios referenced in Subsection G(1) and (2) above
shall be based upon standards the Township shall hereafter enact
and shall secure COAH's approval of same.
§ 190-224.1 JUNK DEALERS § 190-226
186:783
Name Street Location No. of Units
Elton Corner Elton Adelphia
Road
Block 91
Lot 56.01
149 senior rental
units
§ 190-227. Violation of this article or the Affordable Housing Plan.
[Added 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-9]
After providing written notice of a violation of this article and/or the
Affordable Housing Plan to an owner of a low- or moderate-income unit and
advising the owner of the penalties for such violations, the authority may
take the following action against the owner of an affordable housing unit for
any violation that remains unsatisfied for a period of 60 days after service
of the written notice:
A. The authority may file a court action or seek penalties pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of this article and/or
the Affordable Housing Plan. If the owner is found by the court to have
violated any provisions of this article and/or the Affordable Housing
Plan, he or she shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(1) A fine of not more than that as stated in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. Each and every day that the violation continues or
exists shall be considered a separate and specific violation of these
provisions and not as a continuing offense; [Amended 5-23-2006
by Ord. No. O-06-16]
(2) In the case of an owner who has resold his or her low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of this article and/or the Affordable
Housing Plan, payment into the Township of Freehold Affordable
Housing Trust Fund of an amount equal to the difference between
the unauthorized resale price and the maximum resale price
allowed by this article plus interest from the date of sale provided
by the Rules of Court as well as reimbursement of the authority's
attorney's fees;
(3) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of this article and/or the Affordable
Housing Plan, payment into the Township of Freehold Affordable
Housing Trust Fund of an amount equal to the difference between
the unauthorized rental charge and the maximum rental charge
allowed by this article plus interest provided by the Rules of Court
from the date of violation; or
(4) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of this article and/or the Affordable
Housing Plan, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the court; or
§ 190-226 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-227
186:784
B. The authority may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking a
judgment which would result in the termination of the owner's equity or
other interest in the unit, in the nature of a mortgage foreclosure. Any
judgment shall be enforceable as if the same were a judgment of default
of the first purchase money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against
the low- and moderate-income unit.
(1) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the authority,
by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the lowand
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a
sale price which is not less than the amount necessary to fully
satisfy and pay off any first-purchase money mortgage and prior
liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by the
authority, including attorney's fees. Any additional liens on the unit
will be subordinate to the authority's costs and rights regarding the
property. The violating owner shall have his right to possession
terminated as well as his title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's
sale.
(2) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
first-purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the authority for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
agency in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally
responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in addition to
any and all costs incurred by the authority in connection with
collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed in
escrow by the authority for the owner and shall be held in such
escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such earlier time
as the owner shall make a claim with the authority for such. Failure
of the owner to claim such balance within the two-year period shall
automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the authority.
Any interest accrued or earned on such balance while being held in
escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to the authority, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the authority.
(3) Foreclosure by the authority due to violation of this article and/or
the Affordable Housing Plan shall not extinguish the restrictions of
this article, the Affordable Housing Plan and the COAH procedural
and substantive regulations as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser at
the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions of this
article and the Affordable Housing Plan. The owner determined to
be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from whom title
and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not
be entitled to any right of redemption.
§ 190-227 JUNK DEALERS § 190-227
186:785
(4) In order to be eligible to bid on an affordable unit, a bidder must be
prequalified by the authority as a low- or moderate-income
household as set forth in the COAH substantive regulations and as
set forth in the COAH deed restrictions executed upon the
purchase or rental of an affordable unit.
(5) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first-purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens, the authority may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first-purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with
an amount equal to the difference between the first-purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for
which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of this article and the Affordable Housing Plan.
This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from actual sale as previously
described.
(6) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the authority shall obligate the
owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the authority, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the terms and
provisions of this article and the Affordable Housing Plan.
(7) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of this article and the
Affordable Housing Plan until such time as title is conveyed from
the owner. The owner shall also be fully responsible for satisfying
all taxes, fees, fines and upkeep of the unit until the transfer of
ownership.
§ 190-227 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-227
186:786
ARTICLE XXI
Historic Preservation
§ 190-228. Establishment of Historic Preservation Commission;
membership; terms; vacancies.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et
seq., the Freehold Township Historic Preservation Commission,
(hereafter "Commission") is hereby established and created.
B. Membership. The Commission shall consist of seven regular members
and two alternates appointed by the Mayor. The Commission shall
include members from each of the following classes: [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-23]
(1) Class A: a person knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the municipality.
(2) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside the
municipality.
(3) Class C: regular members who are not designated Class A or B shall
be designated as Class C. Class C members shall be citizens of the
municipality who shall hold no other municipal office, position or
employment, except for membership on the Planning Board. Of the
regular members, a total of at least four must be of Class A and B.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(4) Alternate members.
(a) Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C
members and at the time of their appointment shall be
designated "Alternate Number 1" and "Alternate Number 2."
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings, but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate Member Number 1 shall vote.
(b) No member of the Commission shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
C. Term; vacancies; removal.
(1) Regular members shall serve for a period of four years. Initial
appointments, however, shall be made in the following manner:
(a) Three regular members appointed for three years.
§ 190-228 JUNK DEALERS § 190-228
186:787
§ 190-229. Organization of Historic Preservation Commission.
(b) Two regular members appointed for two years. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-23]
(c) Two regular members appointed for one year. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-23]
(d) Alternate Number 1 for two years.
(e) Alternate Number 2 for one year.
(2) Thereafter, the term of a regular member shall be four years and
the term of an alternate member shall be two years. If the members
of the Planning Board are appointed to membership on the
Commission, their terms on the Commission shall be concurrent
with their terms on their respective boards. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(3) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
(4) A member of the Commission may, after public hearing if the
member so requests, be removed by the governing body for cause.
A. Officers. Each year in the month of January, the Commission shall elect
a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its members and select a secretary
who may or may not be a member of the Commission or a municipal
employee. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
B. Staff, experts, counsel, expenses and costs.
(1) The Township Committee shall make provision in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Commission.
(2) The Commission may employ, contract for, and fix the
compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall
deem necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from
the Municipal Attorney at the rate of compensation determined by
the governing body. Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall
not exceed, exclusive of gifts, grants or other sources of selfgenerated
revenue, the amount appropriated by the governing
body for the Commission's use.
C. Meetings; procedures; decisions. The Commission shall reorganize
annually, each January. The Commission may adopt such administrative
rules, regulations, procedures and forms for applications by formal
resolution, as shall provide for the orderly conduct of its business and
processing of applications, provided that such rules, regulations and
procedures shall not be inconsistent with any provision of this article. A
quorum shall consist of five members. All Commission meetings shall be
subject to the Open Public Meetings Act. To the extent practical, the
procedures followed by the Commission as to public hearings, voting,
§ 190-228 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-229
186:788
§ 190-230. Responsibilities of Historic Preservation Commission.
etc., shall be patterned after those of a Planning Board pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law. Decisions by the Commission shall be
in writing by resolution setting forth findings of fact and conclusions
of law. The Commission may follow the procedure for memorializing
decisions as are permitted for Planning Boards.
D. Appeals. Unless otherwise provided in this article, whenever the
Commission shall make a final decision pursuant to this article, the
decision shall be subject to appeal to the Planning Board in the same
manner as decisions of an administrative official pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a). [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
A. Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be as follows:
(1) To prepare and to maintain guidelines for the appropriate
architectural designs applicable to the exterior appearance of new
construction and for the renovation, alteration, enlargement or
other change to the exterior of structures that are located in a
historic district zone or individual properties located elsewhere in
the Township which have been designated historic landmarks.
(2) To review all applications relative to § 190-233 and make
recommendations on proposed designs.
(3) To review and make recommendations on proposed designs and
other design elements (e.g., exterior materials, signs, landscaping,
exterior lighting, etc.) contained in site plans for new, enlarged or
altered existing buildings designated as landmarks or located
within a historic district.
(4) To review and make recommendations on design for all plans that
call for the construction of new buildings or the improvement or
demolition of existing buildings, in whole or in part, that are
located in any historic district zone or individual buildings located
elsewhere in the Township of Freehold that have been designated
by the Township or other agency as a historic landmark.
(5) To study and prepare reports evaluating other areas or properties
in the Township which, because of their recognized architectural/
historical significance, would qualify as historic districts or historic
landmarks. Such findings and recommendations shall be presented
to the Planning Board for action thereon and shall be included in
the list of properties designated as historic landmarks. The
Commission may serve as advisor to owners of property seeking
historic landmark designation for same.
(6) Prepare a survey of historic landmarks of the Township.
§ 190-229 JUNK DEALERS § 190-230
186:789
(7) Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the
implication of preservation of historic landmarks of any other
Master Plan elements.
(8) Advise the Planning Board and Township Committee on the
inclusion of historic landmarks in the recommended capital
improvement program.
(9) Advise the Planning Board on applications for development.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(10) Provide written reports on the application of the zoning provisions
concerning historic preservation, to the administrative officer in
charge of issuance of building permits.
(11) Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the Township,
including serving as the Township's archivists and participating in
education programs dealing with preservation for schools, senior
citizens and others.
(12) Assist other public bodies in aiding the public in understanding
historic resources, their significance and methods of preservation.
(13) Compile and monitor notices regarding use of detection-type
devices; consider, determine and condition the granting of requests
for provision to dig, disturb, or remove anything from historic
landmarks.
(14) Advise the Township Committee on the relative merits of proposals
involving public lands to restore, preserve and protect historical
buildings, sites and structures, including the preparation of a longrange
plan therefor; securing state, federal and other grants and
aid to assist therein; and monitoring such projects once underway;
(15) Recommend to the Planning Board and the Township Committee
the establishment and boundaries of historic districts where
appropriate.
(16) Recommend to the Planning Board the granting of use variances
where such are deemed to be within the intent and purposes of this
article. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(17) Secure the voluntary assistance of the public and (within the limits
of the budget established by the Township Committee for the
Commission's operation) to retain consultants and experts and
incur expenses to assist the Commission in its work and to provide
testimony in support of the Commission's position before other
bodies, boards, commissions or courts.
§ 190-230 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-230
186:790
§ 190-231. Definitions and word usage.
(18) Cooperate with local, county, state, or national historical societies,
governmental bodies and organizations to maximize their
contributions to the intent and purposes of this article.
(19) Recommend to the applicable county, state, and federal agencies,
where appropriate, recognition of historic buildings, structures,
sites, objects or districts.
(20) Request the Township Committee to seek, on its own motion or
otherwise, injunctive relief for violations of this article or other
actions contrary to the intent and purpose of this article.
(21) To provide recommendations, input and advice relative to sites of
historic interest to the same extent as to historic landmarks and to
buildings, structures, sites and/or objects within an historic
district; however when application for a construction permit
relating to a sale of historic interest has caused the Commission's
jurisdiction to be invoked, any such recommendation, input and
advice would be purely advisory and have no binding effect.
(22) The Commission shall on or before January 14 of each year provide
to the Township Committee, Township Clerk, Township's Planning
Board, Construction Official and administrative officer an update
list of all properties designated as historic landmarks, sites of
historic interest and those included within an historic district.
Throughout the year, the Commission shall update such lists as
designations change. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
B. Compatibility with other agencies.
(1) The responsibilities, powers and duties of the Commission shall not
conflict with or supersede the powers and duties of any other board
or agency within the Township of Freehold.
(2) If the Planning Board is required, as part of the review of a
development application, to pass upon an action relating to an
historic landmark or property within an historic district, over which
the Commission would otherwise have binding authority, the
Commission shall make a recommendation to the reviewing board
which shall consider such recommendation in making its final
decision. In those circumstances, the final decision shall be
reserved for the reviewing board after considering the
recommendation of the Commission. [Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-26]
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this article, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
§ 190-230 JUNK DEALERS § 190-231
186:791
(1) The term "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and the term
"may" indicates a permissive action.
(2) The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "premises."
(3) The word "used" includes the words "intended to be used" or
"arranged to be used."
(4) The word "occupied" includes the words "intended to be occupied,"
"designed to be occupied" or "arranged to be occupied."
(5) The word "demonstrate" means to provide such visual, written or
oral information as will enable the Commission or other reviewing
agency or board to render an informed opinion or decision thereon.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as a part of
an existing improvement when such new improvement changes the
exterior appearance of any landmark.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated to handle the
administration of building permit applications as referenced in this
article.
AFFECTING A LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT — Any act which
alters or changes a historic landmark or an improvement within a
historic district.
ALTERATION — Any work done on any existing improvement which:
BUILDING — A structure created to shelter human activity of any kind.
DEMOLITION — The partial or total razing or destruction of any
building, structure, or of any improvement within a historic district or
of any historic landmark.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographically definable area possessing a
significant linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, and/or
objects which when viewed collectively:
(1) Is not an addition to that improvement; or
Changes the appearance of the exterior surface of any
improvement.
(2)
Represent a significant period in the development of the Township;
or
(1)
Have a distinctive character resulting from their architectural
style; or
(2)
Because of their distinctive character can readily be viewed as an
area or neighborhood distinct from surrounding portions of the
Township.
(3)
§ 190-231 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-231
186:792
HISTORIC DISTRICT RESOURCES — Resources within a historic
district shall be classified either as key, contributing, or
noncontributing which are defined as:
HISTORIC LANDMARKS (OR LANDMARK) — Any buildings,
structures, sites, objects, or districts which possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, or association, and
which have been determined pursuant to the terms of this chapter, to
be:
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or any part thereof constructed or
installed upon real property by human endeavor and intended to be
kept at the location of such construction or installation for a period of
not less than 120 continuous days.
KEY — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects which due to their
significance would individually qualify for landmark status.
(1)
CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects
which are integral components of the historic district either
because they date from a time period for which the district is
significant or because they represent an architectural type, period
or method for which the district is significant.
(2)
NONCONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites, or objects
which are not integral components of the historic district because
they neither date from a time period for which the district is
significant nor represent an architectural type, period, or method
for which the district is significant.
(3)
Of particular historic significance to the Township of Freehold by
reflecting or exemplifying the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, county or community; or
(1)
Associated with historic personages important in national, state,
county or local history; or
(2)
The site of a historic event which had a significant effect on the
development of the nation, state, county or community; or
(3)
An embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period,
or method of architecture or engineering; or
(4)
Representative of the work of an important builder, designer, artist,
engineer or architect; or
(5)
Significant for containing elements of design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation; or
(6)
Able or likely to yield information important in prehistory or
history.
(7)
§ 190-231 JUNK DEALERS § 190-231
186:793
§ 190-232. Designation of historic landmarks.
OBJECT — A thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or
scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to
a specific setting, environment or event.
REPAIR — Any work done on any improvement which:
REPLACEMENT — Repairs when a building permit is required for
same.
SITE — The place where a significant event or pattern of events
occurred. It may be the location of prehistoric or historic occupations
or activities that may be marked by physical remains; or it may be the
symbolic focus of a significant event or pattern of events that may both
have been actively occupied. A site may also be the location of a ruined
building, structure or object if the location itself possesses historic,
cultural or archaeological significance.
SITES OF HISTORIC INTEREST — Any buildings, structures, sites,
objects or districts which, although not given historic landmark
designation under this chapter are an important historical asset to the
community which it is felt would benefit from the advice and input of
the Commission.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made work arranged in a definite pattern of
organization.
(1) Is not an addition to the improvement; and
(2) Does not change the appearance of the exterior surface.
A. Guidelines for designation. The Commission may recommend to the
Planning Board guidelines for review to be utilized in determinations of
historic landmark status, sites of historic interest status and for review
of development applications or permits affecting historic landmarks,
sites of historic interest or improvements within historic districts. The
Planning Board may recommend modifications of the guidelines and
shall make the final decision as to their adoption.
B. Historic landmark/sites of historic interest designation list. The
Commission shall consider for historic designation buildings,
structures, objects, sites, and districts within the Township which merit
landmark designation and protection of possessing integrity of location,
design, setting, materials, workmanship, or association based on its
review or upon the recommendation of other Township bodies or of
concerned citizens. The Commission shall make a list of landmarks
recommended for designation. For each landmark, there shall be a brief
description of the landmark, of the landmark's significance pursuant to
the criteria set forth above, a description of the landmark's location and
boundaries, a black and white photograph of each property and a
location map. In conjunction with the list of landmarks recommended
for designation, the Commission may, at the same time, or at some later
§ 190-231 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-232
186:794
time, prepare a list of buildings, structures, objects, sites and districts
which merit designation as sites of historic interest.
C. Hearing on proposed designation. A hearing shall be conducted on the
proposed designations at which interested persons shall be entitled to
present their opinions, suggestions, and objections on the proposed
recommendations for landmark/site of historic interest designation. The
Commission shall then vote on its recommendations to the Planning
Board for resources to be designated as historic landmarks and/or sites
of historic interest.
D. Notice of proposed designation. At least 10 days prior to the hearing
provided for in Subsection C above, the Commission shall provide
notice of the hearing in the following manner:
(1) By certified mail return receipt requested, to each owner that his
property is being considered for historic landmark/site of historic
interest designation and the reasons therefor. The notice shall
advise the owner that if so designated, his or her property would be
subject to the provisions of this article, shall advise him of his
opportunities and rights to challenge or contest such designation
and shall set forth the time, date and location of the public hearing
to be held.
(2) By publishing in an official newspaper of the municipality, a notice
of the time, date and location of the hearing, a preliminary list of
potential designations including a lot and block designation for
same as it appears on the official Township Tax Map.
E. Historic Preservation Commission report to Planning Board. After the
hearing, the Commission shall prepare a concise report of its
recommendations for sites to be designated as historic landmarks/site
of historic interest. Copies of the report shall be delivered to the
Planning Board and the Township Clerk and a notice of action published
by the Commission secretary in the official newspaper. The published
notice shall state the Commission's recommendations and also that final
designation shall be made by the Planning Board at a public meeting
specified on a date not less than 15 nor more than 45 days from the date
of publication.
F. Planning Board designation; certification of designation. Final
determination designating historic landmark/site of historic interest
status shall be made by the Planning Board. A certificate of designation
shall be issued by the Planning Board. Within seven days of the creation
of landmark status/site of historic interest, the Planning Board shall by
certified mail notify the owner of the property involved of the
determination and advise him of his rights with respect to an appeal of
said determination to Township Committee pursuant to Subsection G
below.
G. Appeal to Township Committee. A member of the public may seek to
appeal the status directly to the Township Committee upon giving
§ 190-232 JUNK DEALERS § 190-232
186:795
§ 190-233. Review by Historic Preservation Commission.
notice to the owners and persons of record as objecting thereto, the
Planning Board and the Commission. Such appeal shall be made within
45 days of the Planning Board's determination and the Township
Committee shall have the power to either affirm, modify or vacate the
decision of the Planning Board as it deems proper.
H. Township Committee adoption of designations. After Planning Board
review and approval, the Commission shall submit the list of designated
landmarks/sites of historic interest and a map to the Township Clerk for
filing. The Township Committee shall then consider the designation list
and map, and may approve, reject or modify same by ordinance. Once
adopted, the designation list and map may be amended in the same
manner in which it was adopted. Upon adoption, the designation list
and map shall also be incorporated by reference into the Municipal
Master Plan and the zoning provisions of this chapter.
I. Filing of certificate of designation. Copies of the list of designated
landmarks and location maps as adopted shall be made public and
distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing development
applications and building permits. A certificate of designation shall be
served by certified and regular mail upon each owner included on the
list, a true copy thereof shall be filed with the County Clerk for
recording. No filing shall take place for sites of historic interest.
J. Reconsideration of designation. Nothing herein shall be construed as
requiring the Commission to designate a structure, building, object or
site a historic landmark even if all criteria to so designate have been
satisfied. The Commission retains the discretion to designate such
structure, building, object or site as a site of historic interest.
Thereafter, the Commission shall not be prohibited from reconsidering
such designation and, after following the procedures of this § 190-232,
redesignate a site of historic interest as a historic landmark.
A. Applications subject to Historic Preservation Commission review.
(1) All building permit, demolition and development applications
affecting a historic landmark/site of historic interest or an exterior
improvement within a historic district shall be reviewed by the
Commission. Such review shall be required for, but not limited to,
the following which are merely listed as examples: demolition,
relocation, changes in exterior appearance, construction of any
improvements, changes in signs or lights, site plan review or
subdivisions, zoning variance requests, and collocation, removal, or
replacement of equipment at an existing wireless communications
tower or base station. In addition, application and plans for new
construction of nonresidential buildings and residential
developments throughout the Township, which have been referred
to the Commission by the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
Township Committee shall be reviewed by the Commission.
§ 190-232 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-233
186:796
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26; 6-28-2016 by
Ord. No. O-16-6]
(2) The following activities are not subject to this article:
(a) Changes to the interior of structures.
(b) Ordinary repairs and maintenance or the exact replacement of
any existing architectural details that are otherwise permitted
by law, provided that this work on a historic landmark does not
alter the exterior appearance of the building.
B. Waiver; emergencies.
(1) Waiver. Applicants for building permits for existing properties,
located in historic district zones, but which are noncontributing as
defined herein may apply for a waiver of the requirements of
review, provided that they transmit a letter, requesting said waiver
to the Commission, which includes the following information:
(a) Identification of the property by Township of Freehold block
and lot number as shown on the current Tax Maps.
(b) Year original structures were built and years when additions (if
any) were built.
(c) Photographs taken within a year of the waiver requests
showing front, side and rear elevations of structures.
(d) Explanation of work to be done under requested building
permit.
(e) Reasons for waiver request.
(2) Emergencies. Approval by the Commission is not required prior to
immediate and emergent repair to preserve the continued
habitability of the landmark and/or the health and safety of its
occupants or others. Emergency repairs may be performed in
accordance with Township codes, without the necessity of first
obtaining the Commission's review. Under such circumstances, the
repairs performed shall be only such as are necessary to protect
the health and safety of the occupants of the historic landmark, or
others, and/or to maintain the habitability of the structure. A
request for the Commission's approval shall be made as soon as
possible thereafter and no further work shall be performed upon
the structure until an appropriate request for approval is made and
obtained. All work done under this subsection shall conform to the
criteria set forth in this article and the guidelines for review of
applications as adopted by the Planning Board in accordance with
this article.
C. Referrals to Historic Preservation Commission. The Planning Board
shall refer all development applications, and the administrative officer
§ 190-233 JUNK DEALERS § 190-233
186:797
shall refer all building permit applications, including permit
applications for new construction, demolition, alterations, additions, or
replacements which affect a historic landmark, a site of historic interest
or an improvement within a historic district, to the Commission.
[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(1) Applications involving historic landmark or historic district
properties.
(a) The Commission shall determine if such applications are not
complete. If incomplete, they shall be returned within 30 days.
When complete, the Commission shall schedule a review at its
next regular meeting and the applicant shall be notified and
given an opportunity to be heard.
(b) The Commission shall provide written advice and
recommendation to the Planning Board or, in the case of the
permit application through the administrative officer, except
otherwise provided by § 190-230B, shall direct such officer to
approve, deny or conditionally approve the application. Such
determinations by the Commission shall be made within 45
days of the Commission's determination that the application is
complete, unless such time is extended by consent of the
applicant.
(c) On any application involving demolition or removal of any kind,
except otherwise provided by § 190-230B, the Commission's
order shall specify whether the permit is to be denied or
postponed. If postponement is ordered, the Commission shall
work with the applicant during this interim period to
investigate and consider alternatives to demolition or removal.
(2) Applications involving sites of historic interest.
(a) If such applications are for other than a building permit, each
shall be processed in the same manner as under Subsection
C(1) above. If such applications are for a building permit, the
Commission shall review the application submitted to the
Construction Official and, if the Commission deems it desirable
based on the application filed, may request a meeting with the
applicant to discuss the extent of the work planned and provide
suggestions to accommodate the desires of the applicant while
at the same time attempting to protect the historical
significance of the site of historic interest. Such
recommendations shall be purely advisory and shall have no
binding effect; however, the Construction Official shall await
the report of the Commission for a period of 45 days after
referral to the Commission. If no report is received within the
forty-five-day period, the Construction Official may, if all other
requirements therefor are met, issue the requested permit.
§ 190-233 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-233
186:798
(b) In the cooperative effort outlined above, the Commission shall
explore the availability of public or private funds to assist the
property owner with any increased costs which may
accompany following the Commission's recommendations. If
such funds are provided by the Township through any
established grant or assistance program, it shall be required
that, as a condition to receipt of such funds, the property
owner shall record restrictions, in the County Clerk's office,
subjecting the property to historic landmark designation to the
same extent as though the procedure set forth in § 190-232
was followed and the certificate reference in § 190-233I was
filed.
D. Submission requirements. An original and two copies of each of the
following shall be submitted to the secretary of the Commission:
(1) Applicable application form, if any, as adopted by the Commission.
(2) Plans and specifications as accepted by the Building Department.
(3) Detailed information shall be provided on the construction
material, color, design and any of the following or other elements of
the proposal to provide clear and comprehensive information for
the Commission in its determination of the compatibility of the
proposal:
(a) Roof design and surfacing.
(b) Walls/siding/pattern of shingles/and exterior painting or stain.
(c) Windows: style, relationship to each other/awnings.
(d) Doors.
(e) Ornaments or trim.
(f) Colors/materials.
(g) Railings/porches.
(h) Chimneys.
(i) Fences.
(j) Yard furniture.
(k) Garages/carports.
(l) Signs.
(m) TV antennas/satellite dishes.
(n) Solar energy installation.
§ 190-233 JUNK DEALERS § 190-233
186:799
(o) Outdoor furniture for accessory use of a principal
(nonresidential) use such as restaurant's outdoor eating
section.
(p) Street furniture generally relative to a public or a semipublic
use:
[1] Sidewalks, paving.
[2] Lightposts.
[3] Benches.
[4] Trash receptacles.
[5] Kiosks/signs.
[6] Hydrants.
[7] Phone booths.
[8] Gazebos.
[9] Pavilions.
[10] Urns.
[11] Play or recreation equipment.
(q) Landscaping, grading and topography.
(r) For new construction, utilities shall be placed underground
and site plans shall show the placement of same; statements
from the relevant public utility company may be requested by
the Commission.
E. Standards of review. In regard to an application for any approval of
proposed action the following matters shall be considered:
(1) If the historic landmark/site of historic interest or structure in a
historic district is involved:
(a) The impact of the proposed change on its historic and
architectural significance as defined in this section;
(b) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which the
historic or architectural interest would be adversely affected to
the detriment of the public interest, and
(c) The extent to which there would be the involvement of textures
and materials that could not be reproduced or could be
reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
(2) The use of any structure involved.
§ 190-233 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-233
186:800
(3) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view of a landmark or structure within a historic district
from a public street.
(4) If the application deals with a structure within a historic district,
the impact the proposed change would have on its character and
ambience and the structure's visual compatibility with the
buildings, places and structures to which it would be visually
related in terms of the visual compatibility factors set forth herein.
(5) In regard to applications, additional pertinent matters may be
considered but in no instance shall interior arrangement be
considered.
(6) In assessing the effect of any proposed change on an application
concerning any landmark, the Secretary of the Interiors Standards
for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings shall be utilized. Such standards and guidelines are
hereby adopted by reference and copies shall be made available for
inspection and/or purchase in the office of the Township Clerk.
F. Demolitions. An application for a permit to demolish a historic
landmark/site of historic interest or a structure or improvement within
a historic district shall be forwarded by the Construction Official to the
Commission.
(1) Demolitions involving historic landmark or historic district
properties.
(a) The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed demolition. At least 10 days before such hearing, the
applicant shall give notice of the time, date, location and
purpose of the hearing to the agencies listed below by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by published notice in an
official newspaper of the municipality; and shall present an
affidavit attesting to such notification prior to commencement
of the hearing:
[1] Monmouth County Historical Commission.
[2] Monmouth County Heritage Committee.
[3] Monmouth Conservation Foundation.
[4] Monmouth County Historical Association.
[5] State Office of Historic Preservation.
[6] State Advisory Council of Historic Preservation.
[7] Monmouth County Park System.
[8] Any other organization concerned with historic
preservation, deemed appropriate by the Commission.
§ 190-233 JUNK DEALERS § 190-233
186:801
(b) The following matters shall be considered by the Commission:
[1] Its historic, architectural, cultural or scenic significance in
relation to the criteria established in this section.
[2] If it is within a historic district, its significance to the
district as a key, contributing, or noncontributing resource
and the probable impact of its removal on the district.
[3] Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted
by the zoning provisions of this chapter.
[4] Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of
alternatives to the proposal.
[5] Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which
its historical or architectural value is such that its removal
would be detrimental to the public interest.
[6] The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it would
not be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great
difficulty and expense.
[7] The extent to which its retention would promote the
general welfare by maintaining and increasing the real
estate values, generating business, creating new jobs,
attracting tourists, students, writers, historians, artists
and artisans; attracting new residents, encouraging study
and interest in American history, New Jersey history and
the history of Freehold Township; stimulating interest and
study in architecture and design, educating citizens in
American culture and heritage, or making the municipality
a more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
[8] Such other matters as may appropriately affect the
decision considering the specific characteristics of the
property in question.
[9] The ownership, use and applicant's reason(s) for
requesting demolition.
[10] Any other applicable standards of review or guidelines
adopted by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of the
Interior.
(c) Following the public hearing, the Commission shall make a
decision and act on the request for the demolition permit.
(2) Demolitions involving a site of historic interest. The Commission
shall conduct the procedures as outlined in Subsection F(1) above,
except as follows:
§ 190-233 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-233
186:802
(a) The Commission shall have a period not exceeding six months
in order to have an opportunity to seek a viable alternative to
demolition.
(b) The applicant shall not be required to notify the agencies set
forth in Subsection F(1)(a) through (g).
(3) Demolitions in conjunction with a development application. In
those circumstances where the planned demolition is part of a
development application pending before the Planning Board, the
hearing provided for in this section shall be combined as part of the
development application hearing held before the reviewing board.
The Commission shall be given notice of the hearing and its
members or representative shall be allowed to ask questions,
request information and present evidence to the reviewing board
relating to the demolition. The Commission shall further be
accorded the opportunity of making a recommendation to the
reviewing board as to whether or not the demolition should be
allowed. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
G. Relocations. In regard to an application to move any historic landmark,
or to move any improvement within a historic district, the application
shall be forwarded by the responsible Township official to the
Commission.
(1) The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed
move or relocation. At least 10 days before such hearing, the
applicant shall give notice of the time, date, location and purpose of
the hearing to the agencies listed below by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by published notice in an official newspaper
of the municipality; and shall present an affidavit attesting to such
notification prior to commencement of the hearing:
(a) Monmouth County Historical Commission.
(b) Monmouth County Heritage Committee.
(c) Monmouth Conservation Foundation.
(d) Monmouth County Historical Association.
(e) State Office of Historic Preservation.
(f) State Advisory Council of Historic Preservation.
(g) Monmouth County Park System.
(h) Any other organization concerned with historic preservation,
deemed appropriate by the Commission.
(2) The following matters shall be considered by the Commission:
(a) The historic loss to the site of original location and the historic
district as a whole.
§ 190-233 JUNK DEALERS § 190-233
186:803
(b) The compelling reasons for not retaining the landmark or
structure at its present site.
(c) The compatibility, nature, and character of the current and the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the protection of
interest and values referred to in this section.
(d) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or
structure itself.
(e) If it is to be moved from Freehold Township, the proximity of
the proposed new location to the Township, including the
accessibility to the residents of the municipality and other
citizens.
(f) If the proposed new location is within a district, visual
compatibility factors as set forth in this section.
(3) Following the public hearing, the Commission shall make a decision
and act on the request for relocation.
(4) In those circumstances where the planned relocation is part of a
development application pending before the Planning Board, the
hearing provided for in this section shall be combined as part of the
development application hearing held before the reviewing board.
The Commission shall be given notice of the hearing and its
members or representative shall be allowed to ask questions,
request information and present evidence to the reviewing board
relating to the relocation. The Commission shall further be
accorded the opportunity of making a recommendation to the
reviewing board as to whether or not the relocation should be
allowed. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
H. Advice regarding nonhistoric properties.
(1) The Commission also serves in an advisory capacity in the review of
plans referred by the Planning Board or Township Committee
pertaining to the exterior appearance of structures that are not
historic landmarks and not within a historic district. The purpose
and intent of this additional role of the Commission is to assist
other Township boards in their review capacity, where development
is proposed in close proximity to areas and/or structures of historic
significance or because the owners or applicants desire to
construct improvements with historic design and character. The
goals of the Commission are to advise applicants on how to amend
and improve designs rather than to impose individual design
choices on any specific proposal. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
(2) In the review of plans that have been referred to them, the
Commission will generally examine the following elements for
§ 190-233 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-233
186:804
compatibility with the existing style, with existing adjoining
development and appropriateness:
(a) Building height.
(b) Bulk/scale.
(c) Placement of windows, doors, roof.
(d) Materials/textures and scale.
(e) Color.
(f) Signs.
(g) Fences, walls, other accessory structures on the site.
(h) Parking area layout, loading facilities.
(i) Landscaping.
(j) Driveways.
(k) Compatibility of all elements of the proposal.
(l) Any other exterior elements that would impact the
surroundings.
(3) When plans are referred to the Commission by the Planning Board,
the referral should include the timing schedule for the submission
in order to enable the Commission to make its review and, if
necessary, meet with the applicant to discuss adjustments, within
the timing framework for the submission, the dates of public
hearings, Planning Board meetings, etc. [Amended 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-26]
I. Removal or disturbance of objects or landmarks detections devices.
(1) No person shall use any electrical, mechanical or other detection
type device to disturb, remove, locate objects in or on any Township
owned historic landmark/site of historic landmark or improvement
within a historic district without giving written notice, as set forth
below, to the Township Clerk and the Commission and receiving
permission of the Township Committee to undertake the proposed
activity.
(2) The written notice of the intent to use such a detection device shall
set forth the name and address of the person giving notice as well
as the names and addresses of all persons involved in the on-site
use and shall set forth the date each use will occur and whether any
business, club, or other organization is involved.
(3) The written notice of the intent to use such a detection device shall
be delivered to the Township Clerk and to the secretary of the
Commission at least 30 days in advance of the proposed use. The
§ 190-233 JUNK DEALERS § 190-233
186:805
§ 190-234. Violations and penalties.
Commission shall consider the request and make a
recommendation to the Township Committee whether the request
should be approved, denied or approved with conditions. The
Township Committee shall then make the final decision and notify
the applicant.
A. Any person who undertakes any activity affecting a historic landmark or
any improvement within a historic district which is regulated by this
article, without obtaining review by the Commission shall be in
violation of this article.
B. On any violation, the Zoning Officer shall serve a notice describing the
violation and demanding abatement within 10 days; and, notifying the
owner or person(s) present that they must immediately stop and cease
any further activity whatsoever. Such owner or other person(s) shall
immediately stop any activity.
C. The Zoning Officer may also file complaint in the Township municipal
court; and/or seek injunction relief or restraints in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
D. Each separate day a violation exists shall be deemed to be a new and
separate violation.
E. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
fine and penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 190-233 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-234
186:806
ARTICLE XXII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 190-235. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or
buildings at the date of adoption of this chapter may be continued, although
such use or building does not conform to the regulations specified by this
chapter for the zone in which such land or building is located, provided that:
§ 190-236. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be adjudged abandoned when there occurs a
cessation of any such use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act
on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use within a period of
one year from the date of cessation or discontinuance. Such use shall not be
reoccupied, except in conformance with this chapter.
§ 190-237. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back to a nonconforming use.
§ 190-238. Creation by governmental action.
Whenever a nonconformity is created by or exists solely by reason of the
exercise of a governmental right of eminent domain subsequent to the
effective date of this section, no bulk variance(s), i.e., lot area, side yard
setback, front yard setback, etc., shall be required to use the property as
though it were conforming in that respect. The "exercise of governmental
right of eminent domain", for purposes of this section, shall be evidenced
by the filing of an eminent domain complaint by a governmental entity in a
court of competent jurisdiction, which complaint shall set forth the taking
of property which results in the nonconformity from which relief is sought.
In the absence of the filing of such a complaint or if the eminent domain
proceeding was subsequently abandoned by the governmental entity, there
shall exist a presumption that the nonconformity was not created by or
exists solely by reason of the exercise of a governmental right of eminent
domain unless the governmental entity has properly authorized and
A. No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
B. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended, or increased,
unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of
nonconformance; except that, as to any nonconforming single-family
residential structure, enlargement, extension or increase may be
permitted if such enlargement, extension or increase does not
exacerbate any existing nonconformity, nor create any new
nonconformity. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-18]
C. No nonconforming use may be expanded.
§ 190-235 JUNK DEALERS § 190-238
186:807
executed a written instrument recorded in the Monmouth County Clerk's
Office within 30 days of its execution, evidencing the fact that a particular
conveyance of property was made to it, or to a third party at its request,
which conveyance results in the nonconformity from which relief is sought.
§ 190-239. Restoration.
A nonconforming structure or building may be restored or repaired in the
event of partial destruction thereof. In no event shall restoration or repair
result in any increase in the size of the nonconforming structure or building,
or an increase in intensity of the nonconforming use. All restoration and
repair shall be in accordance with current development standards and
requirements except as protected by the nonconforming status. "Partial
destruction" as used herein shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. As
a guide in this determination, the Zoning Officer shall liberally apply the
concept of partial destruction. Until more definitive guidance is provided by
the legislature or through judicial determinations, in circumstances where
the decision is debatable, the Zoning Officer shall determine the destruction
to be partial.
§ 190-240. Future changes.
Whenever this chapter or the Zoning Map shall be modified, amended,
or supplemented, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses, structures, or building created thereby.
§ 190-238 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-240
186:808
ARTICLE XXIII
Planning Board Acting as Board of Adjustment
§ 190-241. (Reserved)106
§ 190-242. Additional powers of Planning Board. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
The Planning Board shall possess the following additional powers when
exercising traditional Board of Adjustment powers:
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning provisions of this chapter.
B. Hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or ordinance or for
decisions upon other special questions upon which such board is
authorized to pass by any Zoning or Official Map provisions.
C. Where by reasons of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions, or by reason of other extraordinary and exceptional
situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of
any regulation of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship including a
variance for a conditional use; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use.
D. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations of this chapter pertaining to zoning
including but not limited to allowing a structure or use in a district
restricted against a structure or use but only by affirmative vote of at
least five members of the Board.
(1) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning
provisions of this chapter. An application under this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency, for its report,
provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Planning Board shall act.
106. Editor's Note: Former § 190-241, Membership; appointment; organization, as amended,
was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26.
§ 190-241 JUNK DEALERS § 190-242
186:809
§ 190-243. (Reserved)107
§ 190-244. Appeals and applications. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
§ 190-245. (Reserved)108
§ 190-246. Modification on appeal. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-26]
The Planning Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify
the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination
appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the administrative
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 190-247. Stay of proceedings by appeal; exception. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
An appeal to the Planning Board shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made unless
the officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies to the Planning
Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate of stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(2) Any variance or other relief affecting the creation and/or
establishment of 25 or more new residential dwelling units in an
area or zone prohibited against such dwellings shall be deemed to
be a substantial detriment to the public good and a substantial
impairment to the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning
provisions of this chapter.
A. Appeals to the Planning Board may be taken by any interested party
affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the Township
based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning provisions of this
chapter or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken
specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Planning
Board for action under any of its powers without prior application to an
administrative officer.
107. Editor's Note: Former § 190-243, Costs and expenses, was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26.
108. Editor's Note: Former § 190-245, Time for decision, was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26.
§ 190-242 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-248
186:810
§ 190-248. Other powers of Planning Board. [Amended 10-24-2006
by Ord. No. O-06-36; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-26]
A. Sections 190-244 through 190-247 of this chapter shall apply to the
power of the Planning Board to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to § 190-30 of this chapter for
a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin, or public area reserved pursuant
to § 190-34 of this chapter.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to § 190-32 of this chapter for
a building or structure not related to a street.
B. When acting upon an application, the Planning Board may, based upon
the record before it, place a reasonable time limit within which
construction allowed by the granting of the application must be
completed.
§ 190-248 JUNK DEALERS § 190-248
186:811

ARTICLE XXIV
Enforcement; Certificates and Permits
§ 190-249. Enforcement.
The duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter is hereby conferred
upon the code enforcement administrator (Construction Official or Zoning
Officer) who shall have such powers as are conferred upon him by this
chapter and as reasonably may be implied. In no case shall a permit be
granted for the construction of or alteration of any building where the
proposed construction, alteration, or use thereof would be in violation of
any provision of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or
his duly authorized assistants to cause any building, plans or premises to
be inspected or examined and to order in writing the remedying of any
conditions found to exist in violation of this chapter, and he shall have the
right to enter any building or premises during the daytime in the course of
his duties.
§ 190-250. Certificates and permits.
§ 190-251. Periodic reexamination.
A. Zoning permits. Zoning permits shall, hereafter, be secured from the
Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the
construction, erection or alteration of any nonresidential structure or
part thereof or upon a change in the use and/or occupancy of any
nonresidential land or structure.
B. Certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be required
before any building or structure shall be occupied. Such certificate
shall be issued by the Township Construction Official, provided that the
applicant is lawfully entitled thereto and shall submit proper
application for the same together with an application fee. On the
service of notice by the Zoning Officer to the owner of any violation of
any provisions or requirements with respect to any building or use
thereof or of land, as specified in this chapter, the certificate of
occupancy for such use shall be deemed to be in violation of the chapter
and subject to the penalties hereinafter prescribed. A new certificate of
occupancy for such use shall be deemed to be in violation of the chapter
and subject to the penalties hereinafter prescribed. A new certificate of
occupancy shall be required for any further use of such building or land.
A. The Township Committee shall, at least every six years, provide for a
general reexamination of its Master Plan and development regulations
by the Planning Board which shall prepare a report on the findings of
such reexamination, a copy of which shall be sent to the County
Planning Board and the Municipal Clerks of each adjoining
municipality. The six-year period shall commence with the adoption or
termination of the last general reexamination of such plan and
§ 190-249 JUNK DEALERS § 190-251
186:813
§ 190-252. Continuance of applications previously filed.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued except that appeals arising out of decisions made
on any such application shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
Ordinance 75-3 is saved from repeal.
regulations. The first such reexamination shall be completed within six
years after the effective date of this chapter.
B. Such report shall state:
(1) The major problems and objectives relating to land development in
the Township at the time of such adoption, last revision or reexamination,
if any.
(2) The extent to which there have been significant changes in the
assumptions, policies, and objectives forming the basis for such
plan or regulations as last revised, with particular regard to the
density and distribution of population and land uses, housing
conditions, circulation, conservation of natural resources and
changes in state, county, and Township policies and objectives.
(3) The specific changes recommended for such plan or regulations, if
any, including underlying objectives, policies, and standards, or
whether a new plan or regulation should be prepared.
§ 190-251 FREEHOLD CODE § 190-252
186:814
Chapter 195
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Limousine certification — See Ch. 199.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 236.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 315.
§ 190-252 JUNK DEALERS § 190-252
186:815

ARTICLE I
General Licensing Requirements
[Adopted by Ord. No. 15 (§ 7-1 of the Revised General Ordinances),
as amended through Ord. No. O-98-20]
§ 195-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued
by the Township, except alcoholic beverage, dog and taxicab licenses, and
except as may be provided elsewhere in the Code of the Township of
Freehold.
§ 195-2. Applications and fee.
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required fee and
shall be made to or through the Township Clerk upon forms provided by
him. Applications shall contain the information specified by resolution of the
Township Committee and may include the following along with any other
information deemed necessary or specifically called for by ordinance:
A. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
B. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
C. If a vehicle is to be used, its description including the license number.
D. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
E. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
F. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold or supplied.
G. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.
H. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
I. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this subsection supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all of the information required by this subsection
§ 195-1 JUNK DEALERS § 195-2
186:817
§ 195-3. Investigation of applicants. [Amended 7-10-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-20]
§ 195-4. Contents of license.
Licenses shall be in a form which the Township Committee shall prescribe
by resolution, and shall contain the following information:
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
J. If the applicant seeks a solicitor's license, pursuant to Chapter 288, the
applicant must submit a valid certificate of authority issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:32B-8.2, empowering the vendor to collect sales tax.
[Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-21]
A. Each applicant for a license shall secure through a private agency a
criminal history background check, conducted not more than 14 days
prior to the filing of the application. Such criminal history background
check must be submitted (as part of the application) directly from the
private agency to the Chief of Police. The criminal history background
check shall be in sufficient detail and scope to reveal any criminal
history recorded with the State Bureau of Identification or with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and to allow the Chief of Police to reach
an informed decision as required below.
B. Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall
immediately institute whatever investigation of the applicant’s business
responsibility, moral character and ability to properly conduct the
licensed activity he considers necessary for the protection of the public.
He shall communicate his findings to the Township Clerk within a
reasonable time after the application has been filed. If the investigator
decides that the applicant’s character, ability or business responsibility
is unsatisfactory, or the products, services or activity are not free from
fraud, he shall disapprove the application, and the Clerk shall refuse to
issue the license and shall so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the
Township Clerk shall issue the license immediately, provided the
required license fees have been paid, except in cases where approval of
the Township Committee is required. In the event of the refusal of the
issuance of a license, the applicant may appeal to the Township
Committee for hearing. The appeal must be filed, in writing, with the
Township Clerk within 14 days after notification of the refusal. The
Township Committee shall hold its hearing within a reasonable time but
not later than 30 days thereafter, and its decision shall be final.
[Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-21]
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
§ 195-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 195-4
186:818
§ 195-5. License record.
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the
Township Committee and shall contain the same information as is required
by § 195-4 to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount of
the fee paid for the license, the date upon which payment was received, the
date of the issuance of the license, whether the license is a new license or
a renewal, and any other information which the Township Committee may
require.
§ 195-6. Display of license.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his possession at all
times and shall display it upon the request of any Township official, police
officer or any person with whom he is doing business.
§ 195-7. Transferability.
Licenses shall apply only to the person to whom issued and only to the
premises and location stated in the application. A separate license must be
obtained for each employee and each separate place of business. License
may be transferred only by special permission of the Township.
§ 195-8. Expiration date; renewal.
Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31, of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for the
renewal of licenses shall be made not later than December 1 of the year of
previous issue.
§ 195-9. Causes for license revocation.
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
E. The expiration date of the license.
F. Any other appropriate information which the Township Committee may
require by resolution.
A. Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the
Township Committee after notice and a hearing for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
§ 195-4 JUNK DEALERS § 195-9
186:819
§ 195-10. Notice of hearing.
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at
his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 195-11. Conduct of hearing.
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own behalf, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent record made
of the proceedings at his own expense. If a record is made and a copy is
requested by the licensee, the licensee shall provide a copy to the Township
without charge. The Township Committee shall revoke or suspend the
license if it is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the licensee
is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 195-12. Reinstatement of revoked licenses.
The Township Committee may issue another license to a person whose
license has been revoked or denied as provided in this article if after
hearing it is satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which
led to the revocation or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person
whose license has been revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him,
directly or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on the same
activity.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) A violation of any provision of the Code of the Township of
Freehold.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral
turpitude.
(5) Conduct of the licensed activity whether by the licensee himself or
his agents or employees in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
B. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application,
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this chapter,
such license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation
is such as would have resulted in denial of the application.
§ 195-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 195-13
186:820
§ 195-13. Power to make rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may by resolution make rules and regulations
which interpret or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective.
No regulation shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision
of this chapter, and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is
in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or by
implication imposed by any provision of this chapter.
§ 195-14. Payment of delinquent property taxes; suspension for
nonpayment. [Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-3; 5-31-2016 by
Ord. No. O-16-5]
Whenever application is made for issuance, renewal or approval of any
license or permit, whether under this chapter or any other provision of
the Code of the Township of Freehold, which license or permit relates to
any real property within the Township, the license or permit shall issue
or be approved only upon condition that any and all delinquent property
taxes or assessments on the property where the business or activity is to
be conducted are paid in full, unless otherwise approved by the Township
Committee. In the event that subsequent to the issuance or approval of
any such license or permit the property taxes or assessments shall fall
delinquent for three or more consecutive quarters, such license or permit
shall be suspended. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessments
and a restoration fee equal to 50% of the application fee, the license or
permit shall be restored. This provision shall not apply to an alcoholic
beverage control license, a food handler's license or to a building permit or
certificate of occupancy.
§ 195-15. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 195-13 JUNK DEALERS § 195-15
186:821

ARTICLE II
Criminal History Background Investigations
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-98-28 (§ 7-15 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 195-16. Purpose. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-21]
The purpose of this article is to ensure the safety of the Township citizens
by requiring background checks, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq.,
of all persons who seek a license to work or act as a solicitor, pursuant
to Chapter 288, or taxicab driver within the Township, or who provide
limousine services within the Township. It is further the purpose of this
article to establish the Township as an "authorized requester" pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 13:59-1-1 et seq.
§ 195-17. Applicability. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-21]
The requirements of this article are applicable to any person who seeks a
license, or renewal of a license as a solicitor, pursuant to Chapter 288, or as
a taxicab driver, pursuant to Chapter 315, or who makes application for a
limousine certification, or renewal of such certification, pursuant to Chapter
199.
§ 195-18. Exemption for previous background checks. [Amended
11-20-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-21]
§ 195-19. Requirement of special background checks. [Amended
11-20-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-21]
In addition to other requirements for grant of license or certification
provided in these revised general ordinances, no person shall be granted
a license as a solicitor, pursuant to Chapter 288 or for taxicab drivers,
pursuant to Chapter 315, or granted a limousine certification, pursuant to
A. If the applicant for a solicitor's license, pursuant to Chapter 288, has
been the subject of a Criminal History Record Information (CHRI)
request processed by the New Jersey State Bureau of Identification
(SBI) in the Township or another jurisdiction within the last 12 months,
he or she may have the results thereof submitted directly to the
Township Chief of Police to be processed in accordance with § 195-20.
Under such circumstances, no further CHRI request need be processed.
B. If the applicant for a taxicab license pursuant to Chapter 315 or for a
limousine certificate pursuant to Chapter 199 has been the subject of a
Criminal History Record Information (CHRI) request processed by the
New Jersey State Bureau of Identification (SBI) in the Township or
another jurisdiction within the last 24 months, he or she may have the
results thereof submitted directly to the Township Chief of Police to be
processed in accordance with § 195-20. Under such circumstances, no
further CHRI request need be processed.
§ 195-16 JUNK DEALERS § 195-19
186:823
Chapter 199, unless such applicant for license or certification, and all those
who will be going door to door in connection therewith (hereafter referred
to as "applicant"), shall first authorize a CHRI request to be processed by
the SBI, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. This CHRI request
shall include both a name search and fingerprint search of the applicant for
license or certification.
§ 195-20. Fees.
In addition to the required license application fee, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to pay all fees required for the CHRI
searches, as specified in N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.3. A cashier's check or money
order for the prescribed fee shall be stapled to the lower left corner of the
applicant fingerprint card. The check or money order shall be made payable
to "Division of State Police — SBI."
A. Fingerprint identification search. Each applicant shall complete and
return to the Township Clerk an applicant fingerprint card, provided by
the Township Clerk or Township Police Department, pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.4(c). Such fingerprinting may be completed by any
police enforcement agency within the State of New Jersey. The
applicant fingerprint card shall be accompanied by a request for
criminal history record information form, which must be completed in
its entirety. A check or money order for the appropriate fee shall be
stapled to the lower left corner of the applicant fingerprint card
B. Name identification search. Each applicant to this article shall complete
a request for criminal history record information form provided by the
Township Clerk, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.4(d). This form must be
completed in its entirety and shall contain all the information required
to complete the CHRI check, including:
(1) Name of the applicant;
(2) Date of birth of the applicant; and
(3) Social security number of the applicant. Pursuant to the provisions
of the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579), the furnishing of social
security information is voluntary. However, failure of the applicant
to provide this information on the CHRI will result in the denial of
the application for license or certification. Social security
information provided by the applicant shall be used only for the
purposes of processing the request for the CHRI and the
application for license or certification.
(4) Authorization for the Township to request the CHRI. Each applicant
shall authorize the Township to request the CHRI searches, by
signing the bottom of the request for criminal record information
form, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.2(b). Failure of the applicant to
authorize the Township to obtain the required CHRI shall result in a
denial of the application for license or certification.
§ 195-19 FREEHOLD CODE § 195-21
186:824
§ 195-21. Background check of applicant.
The results of the CHRI request shall be forwarded to the Township Chief of
Police for review, in accordance with § 195-3, §§ 315-4A(1) and 315-5A(2).
The results of the CHRI shall be included in the findings submitted by
the Chief of Police to the Township Clerk. No presumption of guilt will be
attached to, or assumed for, any pending arrests or charges indicated for
which there are no final dispositions indicated on the CHRI report. Upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Township Clerk shall deny the
application for license presented by the applicant.
§ 195-22. Effects of denial of application.
If the application for license or certification is denied based upon
information contained in the CHRI, no license or certification shall be issued
to the applicant, except as provided hereafter. No license or certification
shall issue during the applicant's period of appeal or challenge, except, in
the case of application for renewal of an existing license or certification,
the Township Committee may issue a temporary license or certification for
a period not to exceed the time permitted for the applicant to appeal the
denial and/or challenge the information contained in the CHRI.
§ 195-23. Rights of applicant when denial is based on information
contained in CHRI.
If the application for license or certification is denied due to any information
contained in the CHRI, the applicant shall be afforded the following rights:
A. Right of notification. The Township shall notify the applicant of any
information contained in the CHRI report which was a basis for the
denial of the application.
B. Right of appeal to the Township Committee. Any applicant denied a
license or certification due to information contained in the CHRI report
shall have the right to appeal the denial to the Township Committee
within 30 days of the date of denial. Such right of appeal may be
extended for no more than 30 additional days, upon a showing of good
cause to the Township Committee. Review of the denial by the Township
Committee shall be in accordance with procedures established by the
Township Committee.
C. Right to challenge and petition for correction any information alleged to
be erroneous. Any applicant for license or certification who is denied or
disqualified for such application due to information contained in the
CHRI report shall have the right to complete or challenge the accuracy
of any information obtained in the CHRI report. The Township Clerk, or
local Police Department, shall provide the applicant making such
challenge with information concerning the procedures to challenge the
information in the CHRI report and any required forms. The applicant
shall be given 30 days in which to present the challenge or allegation of
erroneous information to the Township Committee. Thereafter, the
§ 195-21 JUNK DEALERS § 195-23
186:825
§ 195-24. Confidentiality.
The results of the CHRI shall be maintained in a confidential manner, and no
release or dissemination of the results of the CHRI shall be granted, except
as authorized by N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. The results of the CHRI shall be
used solely for the purpose of determining whether the applicant is fit and
qualified for the license or certification requested. The results of the CHRI
shall be destroyed, in accordance with the requirements and procedures of
N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq., after the license applied for has been granted,
or within 30 days after the applicant for license has exhausted all rights of
appeal if the application for license is denied.
§ 195-25. Frequency of application.
The requirements of this article shall be applicable for each new application
for any license or certification identified in § 195-16.
§ 195-26. Authorized agency.
This article is intended to make the Township an "authorized requester,"
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1.
§ 195-27. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Township Committee shall make a determination whether or not to
extend the time allowed for the applicant to complete the application,
to a maximum of 60 days. If the information in the CHRI report is
not corrected within the allotted time, the applicant shall be required
to submit a new application for license or certification, after such
information in the CHRI has been corrected.
D. Right to have the Township Committee review the corrected
information. If, within the authorized time period, the challenged
information contained in the CHRI is corrected due to the applicant's
petition, the Township Committee shall, at the option of the applicant,
review the application in light of the new information in the CHRI and
determine whether or not to grant the application. The Township
Committee may request an additional review by the Chief of Police.
However, if such additional review is requested, the applicant shall
have an additional 30 days after review by the Chief of Police in which
to bring the application to the Township Committee for approval.
§ 195-23 FREEHOLD CODE § 195-27
186:826
Chapter 199
LIMOUSINE CERTIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Licensing — See Ch. 195.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 315.
§ 199-1. Fee.
Whenever application is made to the office of the Township Clerk for the
issuance of a certification for a limousine pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-13
through N.J.S.A. 48:16-22, a fee of as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall
be paid to the Township of Freehold prior to the certification being issued
by the Township Clerk.
§ 199-2. Overnight parking.
The person or entity seeking issuance of the certification shall also supply
written evidence that the limousines to which the certification shall apply
shall not be stored or parked overnight in any residential zone within the
Township of Freehold.
§ 199-3. Incorporation of statute by reference.
All other provisions of the aforementioned statutory law are incorporated
by reference herein.
Chapter 203
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 245. Solid waste — See Ch. 290.
§ 203-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED LITTER — Any litter which is not in an authorized location
and/or deposited contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
ANNOUNCEMENT — Any printed or written matter which advises the
reader of an event, an idea, property for lease or sale, service or product for
lease or sale or other similar matter.
§ 195-27 LIMOUSINE CERTIFICATION § 203-1
199:827
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or
entity or the agents, servants or employees thereof who distribute, deliver
or deposit or cause to be distributed, delivered or deposited any printed
matter, other than by means of postal services, at any address in the
Township.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HANDBILL — Any printed or written advertisement, circular or other
matter, sample, device, pamphlet or booklet which advertises or directs
attention to or promotes any commercial interest.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.[Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-5]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.[Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-5]
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, beaches or
other public ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 203-2. General prohibitions.
No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or on any property,
whether occupied, open or vacant and whether owned by that person, or
in a public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of water within the
Township, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
for collection.
§ 203-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 203-3
203:828
§ 203-3. Placement in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner which prevents the litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon a public place or upon private
property. No person shall throw, deposit or dump litter in any private
receptacle unless he/she is so authorized by the owner or lessee of such
receptacle.
§ 203-4. Sweeping into gutter or road.
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in a gutter, road, right-of-way or other public
place within the Township the accumulation of litter from a building or lot or
from a public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 203-5. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any public or private property.
§ 203-6. Transportation from outside Township.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport, or collect any litter from
outside the Township and bring it into the Township for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof except at an approved landfill. No truck
or other vehicle containing litter which has been transported into the
Township shall be parked or allowed to remain standing on any street in the
Township or on any public property for a period in excess of two hours.
§ 203-7. Handbills, announcements and newspapers.
A. No handbills, announcements or newspapers shall be thrown, deposited
or otherwise placed in or upon any sidewalk, street utility pole, bus
stop, bus shelter, other public place, or other property where the public
is invited, or upon any vehicle parked thereon within the Township.
B. No handbills or announcements shall be distributed, delivered or
deposited, except by way of postal service, at any address within the
Township without permission or sanction of the owner or occupant
thereof. A request by any means to cease distribution or delivery shall
be deemed a denial of permission or sanction.
C. Any and all handbills or announcements which may be distributed
within the Township shall have printed thereon in a conspicuous place
the name, address and telephone number of the distributor. When such
handbills or newspapers are distributed, they shall be so securely
placed at each dwelling that they will not be blown away by the wind.
§ 203-3 LITTERING § 203-8
203:829
§ 203-8. Rebuttable presumption of ownership.
Any evidence or information contained in or which is a part of abandoned
litter which identifies or otherwise establishes the source of such litter, i.e.,
envelopes and/or other items with the name and/or address of such person,
will create a rebuttable presumption that such person is the owner of such
litter. Such establishing of ownership shall likewise create a rebuttable
presumption that such person did throw, deposit and/or dump such litter at
the place where found. It is further presumed that all right or expectation
of privacy is relinquished in abandoned litter.
§ 203-8.1. Enforcement. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-5]
A summons alleging a violation of this chapter may be issued by the
Freehold Township Code Enforcement Officer or by the Freehold Township
Police Department. Alternatively, any individual may file a complaint with
the Freehold Township Municipal Court, which shall issue a summons in
accordance with the New Jersey Rules of Court.
§ 203-9. Violations and penalties.
For violation of any provision of this chapter, the penalty shall be as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 207
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 224.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 236.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 232.
§ 207-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle or walking aimlessly about in essentially one
location.
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Includes any adult person having care or custody
of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court
or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public has access and shall include
any public building and grounds, street, highway, road, alley, boardwalk or
sidewalk. It shall also include the front or the neighborhood of a store, shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and public grounds, areas,
parks and marinas, as well as parking lots or other vacant private property
§ 203-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 207-1
207:830
not owned by or under the control of the person charged with violating this
chapter or, in the case of a minor, not owned or under the control of his
parent or guardian.
§ 207-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
§ 207-3. Throwing objects.
In addition to the conduct described in § 207-2, the throwing of stones,
snowballs or other objects at any person or vehicle shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter.
§ 207-4. Failure to obey order to move.
Any person violating the provisions of § 207-2 shall be ordered to move on
by a police officer, failing which he shall be guilty of a violation.
§ 207-5. Loitering by minors.
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter. Whenever any minor
under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of this chapter, his
parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the ranking police official
or any other person designated by the Chief of Police to give such notice.
If at any time within 30 days following the giving of notice the minor to
whom such notice relates again violates this chapter, it shall be presumed
in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor did so with the
knowledge and permission of his parent or guardian.
§ 207-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place.
This subsection shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an
offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to whom, or in whose hearing, they are
made.
§ 207-1 LOITERING § 207-6
207:831
Chapter 213
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbers on manufactured/mobile
homes — See Ch. 92, § 92-3.
Campgrounds — See Ch. 97.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Flood Damage Prevention — See Ch. 166.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Licensing — See Ch. 195.
§ 213-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the terminology of the following definitions shall control:
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME — A unit of housing which:
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME LOT OR PAD — A parcel of land
designed to accommodate a manufactured/mobile home and which includes
a manufactured/mobile home stand and a mobile home yard. It shall be
measured using a plot width which shall be the perpendicular distance
between side plot lines, and a plot depth which shall be the actual distance
between the side plot lines and need not be perpendicular to the street.
Consists of one or more transportable sections which are substantially
constructed off site and, if more than one section, are joined together
on site;
A.
B. Is built on a permanent chassis;
Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling on a
permanent or nonpermanent foundation; and
C.
Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for
a manufactured home by the secretary pursuant to the "National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974," Public Law 93-383 (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.) and the standards
promulgated for a manufactured or mobile home by the Commissioner
of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs pursuant to the
“State Uniform Construction Code Act," P.L.1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.);
D.
Under no circumstances shall a mobile/manufactured home as used in
this chapter be construed to include any motor vehicle with sleeping
or living quarters which has any of the controls or appurtenances of
propulsion contained within it.
E.
§ 207-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 213-1
207:832
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME STAND OR PAD — That part of a
manufactured/mobile home lot or pad which has been reserved exclusively
for the placement of a manufactured/mobile home.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME YARD OR PAD COMMON AREA — That
part of a manufactured/mobile home lot or common area excluding the
manufactured/mobile home stand or pad surrounding an individual stand or
pad with applicable setbacks as required by this chapter.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot or parcel of land
containing two or more manufactured/mobile home lots or manufactured/
mobile homes and which shall include all buildings used or intended for
use as part of the equipment thereof. Manufactured/mobile homes located
therein shall be occupied and used solely by and for individuals 52 years of
age or over; married couples at least one of whom is 52 years of age or over;
two closely related persons when both persons are 52 years of age or over;
one person over 18 years of age may reside in the manufactured/mobile
home with an adult person or persons, as permitted above, if the presence
of such person is essential for the physical care or economic support of the
adult person; children 18 years of age or older may reside with a parent or
parents.
PARK MANAGEMENT — The owner of a manufactured/mobile home park
or his designated agents being administrative officers of the manufactured/
mobile home park.
RECREATION BUILDING — A building used by the park residents for
recreational purposes and other general purposes common to all residents.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste, combustible or
noncombustible waste solids.
TENANT — Any person who rents or leases a manufactured/mobile home
lot or pad from the park management.
§ 213-2. Licensing requirements.
A. Compliance. The provisions of this chapter comprise the minimum
standards with which all manufactured/mobile home parks and the park
management shall comply, as well as with the rules and regulations and
policies or laws administered by the Township or any agency or
subdivision in this state having legal jurisdiction, including N.J.A.C.
5.23-3.19.
B. Licensing. No person shall construct or operate and maintain a
manufactured/mobile home park in the Township unless such person
shall first obtain a license for the construction and maintenance and
operation thereof from the Township and pay the fees as hereinafter
provided. No manufactured/mobile homes shall be installed, operated,
maintained or occupied within the Township except upon and within a
duly licensed manufactured/mobile home park. All manufactured/
mobile home park licenses shall comply with the provisions of § 213-1,
definition of "manufactured/mobile home park," as vacancies occur in
§ 213-1 LOITERING § 213-2
207:833
§ 213-3. Design standards and improvements.
the park. Any approval of plans and applications for license issued
hereunder shall be subject to automatic revocation in the event the
applicant to whom the approval is granted shall fail to commence
construction of the manufactured/mobile home park for which a license
is applied for within six months from the date of the granting of the
approval.
C. Location of park. Manufactured/mobile home parks shall be permitted
solely and exclusively in those zones and locations for which a license
has been granted or renewed; the license shall be issued or refused
issuance on the basis of the criteria of this chapter and the general
welfare. No manufactured/mobile home park shall be located within
5,280 feet or one mile of any boundary of any other manufactured/
mobile home park. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
prohibit manufactured/mobile home licenses in existence prior to
September 13, 1971, and newly issued licenses from being held under
common ownership which may cause the tracts of land under those
licenses to abut.
D. Number of licenses. Only one license for the construction and
maintenance and operation of a manufactured/mobile home park shall
be issued for each 35,000 residents of the Township as determined by
the last federal census available at the time of application for such
licenses. This provision shall not affect licenses already in existence and
having been issued. There shall be no more than 400 manufactured/
mobile home lots or pads in any manufactured/mobile home park per
license; and no more than 100 manufactured/mobile home lots or pads
shall be permitted during the first year of operation thereof and no
more than 100 additional lots or pads shall be installed in any
manufactured/mobile home park in any one year thereafter.
E. Duration of licenses. Licenses or permits to maintain and operate a
manufactured/mobile home park pursuant to this chapter shall be
issued annually and shall expire on December 31 of each year.
A. Organization. The manufactured/mobile home parks site planning and
improvements shall provide facilities appropriate to the needs of the
residents for safe, healthful and comfortable living areas. The
manufactured/mobile home parks site including manufactured/mobile
home stands, patios, buildings and all site improvements shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the
shape of the plot and the position of buildings and common facilities
and with full regard to the use and public safety and appearance.
(1) Manufactured/mobile home units shall be fitted to the terrain with
a minimum disturbance of the land.
§ 213-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 213-3
207:834
(2) Existing trees, steep slopes, freshwater wetlands, floodplains and
other natural site features shall be preserved to the extent
practical.
B. Lot or pad layout and occupancy. Each manufactured/mobile home lot
or pad shall be clearly identified by number. Each manufactured/mobile
home shall be adequate to accommodate the manufactured/mobile
home occupying the same. The number of manufactured/mobile homes
permitted in a manufactured/mobile home park shall not exceed the
number of manufactured/mobile home lots. Nothing contained in these
regulations shall be construed as prohibiting the maintenance of a
retail manufactured/mobile home sales agency within a manufactured/
mobile home park or the sale of a manufactured/mobile home whether
occupied or unoccupied which is located on a manufactured/mobile
home lot or pad and connected to pertinent utilities.
C. Manufactured/mobile homes per acre. The maximum number of
manufactured/mobile homes permitted per acre shall be four.
D. Minimum size. The minimum size for a manufactured/mobile home park
shall be 55 acres, which shall also be the minimum size of any additions
to an existing manufactured/mobile home park.
E. Manufactured/mobile home lot or pad area. All manufactured/mobile
home lots or pads shall have a minimum of 6,000 square feet with a
minimum width of 60 feet and a minimum depth of 100 feet. There shall
be a separation of at least 25 feet between each manufactured/mobile
home in a manufactured/mobile home park and every other
manufactured/mobile home in the manufactured/mobile home park. No
manufactured/mobile homes shall be closer than 25 feet from the
adjoining pad or property line or building structure or and 20 feet from
the curbline of any private street or 35 feet from the center line of a
street that does not have a curbline and 100 feet from the right-of-way
line of any public street.
F. Roads, sidewalks and drains. Streets shall be provided on the site
where necessary to furnish principal traffic ways for convenient access
to manufactured/mobile home stands and other important facilities on
the streets. The streets shall be retained as private streets on the
property and shall be a minimum paved width of 30 feet in width from
curb to curb. No manufactured/mobile home shall be occupied prior to
the completion of the access streets thereto and that portion of the
street sufficient to cover the frontage of the manufactured/mobile home
lot. The park management shall maintain the streets in the
manufactured/mobile home park in order to provide a safe and
adequate means of transportation throughout the manufactured/mobile
home park for its inhabitants and their guests. Street repairs, sweeping
and snowplowing, as needed from time to time, shall be provided by the
park management. All roads in the manufactured/mobile home park
shall be continuous except that closed ends of dead-end streets shall be
provided with vehicular turning space as provided for in Chapter 190,
§ 213-3 LOITERING § 213-3
207:835
Land Use. All roads, sidewalks and storm sewer drains shall be installed
to comply with the provisions of the Chapter 190, Land Use, except
that access roads which lead to a public highway or street shall be at
least 40 feet wide from curb to curb. A concrete sidewalk of standard
type construction shall be constructed along both sides of each roadway
or street in the manufactured/mobile home park, and the sidewalks
shall also be constructed from the roadway into the manufactured/
mobile home park space lot or pad so as to provide access thereto. The
sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width and conform to the
requirement of the Americans with Disabilities Act design standards.
G. Parking. There shall be no parking permitted on any of the interior
streets of the manufactured/mobile home park. At least two car parking
spaces for each manufactured/mobile home shall be provided. Parking
spaces shall be provided either in convenient bays or other area upon
the manufactured/mobile home lot or pad.
H. Recreation facilities. A recreation area shall be provided for each
manufactured/mobile home park in the amount of 15% of the full area
held under each license. Such space shall be in usable condition for
active recreation which may include but not necessarily be limited to
basketball, swimming, tennis and handball and which shall be free of
traffic hazards. A minimum of 1,400 square feet of recreation space in a
building in a manufactured/mobile home park shall be provided
exclusive of rest rooms and storage facilities. Prior to approving any
manufactured/mobile home park, the Township Committee shall receive
a report on the adequacy of the indoor and outdoor recreation facilities
from the Township Recreation Commission.
I. Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed at every intersection and for
every 300 feet along interior streets. The lights shall be of the mercury
vapor lamp type and shall be illuminated from 1/2 hour after sunset
until 1/2 hour before sunrise. The applicant shall have the option under
this chapter of illuminating the manufactured/mobile home park with
gas or electric lamps in a colonial style. If the option is exercised,
however, the gas lamps shall be installed at every intersection and at
intervals of 60 feet along both sides of all interior streets.
J. Buffer strips. A buffer strip shall be maintained along all exterior
property lines of the manufactured/mobile home park whether they be
front lines, side lines or rear lines. Such buffer strips shall be at least 50
feet in width and shall be screened when necessary, according to the
provisions of Chapter 190, Land Use.
K. Service areas. Closed storage areas and areas where trash and garbage
are stored shall be screened with a six-foot-high heavy timber or
masonry enclosure.
L. Subfloor storage. No gasoline and such similar flammable liquids or
other types of storage shall be stored underneath a manufactured/
mobile home.
§ 213-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 213-3
207:836
§ 213-4. Water and sewer facilities.
§ 213-5. License fees.
M. Patios. Patios shall not extend more than 10 feet from the permitted pad
site and a minimum of 15 feet from the permitted side line of the
common area surrounding the manufactured/mobile home site.
N. Conformance with state and federal standards. All manufactured/
mobile homes shall conform with the New Jersey Manufactured Home
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.19, and with the Federal Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards, as set forth in Part 3280 of Title 24
of the Code of Federal Regulations, including all subsequent revisions
and amendments thereto, which may be obtained from the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20420.
A. State standards. All manufactured/mobile home parks located within
the Township shall conform to the State Sanitary Code and N.J.A.C.
5:23-3.19 requirements except when Chapter 190, Land Use, or this
chapter have requirements exceeding those requirements, in which
event Chapter 190 or this chapter shall have preeminence.
B. Water and sewer. The licensee shall be required to provide a central
source of water and treatment of sewage, and all manufactured/mobile
homes shall be connected thereto. The foregoing utilities shall be
approved by the State Department of Health in accordance with the
statutes made and provided. The licensee shall be required to connect
with the nearest water utility and to pay the cost of such connection. If
the nearest water utility should be the Township, the licensee shall pay
a bulk rate for service with a minimum of one meter per license. The
licensee agrees that at such times as a central sewage treatment plant
is available from the Township that connection shall be made thereto.
A. Fees. The annual license fee based upon anticipated expenses to be
incurred by the Township in providing services to the park for each
manufactured/mobile home park with not more than 50 manufactured/
mobile home lots or pads shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees. For
each manufactured/mobile home park exceeding 50 manufactured/
mobile home lots or pads, the license fee shall be as provided in
Chapter 150, Fees, plus an additional sum per month for each
manufactured/mobile home registered in the manufactured/mobile
home park during such month in excess of 50 lots or pads. A calendar
month is hereby defined as any continuous thirty-day period of
occupancy. The aforesaid fee shall accompany the application for the
license.
B. Time of payment.
(1) The annual license fee is payable within 30 days starting from
September 13, 1971, and on or before January 1 of each year
§ 213-3 LOITERING § 213-5
207:837
§ 213-6. Application for license.
thereafter. If such amount aforesaid remains unpaid on the date or
dates set forth above, the same shall be delinquent and shall be
subject to a penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the delinquent
payment.
(2) In addition to the annual license fee as set forth above, the licensee
shall pay the sum provided for in Chapter 150, Fees, for each
manufactured/mobile home lot or pad occupied by any
manufactured/mobile home which is part of the license fee.
(3) Every person holding a license for the operation of a manufactured/
mobile home park shall pay the fee provided above monthly on or
before the 10th day of the next succeeding month, and if not paid at
the end of the 10th day the payment shall become delinquent and
shall be subject to a penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the
delinquent payment.
C. Annual reports. Every person holding a license for the operation of a
manufactured/mobile home park shall submit the form signed and
sworn by the licensee or by his duly authorized agent annually in
conjunction with the annual license fee specified in Subsection B-1
above. Copies of the annual report form shall be filed with and be made
available by the Township Clerk and shall contain spaces for the
following information:
(1) Name and address of licensee and address of manufactured/mobile
home park.
(2) Month and year for which the report is made.
(3) Total number of manufactured/mobile homes registered at the
manufactured/mobile home park.
(4) The number of lots or pads occupied by the manufactured/mobile
homes.
(5) Such other information as the Township Committee may from time
to time require.
D. No violation. No license shall be issued until the Board of Health officer
and the Construction Official shall have certified that they know of no
violation of any law, regulation or ordinance applicable to a
manufactured/mobile home or a manufactured/mobile home park.
A. Procedure. Upon payment of an application fee as provided in Chapter
150, Fees, licenses for the construction and maintenance and operation
of a manufactured/mobile home park in accordance with the application
and related documents and as required by this chapter shall be issued
upon proper application to the Planning Board and to the Township
Committee after consultation by the municipal agencies and officers
§ 213-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 213-6
207:838
hereinafter stated and public hearing if it shall appear that the
proposed manufactured/mobile home park conforms to this chapter
and the design standards herein set forth and upon payment of the
fees herein required, provided that the controlling determination for
issuance shall be the public welfare and general best interest of the
Township and not the timeliness of an application. Once all
requirements as set forth in this chapter are complied with, the
Township Committee may also consider:
(1) The applicant's past performance in the Township or elsewhere.
(2) The applicant's ability to complete the project.
B. Application.
(1) Application for a license to construct or operate and maintain a
manufactured/mobile home park shall be made by filing an
application with the Planning Board of the Township. The applicant
shall submit with such application six copies of a site plan which
shall be an accurate plot plan drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet prepared by a licensed engineer of the State of
New Jersey and showing the following information as a minimum:
(a) The lot and block number, exact acreage and exact dimensions
of the property to be built upon.
(b) Locations and layout of all existing structures, buildings and
roadways on the site and on adjacent properties, but only if the
buildings or roadways are within 200 feet of the site or are
covered by another manufactured/mobile home license held by
the same applicant.
(c) The size, shape and layout of all proposed buildings,
structures, roadways, walkways, parking areas, loading areas,
buffer strips, outdoor lighting fixtures, fences, signs and
landscaping.
(d) The existing and proposed grading of the site shown by
contour lines having a vertical interval of two feet for areas
having slopes of 10% or less and five feet for areas having
slopes greater than 10%.
(e) Existing and proposed natural or artificial drainage facilities
for the disposal of surface stormwater runoff.
(f) Existing or proposed facilities for sewage disposal showing the
location of proposed facilities or the point of connection with
an existing system.
(g) Existing or proposed facilities for the supply of water showing
the location of wells or the point of connection of wells or the
point of connection with an existing public water supply.
§ 213-6 LOITERING § 213-6
207:839
(2) No application for a license hereunder shall be considered by the
Planning Board unless and until the applicant therefor shall
present satisfactory proof of ability to comply with § 213-4, which
consists of an unequivocal agreement between the applicant and
the principals of a publicly approved water or sewer company.
C. Referral. Upon receipt of an application for a manufactured/mobile
home park, the Planning Board shall forward copies of the proposal to
the Township Engineer, the Construction Official, the Township Board
of Health, the Monmouth County Planning Board and the Township
Shade Tree Commission for their consideration. The Planning Board
shall not act in regard to the application until the receipt of reports
from the aforesaid agencies or individuals or unless a thirty-day period
has elapsed after the forwarding of the applications to the agencies and
no report in writing has been received. In the latter event, it shall be
deemed that such person or agency has approved the proposal.
D. Notice. Upon passage of the thirty-day period referred to above, the
Planning Board shall establish a date for a public hearing. Once a date
for the public hearing has been established, the applicant shall send by
certified mail notice of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date
thereof to all owners of land within 200 feet of the area covered by the
site plan including land across a street or streets therefrom as the
names of such owners appear on the most recent Township tax record.
The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing, give a brief
description of the proposed manufactured/mobile home park and state
that a copy of the site plan thereof has been filed with the Planning
Board and is available in the office of the Township Clerk for public
inspection. The Secretary of the Planning Board shall also cause notice
of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper at least 10 days
prior to the hearing. The applicant shall submit an affidavit prior to the
hearing stating that he has notified all property owners within 200 feet,
including owners of property directly across the street or streets and
the property involved. The applicant shall also forward copies of the
notice to the governing body of every municipality any part of the
boundary of which lies within a distance of 1,000 feet from any part of a
manufactured/mobile home park.
E. Review by Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review the
application and the site plan for its overall conformity to the Master
Plan of the Township and for its adequacy in providing for good site
design, particularly such items as ingress and egress, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, location and orientation of buildings,
landscaping and buffer planting, parking areas and other planning
considerations. The Planning Board shall consider in its review the
reports of the other persons and agencies referred to hereinabove and
particularly those pertaining to the adequacy of proposed drainage
facilities, water supply and sewage facilities, paving requirements and
any other engineering requirements.
F. Approval of plan and modification of manufactured/mobile home pads.
§ 213-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 213-6
207:840
(1) The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove the proposed site
plan and application with respect to adequacy of planning
standards for the site. Its approval or reason for disapproval shall
be clearly stated in a written report from the Planning Board to the
applicant and to the Township Committee. If the application and
site plan are approved by the Planning Board, it shall be referred to
the Township Committee for issuance of a license; the Township
Committee shall offer those parties having an interest in the
application to speak at a public hearing called for that purpose.
Issuance of the license will be based upon the standards set forth in
this chapter and upon those considerations provided for in this
chapter. Issuance or denial shall be by formal action of the
Township Committee at a public meeting after interested parties
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
(2) Any installation or modification of an individual manufactured/
mobile home site shall be approved by the Construction Official for
conformance with the design standards within this chapter and
with the New Jersey Manufactured Home Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-3.19, and with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards, as set forth in Part 3280 of Title 24 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, as may be amended.
G. Other requirements.
(1) The applicant shall provide the Township with a written agreement
that he will permit entry to the manufactured/mobile home park at
any time during the day or night of any authorized state, county or
Township police officer or other law enforcement official and by the
Board of Health officer, Construction Official, Zoning Officer or
other official of the Township or any agent designated by resolution
of the Township Committee.
(2) In the event the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the
application shall so state and the person shall deposit with the
Clerk in addition to the fees otherwise required the sum of $1,000
to be held by the Clerk to insure compliance with the terms of this
chapter in regard to license fees which amount shall be returned to
the licensee upon expiration of the license less such sums as may
be found under terms of this chapter.
(3) Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter convey no right to
erect any building, to do any plumbing, electrical or other work
ordinarily requiring separate and different municipal or
governmental permits.
(4) Upon the issuance of a license, the applicant shall post with the
Clerk a cash deposit of $5,000 per license. This deposit shall
guarantee the collection of any fine, forfeiture or fee, including
legal costs upon or levied against the licensee for violations of this
chapter, and is made for the use and benefit of the Township. The
§ 213-6 LOITERING § 213-6
207:841
deposit shall be placed in an interest-bearing account by the
Treasurer, who shall compute the interest thereon annually and
remit same to the licensee. If any fine, forfeiture or fee should
remain delinquent for a period of six months, the deposit referred
to herein may be used to satisfy same.
H. Renewal of licenses. Licenses for the renewal of manufactured/mobile
home park licenses previously issued to an applicant shall be issued
upon consultation by the municipal agencies required in the case of
original applications. Such license shall be issued if it shall appear that
the manufactured/mobile home park conforms to this chapter in all
respects and the design standards herein set forth upon payment of the
fees herein required. Manufactured/mobile home parks predating the
existence of this chapter shall be deemed nonconforming except for the
provisions of § 213-1, the definition of "manufactured/mobile home
park," which shall be complied with as vacancies occur. Application for
a renewal license shall be made by the filing of four copies of a written
application signed by the person seeking a renewal license, which shall
contain the following information and be accompanied by the following
statements, data and maps:
(1) The application shall set forth any change in ownership or interest
in the property by the person making the application.
(2) The application shall set forth any changes in the manufactured/
mobile home park with respect to matters set forth in the prior
application and shall contain all data required with respect to an
original application concerning any such changes unless such
changes have been previously approved.
I. Approval to operate. Manufactured/mobile home parks shall not be
operated by any person until the Township Committee has given formal
approval therefor by issuance of an appropriate license. The license
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where it can
be easily observed. No persons shall operate a manufactured/mobile
home park whose license therefor is suspended.
J. Temporary permits. The Township Committee may issue temporary
permits for the operation of manufactured/mobile home parks
whenever in its judgment such temporary permits are necessary and
proper pending formal and final action upon an application. The permits
may be issued for such periods and upon such terms as the Township
Committee may deem appropriate pending final approval.
K. Inspection. Manufactured/mobile home park buildings and premises
shall be subject to inspection by the Township Committee or its duly
authorized representative.
L. Consult or seal opinion. The Township Committee may consult or seal
the opinion of any other Township board, agency or official when
considering the issuance or renewal of a license.
§ 213-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 213-7
207:842
§ 213-7. Park management.
§ 213-8. Parking outside of park.
A. Park office. In any manufactured/mobile home park there shall be an
office established which may be located either in a manufactured/
mobile home or in a permanent building and which shall be the office of
the person in active charge of the manufactured/mobile home park. A
copy of the park license and a copy of this chapter shall be
conspicuously posted therein, and the park register as hereafter
referred to in this chapter shall be at all times kept in that office.
B. Park register. Each licensee shall maintain a park register which shall
be kept up to date with the following information: the name of each
owner of each manufactured/mobile home or the tenant thereof, the
name of the manufacturer, the model and the serial and /or registration
number of each manufactured/mobile home, the date of arrival of each
manufactured/mobile home and the date of departure of each
manufactured/mobile home. Likewise, a daily and monthly total of the
total number of manufactured/mobile home lots or pads occupied shall
be placed in the register. A copy of the register shall be delivered to the
Clerk of the Township by the 10th day of the month following the end of
the reporting required by § 213-5.
C. Inspection of register. The manufactured/mobile home park owner shall
keep the register available for inspection by Township officials at all
times. The register shall not be destroyed for a period of three years
following the date of registration.
A. Unlawful parking. It shall be unlawful within the limits of the Township
to park any manufactured/mobile home on any street, alley or highway
or other public place or upon any tract of land owned by any person,
occupied or unoccupied, within the Township except as provided within
this chapter.
B. Emergencies. Emergency or temporary stopping of a manufactured/
mobile home is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer
than 24 hours subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations
or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or
ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
C. Private dwellings.
(1) No person shall park or occupy any manufactured/mobile home on
the premises of any occupied dwelling which is situated outside an
improved manufactured/mobile home park. If and in the event an
occupied dwelling shall become temporarily unfit for occupancy
because of a fire or such other disaster, the owner may apply to the
Township Committee for permission to place a manufactured/
mobile home upon the same tract of land for a period not to exceed
six months. Such manufactured/mobile home shall be used as a
§ 213-7 LOITERING § 213-8
207:843
§ 213-9. Pets.
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet shall permit it to
run at large within the limits of any manufactured/mobile home park.
§ 213-10. Maintenance of manufactured/mobile home park.
Manufactured/mobile home parks shall be maintained, by the park owners
and park tenants, as applicable, in accordance with Chapter 245, Property
Maintenance.
§ 213-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall upon conviction be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter
1, Article II, General Penalty. In the event of such conviction, the license
of the licensee may be revoked and no new license for the operation and
maintenance of the manufactured/mobile home park shall be issued for two
months. Each twenty-four-hour period during which a violation continues
shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
residence for the dwelling's former occupants and only while the
dwelling is being reconstructed and/or repaired. The Township
Committee may, at its discretion, grant a three-month extension
on the original permission. Any permission given by the Township
Committee shall be during reconstruction or repair or during the
time that such is being conducted, not contemporaneous with new
or original construction.
(2) The parking of one unoccupied manufactured/mobile home in any
accessory private garage, building or any rear yard is permitted,
provided that no living quarters shall be maintained or any
business practiced in such manufactured/mobile home and
provided further that the parking shall not be in violation of
Chapter 190, Land Use.
D. Construction sites. A manufactured/mobile home may be utilized at a
construction site for temporary office and storage, provided that a
permit is obtained from the Zoning Officer prior to movement of the
manufactured/mobile home onto the site and a manufactured/mobile
home is removed from the site within 30 days after the issuance of the
final certificate of occupancy.
§ 213-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 213-11
207:844
Chapter 217
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 11.
Animals — See Ch. 79.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 224.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 232.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 236.
§ 217-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does
or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.
§ 217-2. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise.
A. Without intending to limit the generality of § 217-1, the following acts
are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noise in violation of this chapter:
(1) Radios; televisions; phonographs. The playing, use or operation of
any radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. so that it is clearly audible at a distance of 100 feet
from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
(2) Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel,
motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
(3) Animals; birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturb the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity, but nothing herein contained is intended
to apply to a dog pound or kennel licensed in accordance with
Chapter 79, Article I, Dogs, of this Code.
§ 213-11 NOISE § 217-2
217:845
§ 217-3. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to:
(4) Horns. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law, or
when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the
vehicle, or as a warning of impending danger to persons driving
other vehicles or to persons on the street. No person shall sound a
horn or warning device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle which emits an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or for an
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
(5) Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of a steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises.
(6) Defect in vehicle or load. The use of an automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair or so loaded that it creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(7) Construction or repair. The carrying on of excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration work other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and the carrying on of
construction, repair or alteration work by a homeowner on his own
dwelling or property other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. In case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public
health or safety, the Director of Public Works may grant a permit
for excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work,
for a period not to exceed three days, by the terms of which permit
such work may be carried on between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(8) Schools; courts; houses of worship; hospitals. The creation of
excessive noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of
learning, house of worship or court while in use or adjacent to a
hospital which unreasonably interferes with the working of the
institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such a
street indicating that it is a school, hospital or court street.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-25]
B. The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
A. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by houses of worship
engaged in house of worship activities. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-25]
B. Activities of municipal departments in the performance of their duties,
drills or public demonstrations.
§ 217-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 217-3
217:846
§ 217-3.1. Engine braking. [Added 11-29-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-36]
§ 217-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 224
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71.
Amusements — See Ch. 75.
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 134.
Loitering — See Ch. 207.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 232.
C. Activities in public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under
permission or authority of municipal officials.
D. The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the open
air, where duly authorized.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use or operate
or cause to be used or operated, at any time and on any road within the
Township of Freehold, any mechanical exhaust or decompression
device also known as “engine braking”. “Engine braking,” as used
herein, shall mean the use or operation of any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking, decompression or deceleration of
any motor vehicle which results in loud or unusual noise from such
vehicle and shall include engine compression brakes.
B. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the practice
of engine braking:
(1) Where conventional vehicle brakes have failed resulting in an
emergency making necessary the use of engine braking; or
(2) By emergency equipment being used for emergency purposes.
C. Posting of signs. The Township is hereby authorized to post at
reasonable locations within the Township signs indicating the
prohibition of engine braking.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties
set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 217-3 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 224-1
224:847
§ 224-1. Purpose.
The Committee does significantly find that far too many minors are
contributing breaches of the public peace, which in significant part is
occasioned by a lack of responsibility on the part of the parents of the
minors. Although the existing statutes do afford a means to alert parents
to their responsibilities to both the minor and society in general, it is
considered the opinion and legislative judgment of the Committee that
further legislation is necessary to encourage greater parental concern and
responsibility and to fill the void where traditional parental control is
inadequate. This chapter, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, is intended to fill this
void.
§ 224-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Includes either or both parents of a minor, the legal guardians
of such minor or any other person having the care or custody of the minor
committing the violation of the public peace. However, the term "parent"
shall not apply to parents, legal guardians or other persons whose custody
and control over such minor has been removed by court order, degree or
judgment or the military service or marriage of such minor.
§ 224-3. Referral to Youth Guidance Council. [Amended 11-25-2003
by Ord. No. O-03-27]
Whenever a minor residing within the Township of Freehold shall have
been adjudged a "delinquent" within the definition of N.J.S.A. 2A:4-44 or
shall have been adjudged a "juvenile in need of supervision" within the
definition of N.J.S.A. 2A:4-45 or whenever a minor, regardless of residency,
shall have been referred to the Adjustment Subcommittee of the Freehold
Township Youth Guidance Council by a Judge of the Juvenile and Domestic
Relations Court, by the police, by a school official, by any other agency
concerned with youth problems, or by other interested persons as a result of
conduct alleged to have taken place within the Township, the parent of such
minor shall appear with the juvenile and cooperate fully with the programs,
policies and instructions of the Adjustment Subcommittee.
§ 224-4. Failure to comply.
The parent of any minor referred to the Adjustment Subcommittee of the
Freehold Township Youth Guidance Council shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter whenever such parent shall fail, without reasonable excuse
for such failure, to comply with the programs, instructions or directions
relating to the parent as prescribed by the Adjustment Subcommittee.
§ 224-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 224-5
224:848
§ 224-5. Violations and penalties.
Any parent who shall violate the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty.
§ 224-6. Other remedies.
The remedy provision of this chapter shall not be exclusive, and the state
or any other person shall have the right to proceed under any other legally
available remedies.
Chapter 228
PARKING LOTS AND DRIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 11.
§ 224-5 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 224-6
224:849

ARTICLE I
Municipal Parking Lots and Drives109
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-79-21 (Ch. 11A of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-97-27]
§ 228-1. Areas subject to control.
This chapter shall apply to any and all areas within the Township set aside
for the parking of motor vehicles and designated by the Freehold Township
Transportation Board as a municipal parking lot.
§ 228-2. Permit required; penalty.
Any person owning or operating a motor vehicle who shall park same in a
designated municipal parking lot without a current permit as provided for
in this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than $50 nor more than
$100.
§ 228-3. Fees. [Amended 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-32]
Municipal parking lot fees:
§ 228-4. Application; display of decal.
Application for parking permits shall be made to the Township Clerk, who
shall collect the appropriate fee and issue a decal to the applicant. The decal
shall be displayed upon the vehicle to which the permit applies in such a
location as shall be designated on the instructions provided by the Clerk.
Failure to display the decal shall be prima facie evidence of violation of
this chapter. No motor vehicles shall be parked in any designated municipal
parking lot without a decal properly issued by the Township Clerk covering
the motor vehicle for the current time.
A. For the first vehicle in any household: $100 per annum.
B. For any vehicle other than the first registered in any household: $100
per annum.
C. For any vehicle owned by a nonresident of the Township $200.
D. For any portion greater than one month of the remainder of the year
following August 1 of that year: 50% of the annual fee.
E. Daily permit: $2 per day.
F. Replacement fee for lost decals: $10.
109. Editor’s Note: This Art. I, Municipal Parking Lots and Drives, was created 4-27-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-7, which ordinance also included §§ 228-1 through 228-7 (formerly included
as Ch. 228, Parking Lots and Drives) in said article.
§ 228-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 228-5
224:851
§ 228-5. Restrictions concerning applications and use of permits;
penalty.
§ 228-6. Parking outside designated areas prohibited; penalty.
Whenever the designated commuter parking area provided by the Township
shall apply to a portion of a parking lot, which designated area shall be
appropriately marked, no motor vehicle displaying a decal issued hereunder
shall be parked outside of the designated commuter parking area. Any
person owning or operating a motor vehicle in violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine not less than $50 nor more than $100.
§ 228-7. Driving through Municipal Plaza prohibited; penalty.
A. The parking permits provided for in this chapter shall only be issued to
bona fide Freehold Township residents. As part of the application
process, the applicant shall certify to such residency and, must present
a current New Jersey driver's license showing the applicant's Township
address. If the resident has moved to the Township within 60 days of
making the application, the Township Clerk may issue a permit for up to
60 days. To renew beyond such temporary period, the resident must
present the driver's license described above.
B. Parking permits are not transferable, nor shall the holder of such a
permit allow anyone, other than his/her spouse or child residing in the
same Freehold Township household, to use the permit on either a
temporary or permanent basis. No one other than an authorized user of
the permit as provided for in the immediately preceding sentence shall
use such parking permit.
C. Parking permits are no longer valid and must be surrendered to the
Township Clerk's office within two weeks of the permit holder changing
his/her residency to a location outside of the Township.
D. Any person found guilty of providing a false certification under
Subsections A and B above or of facilitating the providing of such false
certification shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,250 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. Any person found guilty of
violating any provision of Subsection C above shall be subject to a fine
not less than $50 nor more than $100.
A. The municipal drive known as "Municipal Plaza," located in front of the
Municipal Building and connecting Schanck Road with Still Wells
Corner Road, is hereby designated as not being a through street. No
one shall operate a motor vehicle through Municipal Plaza for any
purpose other than conducting business at one or more of the municipal
buildings comprising the municipal complex. It shall give rise to a
presumption that the operator of a motor vehicle has violated this
section if there is proof that the operator of the motor vehicle drove his
or her vehicle continuously along Municipal Plaza without stopping the
§ 228-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 228-7
224:852
vehicle, exiting it and entering one or more of the buildings comprising
the municipal complex.
B. Signs shall be erected within a reasonable distance of both entrances of
Municipal Plaza advising that it is not a through street.
C. Any person having been convicted of a violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty.
§ 228-7 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 228-7
224:853

ARTICLE II
Public and Quasi-Public Parking Lots
[Adopted 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-7]
§ 228-8. Prohibition of unregistered vehicles in parking yards and
parking places.
Unless authorized by a sworn law enforcement officer, no person shall
operate, park, leave or be in possession of a motor vehicle which is
unregistered or has a suspended registration in any parking yards (lots)
and parking places, which are open to the public or to which the public
is invited, whether owned or maintained by a governmental entity or in
conjunction with any business or enterprise, whether public, quasi-public or
private.
§ 228-9. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 228-10. Removal.
Any police officer is authorized to order the removal of any unregistered
vehicle in violation of this article to a storage space or garage, and the
expense involved in such a removal and storage of the vehicle shall be borne
by the owner of the vehicle, except that the expense shall be borne by the
lessee of a leased vehicle.
§ 228-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-22-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-9]
The violation of this article shall subject the person so convicted, or
pleading guilty, to a fine of $100 for an unregistered vehicle and $175 for a
vehicle which has a suspended registration.
A. Private property to which the public is not invited, such as residential
lots.
B. Motor vehicles which are exempted from registration under Title 39 of
the New Jersey Statutes, such as car dealer inventory.
§ 228-8 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 228-11
224:855
Chapter 232
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 67.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71.
Animals — See Ch. 79.
Curfew — See Ch. 127.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 134.
Firearms — See Ch. 154.
Loitering — See Ch. 207.
Noise — See Ch. 217.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 224.
Sex offender registration — See Ch. 273.
Sports Code of Conduct — See Ch. 295.
§ 232-1. Disorderly conduct. [Amended 1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-2]
All the following named acts shall be deemed disorderly and against the
public peace and order and are hereby prohibited within the Township:
A. Soliciting. Any person who shall, by word, act, sign or any device, invite
or solicit unlawful sexual intercourse or any other unlawful, indecent,
lewd or lascivious act shall be adjudged in violation of this chapter.
B. Common thieves, burglars and pickpockets. Any person who shall be
arrested at any house of worship, banking institution, broker's office,
place of public amusement, auction room, store or crowded
thoroughfare or other place of public resort or assemblage for business,
worship, amusement or other lawful purpose in this Township, and who
shall be proved, to the satisfaction of the judge before whom he shall be
brought, to be a common thief, burglar or pickpocket and to have been
frequenting or attending such place for an unlawful purpose, shall be
adjudged in violation of this chapter.
C. Carrying weapons. Any person who shall be apprehended having upon
him any picklock, key, crow, jack, bit or other implement with intent to
break and enter in any building, or who shall have upon him any pistol,
hanger, cutlass, bludgeon or other offensive or dangerous weapon with
intent to assault any person, or who shall be found in or near any
dwelling house, warehouse, stable, barn or in any place of public resort
or assemblage for business, worship, amusement or other lawful
purpose with intent to steal any goods or chattels, shall be adjudged in
violation of this chapter.
D. Malicious injury to property. Any person who shall maliciously destroy,
damage or injure property may, where the damage does not exceed the
sum of $25, be adjudged in violation of this chapter.
§ 228-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 232-1
224:856
E. Unlawful dumping. Any person, firm or corporation that shall dump on
or tow to open fields or other private property any abandoned
automobile, automobile parts or other junk shall be adjudged in
violation of this chapter.
F. Injuring school property. A person who shall enter the building or go
upon the lands belonging to a public school district or used and
occupied for school purposes by a public school and shall break, injure
or deface such building or any part thereof or the fences or outhouses
belonging to or connected with such building or lands or shall disturb
the exercises of the school or molest or give annoyance to the children
attending such school or any teacher therein shall be adjudged in
violation of this chapter.
G. Damaging or disturbing private property. Any person who shall willfully
cut any tree, shrub or vine upon, or remove any earth, gravel or sand
from, any property belonging to another person in this Township
without his consent, or who shall willfully cause injury or damage to or
destroy any livestock, poultry, cultivated crop, orchard, fence, sign,
signboard, notice or building belonging to any other person while on
such person's land without such person's consent, shall be adjudged in
violation of this chapter.
H. Erecting sign or encroachment. Any person who erects within the limits
of this Township any sign or encroachment of any nature without first
having obtained permission to do so from the Township Committee or
the Board of Chosen Freeholders, as the case may be, shall be adjudged
in violation of this chapter.
I. Damaging property. Any person who shall maliciously destroy, damage
or injure property of another shall be adjudged in violation of this
chapter.
J. Misrepresentation of age. Any person who shall misrepresent or
mistake his or her age or the age of any other person for the purpose of
inducing any licensee or any employee of any licensee to sell, serve or
deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of 21 years
shall be deemed and adjudged in violation of this chapter.
K. Interference with law enforcement officer. Any person who shall
knowingly misstate a fact, incident or event to a law enforcement
officer in the performance of such officer's duty, or who shall otherwise
engage in conduct, unreasonable under the circumstances, which
conduct shall be intended to interfere with or which shall result in the
actual interference with the official duties of a law enforcement officer
shall be adjudged in violation of this chapter.
L. Fighting and other brawling. Any person or persons fighting or
brawling in the Township of Freehold shall be deemed in violation of
this chapter. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-39]
§ 232-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 232-1
224:857
M. Manufacturing, selling, transporting or using fireworks. Any person
who shall manufacture, sell, transport or use fireworks, or permit the
use of fireworks on premises under ones ownership or control, shall be
adjudged in violation of this chapter. "Fireworks," as used herein, shall
include any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation. The manufacturing, selling, using or
transporting of hand-held sparklers shall not be deemed a violation of
this chapter so long as each individual tip, head or igniting point or
surface is thoroughly covered and securely protected from accidental
contact or friction with any other surface. Persons having ownership or
control of premises at which fireworks have been used in violation of
this subsection shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption to having
permitted the use of fireworks on such premises. Such presumption
may be rebutted by submitting evidence that such person took
affirmative action to stop or prevent such use, or was not physically at
or in close proximity to the premises at any time during such use.
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-47]
N. Urinating or defecating in public. Any person who shall urinate or
defecate in a public place or in or on any private place while in public
view shall be adjudged in violation of this chapter. [Added 10-27-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-30]
O. Restrictions on artificial lighting. [Added 4-23-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-14]
(1) No artificial lighting shall:
(a) Shine directly upon any neighboring, adjoining or adjacent
property or be established so that it shines directly upon any
neighboring, adjoining or adjacent property;
(b) Shine directly on or into any room or rooms, porches or patios
of any neighboring, adjoining or adjacent structure or property
so as to be a nuisance;
(c) Be maintained or operated from any structure or land in such a
way as to be a nuisance to any neighboring, adjacent or
adjoining property;
(d) Impair vision through inordinate glare or create a hazard to
any neighboring, adjoining or adjacent property;
(e) Interrupt the reasonable quiet enjoyment, use or comfort of the
occupants of any neighboring, adjoining or adjacent property.
(2) Exterior lighting facing any neighboring, adjoining or adjacent
property shall be shielded so that it does not produce an
objectionable or inordinate glare on any neighboring, adjoining or
adjacent property.
§ 232-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 232-1
224:858
§ 232-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 236
LICENSE FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 75.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Licensing — See Ch. 195.
P. Violations of conditions of development approvals. No person who is in
possession of and/or the operator of property within the Township
which has been the subject of a development application approval as
evidenced by a written resolution of the Planning Board or of the former
Zoning Board of Adjustment, which resolution contains or references
other documents or maps establishing conditions applicable to the
continuing use of the property, shall violate any such conditions. In the
event such conditions are violated, the person in possession or control
of the subject property shall be issued a written notice of such violation.
If such violation is not permanently discontinued or permanently
remedied within 10 days of issuance of the notice of violation, a
municipal summons may issue subjecting any party found guilty to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, §§ 1-3, 1-4, and 1-6 hereof. [Added
8-4-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-14; amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
§ 232-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 232-2
224:859

ARTICLE I
Annual License Fees for Facilities Authorized to Conduct
Amusement Games with Prizes or Awards
[Adopted 8-31-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-18]
§ 236-1. Amusement games licensing fees.
A. Licensing amusement games:
(1) Each amusement game or machine: $195 annually.
(2) Music machines (juke boxes): $65 annually.
B. The maximum annual fee to be paid by the operators of such facilities
shall not exceed the sum of $5,000.
§ 236-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 236-1
224:861
Chapter 240
POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 75.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Licensing — See Ch. 195.
§ 240-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm, association, club or corporation shall maintain,
operate, conduct or pursue the business or occupation of keeping any public
room or place wherein the game commonly known as pool or billiards are
played without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to Chapter
195, Article I, and complying with all provisions of § 240-2.
§ 240-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any religious, charitable, benevolent or
nonprofit association or corporation which operates or maintains up to
three pool or billiard tables solely for the recreation and amusement of its
members for no charge or fee, provided that such organization is bona fide
in character and is not intended as a means or device for avoiding the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-3. Regulations governing operation.
No licensee shall operate, conduct or allow the conducting of the business
of operating a pool or billiard parlor unless complying with each of the
following regulations:
A. Number of tables. No pool or billiard parlor shall have more than 20
pool or billiard tables.
B. Supervision. Each pool or billiard parlor must be supervised on a fulltime
basis from 3:00 p.m. until closing by a uniformed person 21 years
of age or older who is trained in security. There shall be supervision
provided by an adult management attendant during all times that the
parlor is open for business.
C. Persons prohibited. The following persons are prohibited from entering
or remaining within the pool or billiard parlor:
(1) Anyone under the age of 17 years, before the hour of 3:00 p.m. on
any day on which school is in session as established by the Freehold
Regional High School District unless that person is accompanied by
his parent or legal guardian.
§ 236-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 240-3
240:862
(2) Anyone under the influence of or in the possession of any alcoholic
beverage or controlled dangerous substance.
D. Activities prohibited. The following activities are specifically prohibited
within the pool or billiard parlor:110
(1) Gambling or wagering.
(2) Offering or permitting to be offered any prizes or awards whether
in cash or otherwise, as an inducement to using or playing the pool
or billiard tables.
(3) Possessing or use of an alcoholic beverage or any controlled
dangerous substance.
(4) Loitering.
(5) Creating noise disturbing the peace and comfort of those within or
outside the pool or billiard parlor.
(6) Fighting or disorderly conduct.
(7) Any act which would constitute a violation of any law of the State of
New Jersey or of any ordinance of the Township of Freehold.
(8) Blocking or obstructing any exit or passageway leading to an exit.
(9) Permitting the location of a pool or billiard table in an area of the
premises which would prohibit a full view of such table from the
public areas outside the pool or billiard parlor.
(10) Congregating or loitering of four or more persons immediately
outside the licensed premises or in the parking area thereto such
that they disturb the peace and comfort of those in the vicinity.
E. Hours of operation. A pool or billiard parlor shall be operated only
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight if the billiard parlor
is within 1,000 feet of any residential zone. If the pool or billiard parlor
is more than 1,000 feet from any residential zone, then the hours or
operation would be restricted to 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
F. Other uses. No other recreational use shall be allowed to be carried on
within any pool or billiard parlor.
G. Associate or employee. No licensee shall knowingly permit any person
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude to be associated with the
licensee in the ownership or management of the business or to be in his/
her employ.
H. Free unobstructed space. Five feet of free and unobstructed space shall
be maintained around the perimeter of each pool or billiard table,
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 240-3 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 240-3
240:863
§ 240-4. Conduct of others.
No person shall violate any provision of § 240-3.
§ 240-5. Conduct of employees and agents.
No employee, representative, agent or servant of the licensee shall permit
any person to violate any of the provisions of § 240-3.
§ 240-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
exclusive of aisleways and passageways and exclusive of the
unobstructed space to be maintained around every other pool or billiard
table on the premises.
I. Noise. No noise in excess of 65 dba shall emanate from the pool or
billiard parlor into adjoining uses, common areas, parking areas or
other areas outside of the pool or billiard parlor.
J. Unobstructed view. The interior layout of the pool or billiard parlor shall
be designed to allow a full view of each pool or billiard table from the
public areas outside the parlor. The windows and/or doors through
which such view is accommodated shall not be obstructed to prohibit
such view.
K. Spectators. The interior layout of the pool or billiard parlor shall be
designed to allow all spectators to be seated. All those visiting the
parlor and not actively participating in a pool or billiard game shall
remain seated in the area provided for spectators.
L. Conditional use permit. Prior to commencement of business, the
licensee must receive a conditional use permit for the proposed location
pursuant to § 190-208 of Chapter 190, Land Use.
M. Required posting. The licensee shall be required to post the following
within the premises upon which the licensed activity is conducted:
(1) In accordance with § 195-6, a copy of the license.
(2) The regulations set forth in this chapter prominently displayed at
each entrance to the premises and prominently displayed within
the premises such that there is one such posting for every 500
square feet of area. The posting shall be headed "Rules of Conduct"
in bold print designed to attract the attention of those within the
premises.
§ 240-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 240-6
240:864
Chapter 245
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Committee — See Ch. 10, Art. X.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 190, Art. XXI.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 380.
§ 240-6 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 240-6
240:865

ARTICLE I
Removal of Grass, Weeds, Brush and Other Debris
[Adopted 8-8-1966 (§ 6-4 of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. O-95-14]
§ 245-1. Definitions. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-8111]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 245-2. Duties of owners and tenants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any
dwelling or lands in the Township to:
A. Keep all brush, hedges or other plant life, growing within 10 feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a
height of not more than 30 inches where it shall be necessary and
expedient for the preservation of public safety.
B. To keep the lands free of brush, weeds, grass of unreasonable height,
heavily matted cut grass, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, litter, trash and debris, and any solid
waste stored in such a way that it is accessible to and likely to be strewn
about by animals such as but not limited to dogs, cats, raccoons, birds
or rodents, where the same are inimical to the preservation of public
health, safety and general welfare of the Township, or which may
constitute a fire hazard.
C. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed prior to a
scheduled and announced collection and shall not be placed closer than
10 feet to any storm drain inlet. Placement of uncontainerized yard
waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
111. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 245-1 through 245-5 as
§§ 245-2 through 245-5.1, respectively.
§ 245-1 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-2
240:867
§ 245-3. Notice to owners or tenants.
If the reported conditions are found to exist, after an investigation of any
complaint of a resident, officer, or employee of the Township relative to a
violation of this article or upon his own initiative, the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee shall direct that a notice be sent to the owner, tenant
or person in possession of the dwelling or land complained of in writing
either personally or by registered or certified mail to remove such brush,
weeds, grass, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash or other debris within a period not less than 72 hours nor
more than 10 days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if it shall appear to
the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee that a second or subsequent
violation of this article has occurred within a six-month period as to the
same property, the notice requirements of this article shall not be applicable
unless during that six-month period the legal title to the property shall
have changed or possession of same shall have been changed. In such case
involving an alleged second or subsequent violation, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a notification demanding immediate abatement of the
condition and/or issue a summons for the violation of this article without
any further notification.
§ 245-4. Removal by Township, costs to become lien.
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the dwelling or lands in
question shall fail to abate the condition complained of within the time
period specified after receipt of notice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
cause the condition complained of to be abated, either by action of the
Department of Public Works and Automotive Services or by engagement of
an outside contractor, and shall certify the cost to the Township Committee,
which shall examine the certificate and, if it is correct, cause the cost as
shown thereon to be charged against the dwelling or lands. The amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the dwelling or lands and shall
be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
manner is a violation of this article. In the event noncontainerized yard
waste is found in front of any person’s property within the Township,
a rebuttable presumption shall arise that the owner and/or occupant
of the property in front of which said noncontainerized yard waste
is located has improperly disposed of yard waste contrary to the
provisions of this article. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-8;
amended 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-23]
D. Except as allowed by Subsection C above, the owner or occupant of any
property, or any employee or contractor of such owner or occupant
engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping services, shall not sweep,
rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste at any time unless the yard
waste is containerized. If yard waste is not containerized and is placed
in the street, the party responsible for placement of yard waste must
remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in
violation of this article. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-8]
§ 245-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 245-4
240:868
levied upon such dwelling and lands, shall bear interest at the same rate
as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the
same manner as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed
for any violation of this article.
§ 245-5. Open burning.
No person shall burn any brush, weeds, grass, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or debris on any
street in the Township.
§ 245-5.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 245-4 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-5.1
240:869

ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-93-29 (§ 13-3.9A of the Revised General
Ordinances); amended in its entirety 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-4]
§ 245-6. Adoption of standards by reference.
In accordance with the provisions of statute, the International Property
Maintenance Code/2018 (hereafter "Code"), and as may be amended from
time to time hereafter, is hereby adopted as a standard governing the
maintenance of premises within the Township.
§ 245-7. Amendments.
The following provisions of the Code are amended and revised:
A. Section [A] 101.1 Title, (page 1, second line). Insert: Township of
Freehold.
B. Section [A] 103.5. Deleted.
C. Section [A] 106.4 Violation penalties, as set forth in this code is deleted
in its entirety and replaced with the following: Any person who shall
violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Code of the Township of Freehold.
D. Section 107 Notices And Orders, as set forth in this code is deleted in
its entirety and replaced with the following: Whenever the Code Official
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation
has occurred, notice shall be given for the alleged violation to the
person or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. The
notice shall:
(1) Be put in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Include a statement of the violation(s) and reasons why it is being
issued;
(4) Include an order of correction allowing a reasonable time for the
performance of any act it requires;
(5) Include a statement of the Township's right to file a lien in
accordance with Section 106.3;
(6) Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require, provided that notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by
§ 245-6 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-7
240:871
§ 245-8. Copies on file.
A copy of the International Property Maintenance Code has been placed on
file in the office of the Township clerk and will remain there for the use and
examination of the public.
certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by
the notice; or if he is served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this state. The notice may
contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
E. Sections 108, 109, 110, 111, & 112. Deleted.
F. Section 302.4 (page 11, line 2). Insert: 10 inches.
G. Section 304.14 (page 13, line 1 & 2). Insert: May 1 and November 1.
H. Section 404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements, as set forth in
this code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
Every dwelling unit shall contain living room space, dining room space
(or combined living/dining room space), bedroom space and kitchen
space, and the number of occupants of every dwelling unit shall be
limited based on the square footage and maximum occupancy
limitations set forth in this chapter, including Table 404.5. Every room
occupied for sleeping purposes in a dwelling unit shall be classified as a
bedroom and shall not be used to satisfy the living room or dining room
requirements of Table 404.5.
I. Section 404.4.1 Room Area, as set forth in this code is deleted in its
entirety and replaced with the following: Every living room shall
contain not less than 120 square feet and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 100 square
feet of floor area; every room occupied for sleeping purposes by two
occupants shall contain at least 130 square feet of floor area; every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by three occupants shall contain
at least 160 square feet of floor area; and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by four occupants shall contain at least 250 square
feet. No bedroom space shall be used by more than four occupants.
J. Section 404.5 Overcrowding as set forth in this code is deleted in its
entirety and replaced with the following: Occupancy of every dwelling
unit is limited to the maximum permitted by the bedroom space.
K. Section 602.3 (page 23, fifth line) Heat Supply. Insert: October 1 and
June 1.
L. Section 602.4 (page 23, third line) Occupiable work spaces. Insert:
October 1 and June 1.
§ 245-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 245-9
240:872
§ 245-9. Conflict with other provisions.
To the extent any provision of the International Property Maintenance Code
is inconsistent with any other provision of the Code of the Township of
Freehold, the more stringent provision shall be applicable.
§ 245-9 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-9
240:873

ARTICLE III
Certificate of Occupancy for Commercial Buildings
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-93-29 (§ 13-3.9B of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 245-10. Certificate of occupancy required.
No agent of an owner, real estate broker, firm, company, partnership,
corporation or person shall rent, re-rent, lease, re-lease, sell, resell, or
suffer to allow any person or persons to occupy as a tenant or otherwise
any commercially used building where there shall be a change of occupancy,
unless a certificate of occupancy certifying that said building is fit for
human occupation and that said building is in compliance with the Property
Maintenance Code and all other ordinances of the Township, shall first
be obtained from the Code Administrator. Such a certificate of occupancy
shall be granted or denied within 10 days from the date of the application
for same. The Code Administrator shall cause to be prepared appropriate
application forms for such certificate of occupancy, which form shall be
available to the applicant at the office of the Code Administrator.
§ 245-11. Fees.
The charges to cover the cost of administration in connection with said
application shall be paid at the time of application, shall be nonrefundable
and are as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 245-12. Period of validity. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-8]
A certificate of occupancy issued hereunder for the rental of a property
shall be valid for a period not to exceed 60 calendar days from the date
of issuance or until there occurs a change in occupancy, whichever occurs
first. A certificate of occupancy issued hereunder for the resale of a
property shall be valid for a period not to exceed 120 calendar days from
the date of issuance or until there occurs a change of occupancy, whichever
first occurs.
§ 245-13. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 245-10 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-13
240:875

ARTICLE IV
Vacant Buildings
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-01-2 (§ 13-3.10 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 245-14. Storage of certain items prohibited.
All owners of unoccupied or vacant buildings shall comply with the
applicable provisions of the New Jersey Fire Safety Code N.J.A.C. 5:70 et
seq. and any local ordinances and the following additional standards for
safety from fire:
§ 245-15. Boarding up of windows and doors.
In order to promote the early detection and containment of fire, the
boarding up of windows and doors shall not be permitted except with the
permission of the Township Construction Official in emergency situations.
When the windows and doors are allowed to be boarded up, they shall
be covered with no less than 1/2 inch exterior plywood or equivalent and
be painted the same color as the body of the building. In no case shall
boarding up of windows or doors be permitted in excess of six months,
except pursuant to an extension granted as outlined below. Should an owner
find it necessary to board up windows and doors in excess of six months, a
written appeal seeking permission to do so must be filed with the Township
Construction Official at least 14 days prior to the expiration of the initial
six month period. At the time of such appeal, all circumstances shall be set
forth in a written affidavit supporting the owner's request for an extension
of the board-up. Based upon the information set forth in the affidavit,
such other circumstances regarding the property as may be revealed from
an inspection of it, and any other relevant information or circumstances
of which the Township Construction Official may be aware, bearing upon
the request, the Construction Official shall make a determination whether
or not to grant the extension request. Such determination shall set forth
the factors considered and the reasons for the decision. The written
determination shall be sent by regular mail or personal delivery to the
owner. The determination of the Township Construction Official shall be
final unless reversed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 245-16. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
A. No unoccupied or vacant building shall contain any space utilized for
the storage of flammable liquids.
B. No room within any vacant or unoccupied building shall be used for
storage of junk, rubbish or wastes, furniture or building materials not
intended to be used in the existing building.
§ 245-14 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-16
240:877

ARTICLE V
Preventive Maintenance
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-01-23 (§ 13-3A of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 245-17. Findings.
Recognizing the need for preventive maintenance to insure the continued
useful life of certain existing structures, the governing body of the Township
hereby declares that code enforcement in relation to identified structures is
a high municipal priority.
§ 245-18. Definitions. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted
to permanent or continuous occupancy or use for public, institutional,
residence, business or storage purposes.
IDENTIFIED STRUCTURE — A building or structure (as those terms are
defined in this section) which:
STRUCTURE — Combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable,
forming a construction, including buildings.
§ 245-19. Deterioration and service of notice of violation.
In the event that any identified structure deteriorates to the point that, in
the best estimate of the Municipal Construction Code Official, the cost of
correcting the outstanding code violations equals more than 15% of the
cost of replacing the entire improvement on which the violations occur, the
Construction Code Official shall serve personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a notice on the owner of the identified structure listing
the violations, the estimate for their abatement, the replacement cost of the
improvement and stating if the owner does not take all necessary remedial
action within 90 days, or such extensions of time as the Construction Code
Official shall for good cause grant, the municipality may at the expiration
of the ninety-day period, enter upon the property in question, abate the
violations itself and cause the cost thereof to become a lien on the property
or to reimburse itself from any performance guaranty posted for such
purpose.
Pursuant to § 190-232 of Chapter 190, Land Use, of the Code of the
Township of Freehold is an historic landmark, site of historic interest or
located within an historic district; or
A.
Is identified by the Planning Board, during the development approval
process, as being worthy of maintenance and/or restoration.
B.
§ 245-17 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-20
240:879
§ 245-20. Request for hearing by property owner.
Upon receipt of such notice from the Municipal Construction Code Official,
the owner may, within 10 days after such a receipt, notify the Construction
Code Official of his/her wish to have a hearing as to the allegations and
estimates set forth in the Construction Code Official's notice. Such hearing
shall be conducted by the Planning Board if the object of the hearing is an
identified structure pursuant to Subsection B of the definition of "identified
structure" in § 245-18 or, in all other cases, by the Historic Preservation
Commission. The hearing shall, so far as possible, be a formal adversary
proceeding in which the Construction Code Official shall establish the
matters alleged in the notice by a preponderance of the evidence. If the
owner does not request a hearing, the procedures set forth in § 245-19
in this article shall pertain. If a hearing is requested, the Construction
Code Official will, within 10 days following the hearing, serve on the owner
the written opinion of the Planning Board or the Historic Preservation
Commission, as the case may be, setting forth the conclusions and the
reasons therefor.
§ 245-21. Violation abatement by Township.
A. Thereafter, if the owner of the identified structure does not comply, the
Construction Code Official may enter into the premises and, by use of
municipal labor or outside contractors or both, perform such work as is
necessary to abate all violations.
B. The Construction Code Official shall then certify to the Township
Committee the cost of such work, plus all administrative, clerical and
legal costs and overhead attributable thereto and shall present same to
the Township Committee.
C. The Township Committee may, by resolution, vote to cause the sum so
certified to become a lien upon the property in question, payable with
the next quarter's property taxes and, if not paid, bearing interest at the
same rate as delinquent taxes.
§ 245-20 FREEHOLD CODE § 245-21
240:880
ARTICLE VI
Care, Maintenance, Security and Upkeep of Certain Residential
Properties
[Adopted 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-17]
§ 245-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN-STATE REPRESENTATIVE — A representative or agent with an address
in the State of New Jersey who is responsible for receiving complaints
of property maintenance and code violations on behalf of an out-of-state
creditor.
OUT-OF-STATE CREDITOR — A holder of a mortgage on residential
property within Freehold Township, whose mailing address is not located
within the State of New Jersey.
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY —
An unoccupied residential property within Freehold Township with at
least two of the following conditions:
(1) Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
(2)
(3) Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances
or materials on the property;
(4)
(5) The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or
shutters;
(6)
(7) The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, delivery persons, or government
employees indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
(8)
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or
closed off or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and
unrepaired;
(9)
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off,
unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
(10)
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism,
loitering, criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or
deterioration of the property;
(11)
A.
§ 245-22 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-22
240:881
§ 245-23. Duty of creditors.
Any creditor who has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within Freehold Township that was, or
since the time of filing has become, a vacant and abandoned residential
property, shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and
upkeep of the exterior of the property according to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 245-24. Representatives for out-of-state creditors.
An out-of-state creditor who has filed a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a residential property within Freehold Township must
appoint an in-state representative. The out-of-state creditor shall include
the full name and contact information of an in-state representative in the
notice of summons and complaint sent to the Township Clerk pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(a).
§ 245-25. Notice to violating creditors.
Upon the Township Code Enforcement Officer's determination that a
creditor has violated § 245-23, the Zoning Officer shall issue a notice to the
creditor informing the creditor of any and all such violations, and requiring
the creditor to correct all violations within 30 days of receipt of the notice,
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or
similar code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal
authorities declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to
remain vacant and unoccupied;
(12)
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized
the property due to the property being deemed vacant and
unprotected or in danger of freezing;
(13)
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
(14)
(15)Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a residential property shall not be
considered "vacant and abandoned" if, on the property:
There is an unoccupied building which is undergoing construction,
renovation, or rehabilitation that is proceeding diligently to
completion, and the building is in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, codes, regulations, and statutes;
(1)
There is a building occupied on a seasonal basis, but otherwise
secure; or
(2)
There is a building that is secure, but is the subject of a probate
action, action to quiet title, or other ownership dispute.
(3)
B.
§ 245-22 FREEHOLD CODE § 245-25
240:882
or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an
imminent threat to public health and safety. The determination of whether
a violation presents an imminent threat to public health and safety shall be
made by the Township Health Officer, Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 245-26. Violations and penalties.
§ 245-27. Violation abatement by Township.
A. Any creditor, whether an out-of-state creditor or a creditor located
within the state, who violates the duty of creditors set out in § 245-23
shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of such violation. Any
such fine shall commence 31 days following receipt of the notice set
forth in § 245-25, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to
public health and safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11
days following receipt of the notice.
B. An out-of-state creditor shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day
of a violation of failure to advise the Township Clerk of its in-state
representatives as required by § 245-24. Any such fine shall commence
on the day after the ten-day period set forth in N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(a)(1)
for providing notice to the Township Clerk that a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
C. At least 20% of any money collected pursuant to this article shall be
utilized for municipal Code enforcement purposes.
A. If a creditor does not comply with the notice issued pursuant to
§ 245-25, the Construction Code Official may enter into the premises
and, by use of municipal labor or outside contractors or both, perform
such work as is necessary to abate all violations.
B. The Construction Code Official shall then certify to the Township
Committee the cost of such work, plus all administrative, clerical and
legal costs and overhead attributable thereto and shall present same to
the Township Committee.
C. The Township Committee may, by resolution, vote to cause the sum so
certified to become a lien upon the property in question, payable with
the next quarter's property taxes and, if not paid, bearing interest at the
same rate as delinquent taxes.
§ 245-25 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 245-27
240:883
Chapter 249
PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO
§ 249-1. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of this Township to recognize
the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open Public Records Act
(N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.). All records kept in the course of official duties
by any Township officer or employee shall be deemed to be "government
records," as that term is defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, and such records
shall be subject to inspection by the public unless exempt under the statute
or other regulation, common law practice, executive order of the Governor,
Rules of Court, federal law or judicial decision.
§ 249-2. Custodian of records; records request form.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Municipal Clerk is designated as
the custodian of records. The Clerk shall adopt a form for the use of any
person who requests access to a record, and such form shall contain all of
the information required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(f).
§ 249-3. Inspection and copying of public records.
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this
municipality shall make application in writing to the Municipal Clerk,
during regular business hours, on the form provided. All requests for
public records shall be as specific as possible, including the type of
record and date created, if known.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall promptly comply with a request to inspect,
examine, copy or provide a copy of a government record. If the Clerk is
unable to comply with a request for access, he or she shall indicate on
the request form the specific basis for such inability to comply and shall
promptly return it to the requestor. The Clerk shall sign and date the
form and provide the requestor with a copy thereof.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself
leads the Municipal Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a
"government record" as defined by law or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the Clerk shall request an opinion from the Municipal
Attorney. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded to the Attorney,
who, after review and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note
such opinion on the request form and promptly return it to the
Municipal Clerk.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Clerk shall delete, redact or excise from a
copy of the record that portion which is exempt from access and shall
promptly permit access to the remainder of the record.
§ 245-27 FREEHOLD CODE § 249-3
249:884
§ 249-4. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation
or executive order, the Clerk shall grant access to a government record or
deny a request for access to a record as soon as possible, but not later than
seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event that the
Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after receiving a request,
the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number,
or other means of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected
not to provide a name, address, or telephone number, or other means of
contacting the requestor, the Clerk shall not be required to respond until
the requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a response to the
original request. If the government record is in storage or archived, the
requestor shall be so advised within seven business days after the Clerk
receives the request. The requestor shall be advised by the Clerk when the
record can be made available. If the record is not made available by that
time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 249-5. Posting of appeals procedure.
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's
office, a statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the
right to appeal a denial of or failure to provide access to a government
record and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
§ 249-6. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
E. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
in storage, the Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to make a copy of the record available.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record
after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the requestor that
accommodates the interests of the requestor and the municipality.
G. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for
access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations agreements and individual employment contracts), and
public salary and overtime information.
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
Municipal Clerk or his or her authorized representative at all times.
Under no circumstances shall any government record be removed from
the office where it is normally kept unless accompanied by the
custodian or his or her authorized representative.
§ 249-3 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 249-6
249:885
§ 249-7. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public
records.
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates in Chapter 150,
Fees, the actual cost shall be imposed.
Chapter 253
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 290.
§ 253-1. Mandatory recycling program.
B. In the event that the nature of a request to view records requires that
the Clerk or other municipal employee observe or monitor such viewing
for a period of time exceeding 0.5 hour, the requestor shall be
responsible for reimbursing the municipality for time spent by the Clerk
or other employee.
A. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and
occupants of residential property to separate recyclable material from
all other solid waste produced by such residence, including leaves,
glass bottles and jars, tin and bimetal cans, pourable plastic containers
(Nos. 1 and 2), aluminum beverage containers, corrugated cardboard,
clean mixed paper and newspapers as hereafter defined and any other
materials as mandated by the Monmouth County Solid Waste
Management Plan for collection and ultimate recycling of said materials
as set forth in § 253-4 of this chapter. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-2]
B. It shall be mandatory for all owners, schools, lessees and occupants of
business and industrial property and of private, public and
governmental institutions and buildings to separate recyclable material
from all other solid waste produced by said nonresidential
establishments, including leaves, glass bottles and jars, aluminum
beverage containers, corrugated cardboard, clean mixed paper,
newspapers, tin and bimetal cans, pourable plastic containers (Nos. 1
and 2) and any other materials as mandated by the Monmouth County
Solid Waste Management Plan for collection and the ultimate recycling
of said material as set forth in § 253-4 of this chapter. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
§ 249-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 253-1
249:886
§ 253-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated. Any term not defined below shall be given its regular and normal
meaning.
ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CONTAINER — Includes aluminum containers
used for soda, beer or other beverages.
C. On and after October 1, 1988, no one shall be permitted to place any
demolition materials with other solid waste for landfill disposal.
D. As of January 1, 2011, pursuant to the New Jersey Electronics Waste
Management Act,112 no one shall be permitted to place computers,
computer monitors and related hardware, as well as analog or digital
televisions with other solid waste for landfill disposal. [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2113]
E. On and after the adoption of this chapter, and in accordance with
existing state regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, oil
retailers and motor vehicle reinspection stations with used oil holding
tanks shall accept up to five gallons at a time of used motor oil from
individuals changing oil from cars, lawn mowers or motorcycles and
shall post a sign informing the public that they are a "Used Oil
Collection Site."
F. Grass clippings, white goods, rechargeable batteries, vehicle batteries,
and asphalt shingles shall not be disposed with mixed household or
commercial trash. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
G. Residents, businesses and institutions shall use only those recycling
haulers and/or facilities registered with Monmouth County. Failure to
comply with this requirement may result in the issuance of fines in
accordance with § 253-9 of this chapter.
H. Businesses, institutions and multifamily housing complexes not served
by the municipal recycling collection program shall arrange for proper
separation, collection and disposition of mandated recyclables and shall
provide the Municipal Recycling Coordinator with the name and
address of the company providing solid waste and recycling collection
services. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
I. Businesses or institutions hauling their own recyclables shall provide
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator with quarterly reports on the
quantity and destination of recyclables.
J. All applicants seeking construction or demolition permits shall identify
all disposal and recycling arrangements. All applicants shall provide
records documenting the quantity and disposition of all materials.
112. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.94 et seq.
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through I as
Subsections E through J, respectively.
§ 253-1 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 253-2
249:887
CLEAN MIXED PAPER — Includes the white and/or off-white stationery,
photocopy and computer paper, magazines, periodicals, soft cover books
and paperbacks, used envelopes, junk mail and chipboard (cereal
boxes).[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Includes cardboard of the type used to
make cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and
draft paper material.
DEMOLITION MATERIAL /BULKY RECYCLABLES — Includes all asphalt,
concrete, tree stumps, brush, land clearing debris, pallets, waste lumber
and other materials generated from construction and demolition projects,
scrap metal, metal appliances or other bulk material, items larger than one
cubic foot and/or five pounds.[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
GLASS — Includes all products made from silica or sand, soda ash and
limestone, the product being transparent or translucent and being used for
packaging or bottling of various matters, excluding, however, blue or flat
glass commonly known as "window glass."
NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and inserts that come with the paper.[Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-2]
PLASTIC CONTAINER (Nos. 1 and 2) — Containers made of Class 1 or 2
polyethylene teraphthalate and bearing the symbol for PET Class 1 or 2
plastics.[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally produced
by the occupants of commercial, industrial and residential property and
disposed of by private or public pickup.
TIN AND BIMETAL CANS — Includes all disposable items made of tin, steel,
or a combination of metals, including containers commonly used for the
storage of food products.
WHITE GOODS — Includes refrigerators, freezers, air-conditioning units,
humidifiers, and other appliances containing CFCs or HCFCs, ranges,
stoves, dishwashers, washing machines, clothes dryers, hot-water heaters,
and similar large household appliances.
§ 253-3. Municipal Recycling Coordinator. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-2]
A. The position of Municipal Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and
established within the Township of Freehold.
B. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the
Township Administrator pursuant to the Civil Service Laws of New
Jersey and in accordance with the Monmouth County Solid Waste
Management Plan.
§ 253-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 253-4
249:888
§ 253-4. Rules and regulations. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-2]
The Township Committee, or the Municipal Recycling Coordinator subject
to the approval of the Township Committee, shall establish and promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations as to the manner, days and times for
collection, sorting, transportation, sale and/or marketing of said recyclable
material in order to encourage the preservation of material resources while
minimizing the cost of the recycling program to the Township of Freehold.
The rules and regulations provided for hereunder shall be adopted by
resolution of the Township Committee. Copies shall be maintained in the
office of the Township Clerk and be available for inspection and/or
purchase. No later than November 30 of each year, the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator shall submit a certified copy of the current rules and
regulations as well as a certified copy of this chapter to the Monmouth
County Recycling Coordinator for review and comment by county planning
and enforcement staff.
§ 253-5. Collection by authorized persons.
§ 253-6. Ownership of recyclable material; collection by
unauthorized persons.
§ 253-7. Direct disposal. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person, partnership or
corporation who or which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a residential
or nonresidential property may donate or sell said recyclable material as
defined herein to any person, partnership or corporation whether or not
operating for profit. Said person, partnership or corporation, however, shall
A. The Township Committee may use municipal personnel to collect
residential recyclable material set forth herein at curbside and/or from
a dropoff center and shall sell said recyclable material if a market exists
therefor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
B. The Township Committee may elect to enter into agreements with any
person, partnership, corporation, or municipality authorizing him or it
to collect said recyclable material at curbside or from a dropoff center
and to sell said recyclable material.
A. Recyclable material as defined herein shall be the property of the
Township of Freehold once placed on the curbside or brought to a
dropoff center.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person unauthorized by the
Township of Freehold to pick up or cause to be picked up said
recyclable material as defined herein. Each such collection in violation
hereof shall constitute a separate distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
§ 253-4 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 253-7
249:889
not pick up said recyclable materials at curbside or at a municipal dropoff
center. Any person or entity using a direct disposal method, and any person,
partnership or corporation engaging in the business of direct disposal, shall,
on a quarterly basis, report the weight of each recyclable material disposed
of or collected to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator so that accurate
reports can be filed by the Township with the County of Monmouth and
State of New Jersey.
§ 253-8. Enforcement. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-2]
A summons alleging a violation of this chapter may be issued by the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the Monmouth County Health
Department and any other official or employee of the Township of Freehold
by any law enforcement officer or by any civilian, provided that the
summons is issued pursuant to the rules of court.
§ 253-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or neglects to comply
with any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof, as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 257
RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rent control — See Ch. 261.
§ 257-1. Purpose. [Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the authority granted to
municipalities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12b et. seq. and N.J.S.A. 46:8-28
in order to ensure that residential rental units are properly maintained
in accordance with the property maintenance and related codes as well
as to protect the property and the health, safety and welfare of Township
residents. To this end, this chapter shall be liberally construed to assure the
provision of decent and safe units of dwelling space.
§ 257-2. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
§ 253-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 257-2
249:890
owner by this chapter. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesperson of the State of New Jersey as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed real
estate broker or salesperson of the State of New Jersey if such person is
designated by the owner as the owner's agent.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Two or more buildings, each containing two or
more apartments, which are located within close proximity of each other
and are owned by the same owner.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, bungalow, cooperative
cottage or any room or rooms in a rooming/boardinghouse or in any other
dwelling unit consisting of one or more rooms occupying all or part of a
floor or floors in a building, whether designed with or without housekeeping
facilities for dwelling purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment
be designed for residence, for office, or the operation of any industry or
business, or for any other type of independent use.
DEFICIENCY — One or more nuisances, defects or other condition(s) of
the premises not in compliance with the requirements of any Township
ordinance or state law applicable to it.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-2]
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, trust or other entity, who owns, operates, exercises control over
or is in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
PREMISES — Any rental unit, rental facility, apartment or dwelling subject
to this chapter.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings, or a portion
thereof which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a
place where living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or
unfurnished, for pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals and
is meant to include apartments and apartment complexes.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is available, or kept, or used,
or maintained, or advertised or held out to be a place where living
accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for pay
or other consideration, to one or more individuals (excluding the owners
parents and/or children) and including but not limited to one-family homes,
two-family homes, three-family homes, etc., as well as individual apartments
located within apartment complexes.[Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
O-19-7]
ZONING OFFICIAL/LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY — The Zoning Official of
the Township of Freehold.
§ 257-2 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 257-3
249:891
§ 257-3. Registration. [Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
Each and every rental unit shall hereafter be registered annually with the
Township Clerk on forms which shall be provided for that purpose and
which shall be obtained from the office of the Township Clerk. The initial
registration shall occur within 90 days following the final adoption of this
chapter. Such registration shall be renewed and amended annually, as well
as within 20 days of each change of ownership or occupancy of any rental
unit. No rental unit shall hereafter be rented unless the rental unit is
registered in accordance with this chapter. This registration does not mean
approval for the use and occupancy. A certificate of occupancy is required
for each unit, as well as a continued certificate of occupancy upon a change
of occupancy of a unit.
§ 257-4. Contents of registration form.
A. Every owner of a rental unit shall file annually with the Township Clerk
a registration form for each unit contained within a building or
structure which shall include the following information: [Amended
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
(1) The name and address of each record owner or owners of the
premises and each record owner or owners of the rental business if
not the same persons. In the case of a partnership the names and
address of all general partners shall be provided, together with the
telephone numbers for each of such individuals indicating where
such individuals may be reached both during the day and evening
hours. If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address
of the registered agent and all corporate officers of said
corporation, shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals indicating where such
individuals may be reached both during the day and the evening
hours.
(2) If the address of any record owner is not located in Freehold
Township, the name and address of a person who resides in
Monmouth County who is authorized to accept notices from a
tenant or a Township representative and to issue receipts therefor
and to accept service of process on behalf of the record owner.
(3) The name and address and telephone numbers of the agent of the
premises indicating where such individuals may be reached both
during the day and evening hours.
(4) The name and address and telephone numbers, including the
dwelling unit number of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or
other individual employed by the owner or agent to provide regular
maintenance service, if any. For each such individual, a statement
as to where such individual may be reached both during the day
and evening hours shall be provided.
§ 257-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 257-4
249:892
§ 257-5. Filing and indexing of registration form. [Amended
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
The Township Clerk shall annually file with the Zoning Official/Local
Enforcing Agency a copy of the registration form. The information as to the
names of the tenants of record and occupants, which information shall be
kept in a confidential file in the office of the Zoning Official/Local Enforcing
Agency. The Township Clerk shall index and file the registration forms.
In doing so the Township Clerk or designee shall follow the mandates of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1 as amended and supplemented so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements
of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property being
registered and will also satisfy the registration requirements of this chapter.
(5) The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent may be reached or contacted
at any time in the event of any emergency affecting the premises or
any unit of dwelling space therein, including such emergencies as
the failure of any essential service or system, and who has the
authority to make emergency decisions concerning the building
and any repair thereto or expenditure in connection therewith.
(6) The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on
the premises.
(7) If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the
heat in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer
servicing the building and the grade of fuel oil used.
(8) As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of
sleeping rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the
requirement of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan
outlining and identifying each room in the unit, including the
dimensions and floor location of each room, which shall become
part of the application and which shall be attached to the
registration form when filed with the Township Clerk.
(9) Such other information as may be required by the Township.
(10) The name, age and gender, including children, of every tenant of
record as to each rental unit. A copy of the most recent continuing
certificate of occupancy shall be attached. The information
contained in the registration form must set forth information for
each rental unit within the rental property and must include all
tenants in each rental unit. This information shall be made
available to the Board of Education and the Zoning Official/Local
Enforcing Agency. This information shall otherwise remain
confidential and shall not be available to the public.
B. All addresses must include the full accurate street address; P.O. box and
like information does not satisfy this requirement.
§ 257-4 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 257-6
249:893
§ 257-6. Amended registration form. [Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-2; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-7]
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this chapter
shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in
the information required to be included thereon at no additional fee. Each
person is required to file an updated registration form each year. Fees are
as set forth in § 150-22.
§ 257-7. Inspections.
§ 257-8. Access for inspections; repairs; complaints.
A. Rental units shall be inspected by persons or agencies duly authorized
by the Township for inspections. Such inspection(s) shall be for the
purpose of determining compliance with Chapter 190, Land Use, and to
the extent applicable, to determine if the rental facility complies with all
laws, including the Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 245, Article
II), Uniform Construction Code (Chapter 115), Health Code, Housing
Code (Chapter 182) and Fire Code (Chapter 162, Article II).
B. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental unit does not result in a
satisfactory inspection, the owner or agent shall cause all necessary
repairs or corrections to be made within the time prescribed by the
applicable code, and if not made within that time period, the owner
shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and every day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
subject to the penalty provisions of § 257-18 of this chapter. [Amended
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
A. All rental facilities, rental units, rooming houses and boardinghouses
subject to this chapter are subject to inspections to determine their
condition in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants of such rental facilities, rental units, rooming houses and
boardinghouses and of the general public. At the time of such
inspections, all rooms in the rental facilities, rental units, rooming
houses and boardinghouses shall be available and accessible for such
inspections, and the owner, operator and occupant are required to
provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such
inspections shall be made between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. with the
consent of the occupant, who is of legal age to grant such consent, or
with an administrative warrant, unless there is reason to believe that a
violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or
safety, requiring inspection and abatement without delay or where the
time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would
render ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate the
condition. Inspection officers shall make reasonable attempts to obtain
consent of the occupant prior to application for an administrative
warrant.
§ 257-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 257-8
249:894
§ 257-9. Identification and conduct of inspection officers.
Inspection officers shall be supplied with official identification and shall
exhibit such identification when entering any rental facility, rental unit,
rooming house and boardinghouse or any part of any premises subject to
this chapter. Inspectors shall conduct themselves so as to avoid intentional
embarrassment or inconvenience to occupants.
§ 257-10. Refusal of entry for Inspection; use of search warrants.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental unit,
rooming house and boardinghouse access to any part of such rental
facility, rental unit, rooming house and boardinghouse in compliance
with any prior arrangements for such action the tenant and owner
established including provision of any lease entered into by the parties.
Should the parties not have a written lease, prior agreement regarding
such course of action or any written lease is silent regarding such
measure, then the tenant shall provide access at all reasonable times
for the purpose of making such repairs and alteration as are necessary
to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any lawful
order issued pursuant thereto.
C. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported violation of
this chapter, an inspecting officer shall, as time and resources allow,
conduct an inspection as hereinbefore provided. [Amended
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
A. The inspection officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Township for a search warrant, setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
chapter may exist on the premises, including one or more of the
following:
(1) The premises require inspection according to the cycle established
by the Township for periodic inspections of premises of the type
involved.
(2) Observation of the external condition of the premises and its public
areas has resulted in the belief that violations of this chapter exist.
(3) Circumstances such as age of building, type of building, particular
use of premises or other factors make systematic inspections of
such building necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
B. If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in such affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a
search warrant permitting access to an inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. Warrant for
access may be issued by the Judge of the Municipal Court upon affidavit
§ 257-8 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 257-10
249:895
§ 257-11. Occupancy of unregistered premises prohibited.
No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit
occupancy of any rental unit within the Township of Freehold, unless the
rental unit is registered in accordance with this chapter.
§ 257-12. Fees. [Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2; 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. O-19-7]
At the time of the filing of the first registration form the owner or agent
of the owner must pay the registration fee as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees. If the owner of the property resides on the same block and lot as the
rental unit, or is a senior citizen (age 65 years or older) who resides in a
unit of the property and rents out the remaining units and would otherwise
qualify under the State of New Jersey property tax deductions under N.J.S.A.
54:4-8.41, or is designated as a nonprofit organization and qualifies as a
501(c)3 under IRS regulations, there shall be no fee. However, this waiver
does not absolve the annual requirements for registration. After the initial
registration, there shall be no fee for an amended registration regarding
a change of occupancy; nor shall there be a registration fee for a change
of unit ownership, provided that the annual rental registration renewal has
been satisfied for the current year as set forth in Chapter 150. Every person
is required to file an updated registration form each year.
§ 257-13. Registration form to be provided to occupants and
tenants.
Every owner shall provide such occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the registration form required by this chapter. This particular
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel, or guest house registered with
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 257-14. Posting of maximum allowable number of occupants.
[Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
of the inspections officer establishing grounds therefor pursuant to
§ 257-8.
C. Where the inspection officer or his agent, in possession of an
administrative warrant, is refused entry or access or is otherwise
impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from
conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties hereunder.
A. The maximum number of occupants shall be posted by the owner in
each rental unit in a conspicuous area within the rental unit, on a form
to be provided by the Township. It shall be unlawful for any person,
including the owner, agent or tenant, to allow a greater number of
persons than the posted maximum number of occupants to sleep or
§ 257-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 257-14
249:896
§ 257-15. Occupancy standards.
§ 257-16. Service of notice. [Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2114]
In the event that there is any deficiency in the condition of a rental unit
subject to this chapter, the Zoning Official/Local Enforcing Agency may
provide notice to the owner, the lessor or the agent by personal service or
by certified mail, return receipt requested. In the event the owner or lessor
has failed to register the rental unit under this chapter, or has designated
an agent which cannot be found at the address given in any registration,
adequate service shall be by posting it upon the premises in a conspicuous
place.
§ 257-17. Abatement of deficiency; correction by Township; lien
upon premises; appointment of custodian. [Added 2-21-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-2]
In the event, after notice to correct a deficiency, the Zoning Official/Local
Enforcing Agency gets no response after a reasonable time, or the
occupy the rental unit. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of § 257-18 of this chapter.
B. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the Township as
required in this chapter may reside in the registered premises. It shall
be unlawful for any other person to reside in said premises and any
person, including the owner, agent or the tenant allowing a
nonregistered party to reside in said premises shall be in violation of
this section and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 257-18 of
this chapter.
A. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the Zoning Official/
Local Enforcing Agency as provided in this chapter may reside in the
registered premises. It shall be unlawful for any other person to reside
in said premises, and this provision may be enforced against the
landlord, tenant, or other person residing in said premises.
B. No rental facility shall be conducted or maintained in a manner to
constitute a nuisance.
C. The maintenance of all rental facilities and the conduct engaged in
upon the premises by occupants and their guests shall at all times be in
full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the
Township and with all applicable state and federal laws including, but
not limited to, relocation assistance laws.
D. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions of this
section shall subject to the penalty provision of § 257-18 of this chapter.
[Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2]
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 257-16 as
§ 257-18.
§ 257-14 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 257-17
249:897
deficiency is not corrected after a reasonable time, taking into consideration
the nature of the deficiency, the Township may, by resolution, authorize
the expenditure of funds at the cost of the owner or lessor for putting the
premises in proper condition to correct the deficiency. In such case, the
Township may further, by resolution, certify the amount so expended to the
Tax Collector, and the same shall be a lien upon the premises. The Township
may also, by resolution, appoint a custodian of the premises as provided in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12g.
§ 257-18. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 261
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Manufactured/mobile homes — See Ch. 213.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 245.
Rental property registration — See Ch. 257.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Township of Freehold or such
other court having jurisdiction, be liable to penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation subject to the penalty
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating this chapter within one year of
the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the previous
violation shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat
offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a
repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the
maximum fine fixed for a violation but shall be calculated separately
from the fine imposed for the violation.
§ 257-17 FREEHOLD CODE § 257-18
249:898
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 261-1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Rent Control Board of the Township.
CERTIFICATE OF SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE — A certificate issued by
the Township's Office of Code Enforcement certifying that the common
areas of the landlord's grounds and buildings used in the rental operation
are 90% qualitatively free of all violations of the Freehold Township
Property Maintenance Code115 and the Property Maintenance Code of the
State of New Jersey where applicable.
COMMON AREA — That area which includes the internal streets, sidewalks,
grounds, clubhouses, facilities for which there is common access and
entrances into the individual lots rented by the tenants to the extent that
the landlord has contracted pursuant to a leasing arrangement to maintain
said grounds.
COMMUNITY AMENITIES AND FACILITIES — Clubhouse, pools, tennis
courts, laundry rooms and similar facilities which are used in common by
the tenants.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX — The index published periodically by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor (all items)
for the Metropolitan New York City - Northern New Jersey area, Urban
Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, with index base of 1967 = 100.
CURRENT LEASING ARRANGEMENT —
HOUSING SPACE — A space or a lot rented for the purposes of locating
a manufactured/mobile home thereon and shall include all privileges,
services, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use
The date a current leasing arrangement commences shall mean the
date upon which the latest rental increase on a rental unit became
effective, pursuant to:
(1) The terms of a resolution of the Rent Control Board;
By virtue of the landlord's implementation of an automatic
increase;
(2)
By virtue of an agreement between landlord and tenants or tenants'
organization setting forth permissible rental increases in the
future.
(3)
A.
The date a current leasing arrangement commences shall not be
affected by a court-ordered rental increase.
B.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Property Maintenance, Art. II, Property Maintenance Code.
§ 261-1 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-1
249:899
and occupancy of such portion of the property.[Amended 12-22-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-36]
LANDLORD — The owner or entity renting housing space to a tenant or
tenants, or offering housing space for rent to tenant or tenants.
MARKET ADJUSTMENT — A rental increase provision described in § 261-10
which allows a rental unit’s rental increase to be based on market forces
without regard to the rental restrictions imposed by this chapter. Note:
Market adjustment only applies in limited circumstances for a one-time-only
rental increase, all as provided in § 261-10 herein.[Added 12-17-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-41]
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Includes any manufactured/mobile homes,
manufactured/mobile home lots, space in a manufactured/mobile home park
which is rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants.[Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-36]
RENTAL UNIT — The same as "housing space."
ROUNDED TO NEAREST DOLLAR — That if a resulting rental shall include
$0.01 to $0.50, the rental shall be exclusive of the cents; if the resulting
rental shall include $0.51 to $0.99, the rental shall be rounded upward to
the next whole dollar.
SERVICE —
TENANT — A person or persons or family unit renting housing space from
a landlord.
VACANT UNIT — A multiple dwelling unit which either is no longer the
subject of a leasing arrangement, written or oral, or where tenants of
the multiple dwelling unit have no intention to return thereto before the
expiration of the leasing arrangement. A vacant unit shall not include
a manufactured/mobile home lot upon which is located a manufactured/
mobile home which is owned by a person or entity other than the landlord,
except in applying the market adjustment provisions of § 261-10
herein.[Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-36; 12-17-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-41]
Mailing, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the
tenant's unit rented from the landlord or to such other address which
the tenant may request such notices be mailed; or
A.
Personal delivery to tenant, certified to by affidavit of the person
accomplishing the personal delivery or by acknowledgement of service
executed by the person served, which affidavit or acknowledgement
of service must be retained by the person causing service and filed
with the Board upon request. Proper service of notice as contemplated
within this chapter shall be a prerequisite to the implementation of any
rental increase hereunder. Wherever more than one person shall rent
any one unit, service upon one tenant shall be sufficient as service upon
all such tenants.
B.
§ 261-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 261-1
249:900
ARTICLE II
Applicability of Rent Control
§ 261-2. Restriction on rental increases.
Establishment of rental charges for multiple dwelling units between the
landlord and the tenant to whom the provisions of this chapter are
applicable shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of this chapter.
No landlord shall request or receive an increase in the charge or
consideration for the renting out of any multiple dwelling unit except as
permitted by this chapter; any rental increase in excess of that authorized
by the provisions of this chapter shall be void. The void portion of any rental
increase paid by a tenant shall be returned to such tenant by the landlord.
§ 261-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all rentals of housing space
within the Township of Freehold, except:
§ 261-4. Maintenance of community amenities and facilities.
During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall maintain the same level
of community amenities and facilities as was provided at the date of the
inception of the lease. An individual tenant or a class of tenants may seek
a rental reduction by application to the Rent Control Board if the landlord
violates this provision. If the Board finds that substantially the same level of
community facilities or amenities is not being maintained, it may reduce the
rental charge to a reasonable level taking into consideration its finding as to
the value on a monthly basis of the discontinued or diminished community
facility or amenity.
A. Housing space being rented for the first time which shall not be
restricted in the initial rent charged. Any subsequent rental increase,
however, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Vacant units which shall not be restricted in the rental charged. Any
subsequent rental increase, however, shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
C. Multiple dwellings containing fewer than four dwelling units.
D. Motels, hotels and similar type buildings.
E. Housing space which has been converted to condominium units, after
the units' bona fide sale subsequent to conversion.
§ 261-2 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-4
249:901

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Rent Control Board
§ 261-5. Creation.
There is hereby created a Rent Control Board within the Township of
Freehold.
§ 261-6. Membership; terms.
The Board shall consist of five regular members and two alternate
members. The alternate Board members shall serve in the absence of any
regular Board member. Both the regular Board members and the alternate
members shall be appointed for three-year terms by the Township
Committee. Each member shall serve without compensation. No member of
the Board shall be a residential landlord or tenant within the Township, nor
shall any Board member be an elected official, a nominated candidate for
any public office, or a municipal employee of the Township.
§ 261-7. Powers and duties.
The Rent Control Board is hereby granted and shall have, in addition to the
other powers granted herein, the power to do any and all acts necessary to
carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited
to the following:
A. To issue and promulgate such rules, regulations, and amendments
thereto as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter. Such rules, regulations, and any amendments shall be
forwarded to the Township Committee for its review. If, after 30 days of
such forwarding, the Township Committee does not notify the Rent
Control Board as to any objection to any of the proposed rules,
regulations, or amendments, they shall become effective and shall have
the force of law, until revised, repealed, or amended, provided that the
rules, regulations, and amendments, are filed with the Township Clerk.
B. To supply information and assistance to the landlords and tenants
concerning compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rent.
D. To retain such independent experts which the Board shall deem
necessary, provided that expenditures for same do not exceed amounts
budgeted therefor, and subject to the approval of the Township
Committee as may be otherwise required by law.
E. To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by tenants as provided for in
this chapter.
F. To establish such forms to be used by the landlord and tenant in seeking
any relief from the Board.
§ 261-5 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-7
249:903
G. To provide a reasonable opportunity to be heard to both landlord and
tenant prior to making any determination. However, the Board may, in
its discretion, limit the number of witnesses or length of any hearings
before it.
§ 261-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 261-7
249:904
ARTICLE IV
Rental Increases and Surcharge
§ 261-8. Automatic increase provisions.
A. Calculation of allowable automatic increase. At the expiration of a lease
or at the termination of the lease of a periodic tenant, the landlord may
request and receive from the tenant a percentage rental increase no
greater than 90%, if the heat is supplied and paid for by the landlord,
and 80%, if heat is paid for by the tenant, of the percentage difference
between the consumer price index for the fourth preceding month prior
to the month in which the new lease arrangement shall be implemented
and the consumer price index (CPI) for the fourth preceding month
prior to the month the current leasing arrangement was entered into
with said tenant. By way of example: assume a tenant's current leasing
arrangement was entered into during the month of February 1980 and
the proposed new lease will be entered into during the month of
December 1980. The landlord would use the difference in the CPI
between October 1979 (fourth month preceding February 1980) and
August 1980 (fourth month preceding December 1980). The intent of
this provision is to allow the landlord to increase rentals based upon the
change in the CPI over a time period equal in length to the period of
time which elapsed between the date he last implemented a rental
increase and the date the automatic increase will be effective. The
percentage allowable increase calculated hereunder shall be applied to
the tenant's existing rental charge, but exclusive of and without regard
to any surcharge pursuant to this chapter or prior action of the Rent
Control Board being paid or payable by the tenant.
B. Limitation on frequency of automatic increase. No tenant shall be given
more than one increase in rent in any twelve-month period pursuant to
§ 261-8. This limitation shall not in any way affect hardship increases
under § 261-9.
C. Notice to tenants of automatic increase. Any landlord seeking an
automatic increase in rent under § 261-8 shall, at least 30 days prior to
the date of the anticipated implementation of the automatic increase,
serve the affected tenant(s) with a notification which shall clearly set
forth the following information:
(1) The consumer price index 60 days prior to the date of entry into the
current leasing agreement.
(2) The consumer price index no less than 60 days prior to the
anticipated date of entry into the new leasing arrangement.
(3) Calculation of the allowable percentage increase in rent pursuant
to § 261-8.
(4) Calculation of the amount of the allowable rental increases
rounded to the nearest dollar.
§ 261-8 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-8
249:905
(5) Calculation of the tenant's rent for the new leasing term.
(6) Date of the anticipated implementation of the automatic increase.
(7) A true copy of a certificate of substantial compliance. Such
certification shall have been issued not more than six months from
the date of the notice to the tenant of the automatic increase.
D. Hearing on tenant challenge of automatic increase.
(1) Notice and hearing.
(a) In the event that the facts and/or calculations required
pursuant to § 261-8 are disputed, the aggrieved tenant shall
have the right to appeal to the Board by mailing to the landlord
and the Board, not less than 15 days prior to the anticipated
date of implementation of the automatic increase, a notice that
the facts and/or calculations are disputed and the exact
particulars of the manner in which they are disputed. The
aggrieved tenant shall attach thereto a copy of the notice
served upon him by the landlord pursuant to § 261-8C. The
aforementioned fifteen-day period shall be calculated from the
date of postmark and shall be a jurisdictional requirement for
the Board. In the event of a perfected appeal, the automatic
increase will be stayed until the Board has held a hearing and
rendered a decision on the dispute. If the Board renders a
finding in favor of the landlord, the automatic increase shall,
subject to any applicable statutory law, be effective as of the
original scheduled date of implementation even though same
may require a retroactive rent increase payment by the tenant.
If the Board renders a finding in favor of the tenant, the
anticipated automatic increase shall be void; the landlord must
reimburse the tenant for the application fee as provided by
§ 261-8D(2); no further automatic increase may be sought or
implemented until the erroneous facts and/or calculation has
been corrected; a new notice of increase pursuant to § 261-8C
is served upon the tenant and the tenant is reimbursed for the
application fee as set forth herein.
(b) In the event that a single tenant, or a number of tenants, shall
appeal hereunder, and shall raise issues common to other
tenants within the same multiple dwelling complex who have
received notification of an automatic increase pursuant to
§ 261-8, the Board may declare that its decision, as to the
common issues, shall apply to all tenants within the multiple
dwelling complex similarly situated, which action by the Board
shall negate any necessity of those tenants similarly situated
filing an appeal.
(2) Fee. At the time an aggrieved tenant files an appeal with the Board,
pursuant to § 261-8D(1), such tenant shall include therein an
application fee by check or money order made payable to the
§ 261-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 261-8
249:906
§ 261-9. Hardship increase provision.
Each landlord shall be entitled to a fair rate of return on his investment.
If the landlord does not believe he is receiving a fair rate of return on his
investment, he may make application to the Board for a hardship increase
pursuant to this section.
"Township of Freehold" in the amount set forth in Chapter 150,
Fees, which shall be subject to reimbursement by the landlord
to the tenant in the event that the tenant shall prevail after the
hearing by the Board on the dispute.
A. Procedure. The following procedure shall be followed:
(1) Application. A landlord seeking a hardship rental increase under
this section for any multiple dwelling unit shall make written
application therefor to the Board on such written forms as it may
from time to time prescribe and including such additional
information as the Board may require. Included with the
application shall be a certificate of substantial compliance. Such
certification shall not be more than six months as of the date of
application submission to the Board. After having received a
complete application, including the certificate of substantial
compliance, the Board shall set a date upon which the hearing shall
commence. Simultaneously with filing the application for a rental
increase with the Board, the landlord shall make a copy of the
complete application available at a convenient location on his
premises where same may be inspected by his tenants during
regular business hours, Monday through Friday. Further, if a
tenants' association or its equivalent exists within the landlords
multiple dwelling complex, the landlord shall serve a copy of the
application and all related documents filed with the Board upon the
President of said association or in his absence on the Vice
President.
(2) Notice to tenants. Upon receipt from the Board of the date upon
which the hearing shall commence, the landlord shall serve, at
least 30 days prior to the hearing, notice of same upon each tenant
to be affected by the requested increase. Such notice shall set forth
the following:
(a) Notice that the landlord has filed an application for a rental
increase with the Board.
(b) The location on the landlord's premises where the complete
application can be inspected by the tenant, and the hours and
days when such inspection may take place, which shall be at
least during the regular business hours, Monday through
Friday.
§ 261-8 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-9
249:907
(c) The date, time and location for the commencement of the
public hearing before the Board on the application for rental
increase.
(3) Recording of proceedings. If any party to the public hearing desires
to have a verbatim transcript made of the proceedings before the
Board, he shall request that the Board designate a stenographic
reporter to report verbatim the proceedings, all in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 2A:84-1. Any such request must be made at least 14 days
before the date set for the commencement of the hearing and shall
be made to the Board and the attorney for the Board. In the event
that the party is not notified at least seven days before the hearing
of the name of the stenographer designated by the Board, or if said
stenographer is unavailable, the party requesting the stenographer
shall arrange for a stenographer of his choice to record the
proceedings. In either event, the requesting party shall be
responsible for paying any charge made by the reporter. In the
event that arrangements are made for the transcribing of the
hearing a copy of the verbatim transcript shall be forwarded to the
Board, free of charge by the requesting party. In the event that any
members of the Board have been absent for one or more nights of
the hearing, they may read the verbatim transcript of that portion
of the hearing for which they were absent, and shall thereafter be
qualified to vote on the determination of the application for rental
increase.
(4) Time for decision. The Board shall render a decision on an
application for a hardship increase pursuant to § 261-9, within 45
days of the close of the hearing, unless such time for decision is
extended by consent of the applicant. Failure of the Board to so act
shall not be deemed an approval of the amount of increase sought
by the applicant, but shall result in a requirement that any increase
granted by the Board be made retroactive to the date upon which
the decision should have been made in accordance with this
provision.
B. Burden of proof. The burden of proof in any hardship increase hearing
shall be upon the landlord to establish by a preponderance of the
evidence that he is entitled to all or a portion of the relief which he
seeks. Should the landlord fail to produce evidence as to any of the
relevant considerations listed in § 261-9C below, the Board may still
grant an increase to the landlord if warranted by the proof submitted.
C. Considerations in general. At a hearing for a hardship increase, the
landlord shall produce evidence relevant to the following:
(1) Landlord's rate base. The landlord's rate base shall be the
landlord's gross cost of the complex as excerpted from his audited
financial statements for the most current fiscal year. Nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent the Board from accepting
evidence supplementing capital expenditures made by the landlord
§ 261-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 261-9
249:908
since the close of the most current fiscal year. The gross cost shall
include all "arms length" costs of acquisition plus all capitalized
improvements since the date of acquisition. The resulting figure
shall not be reduced by depreciation. In the event that the Board
finds that all or a substantial part of the gross cost is invalid for
some specifically articulated reason(s), the Board may consider the
following:
(a) Fair market value of the landlord's property utilized in his
rental operation.
(b) Assessed valuation of the landlord's property utilized in the
rental operation as determined by the Township Tax Assessor.
The Board may, where it deems it appropriate, adjust same by
the directors ratio of equalized assessments determined
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.1.
(c) Such other evidence which may be produced by the parties and
found relevant by the Board.
(2) Landlord's rate of return. The Board shall make a finding as to the
rate of return to which the landlord is properly entitled. In
determining the rate of return, the Board shall consider the
following, in addition to other evidence which may be produced by
the parties and considered relevant by the Board:
(a) Risk of the investment to the landlord.
(b) Commercial mortgage rates available on properties similar to
the landlord's.
(c) Rates of return available to the landlord in other ventures with
similar risks, or the Board shall adjust the rate to compensate
for the difference in risk.
(d) Point in time when the landlord's investment was made.
(3) Landlord's net operating income. The Board shall determine the
net operating income to which the landlord is entitled. In making
such a determination, the Board shall multiply the landlord's rate
base determined pursuant to § 261-9C(1), by the rate of return to
which he is entitled pursuant to § 261-9C(2).
(4) Operating expenses of the landlord. The Board shall review the
landlord's operating expenses for reasonableness. In performing
this function, the Board may rely upon the individual expertise of
its individual members as well as any evidence bearing on same as
may be presented by the parties or the Board. If the Board finds any
expenses to be unreasonable, it shall set forth specifically its
reasons for so finding and shall substitute therefor an amount it
deems reasonable and shall likewise specify the method it used to
ascertain the reasonable expense.
§ 261-9 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-9
249:909
(5) Gross rental income entitlement of landlord.
(a) The Board shall determine the gross rental income to which
the landlord is entitled. In making this determination, the
Board shall add to the landlord's net income entitlement
determined pursuant to § 261-9C(3) the amount of the
reasonable expenses determined pursuant to § 261-9C(4). The
resulting sum shall be the landlord's gross income entitlement
which in most cases shall represent the gross rental income
entitlement to the landlord, i.e., landlord's annualized rent roll
without consideration for vacancies. In appropriate
circumstances, the Board may deduct from the landlord's gross
income entitlement the following in order to arrive at his gross
rental income entitlement:
[1] All or a portion of the income from related operations
conducted by the landlord including but not limited to
appliance sales, insurance sales, swim club fees, parking
fees, etc., provided that the Board finds a sufficient nexus
between the related operation and the rental operation.
The specific reasons for finding the nexus shall be set forth
by the Board as well as its reasoning for making the
deduction.
[2] If the Board has used exclusively or predominantly the fair
market value approach to arrive at the landlord's rate
base, all or a portion of the period appreciation in value of
the landlord's property may be added to the net operating
income.
(b) The weighing and apportioning of the above factors will be
made as a function of the Board's discretion after having
considered all of the relevant and credible evidence submitted
at the hearing. If the Board has used exclusively or
predominantly the original cost plus capitalization of
improvements approach to valuing the landlord's rate base, no
property value appreciation shall be considered by the Board
as income or benefit to the landlord.
(6) Landlord's expense ratio. The Board shall make a finding as to the
landlord's expense ratio which shall be computed by dividing the
landlord's reasonable expenses determined pursuant to
§ 261-9C(4) by the gross income entitlement. If the resulting
quotient is more than 60%, it shall be an indication of confiscation
warranting a rental increase sufficient to decrease the expense
ratio as computed above to no more than 60%. If, however, the
Board is of the opinion that the landlord is making a fair rate of
return on his investment by implementation of a lesser rental
increase than might be indicated under this subsection, the Board
may refuse to allow a sufficient increase to produce an expense
§ 261-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 261-9
249:910
§ 261-10. Market adjustment. [Added 12-17-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-41116]
Upon the voluntary, uncoerced vacating or court-ordered eviction of any
rental unit for which rent increases are controlled by the terms of this
chapter and upon compliance with Subsections A to E below, at the time
of the rerental of a rental unit the rental increase restrictions of this
chapter shall not apply, and a landlord shall be entitled to apply the market
adjustment provisions for that unit upon approval required by Subsection E
below. However, the market adjustment provisions shall not apply a) where
a landlord-tenant relationship exists between the landlord and the proposed
new tenant and that tenant is transferring to a new rental unit owned
by the same landlord on the same property, and b) for any subsequent
ratio of 60%, but in so doing; must set forth specific and detailed
reasons for so doing.
D. Fees.
(1) Deposit. At the time the landlord makes application for a hardship
increase, he shall submit a fee in the amount provided for in
Chapter 150, Fees, to the Township of Freehold which shall serve
as a deposit on account for any final application fee which may be
determined due from the landlord.
(2) Final fee.
(a) The final application fee of the landlord shall be as provided in
Chapter 150, Fees, calculated based upon the number of
hearing sessions required as follows:
[1] Full session: approximately three hours.
[2] Partial session: up to 1 1/2 hours.
(b) The amount of the final application fee shall be determined by
the Board and set forth in its written resolution adjudicating
the landlord's application. Failure of the Board to set forth the
fee in the resolution shall not excuse the landlord from paying
same. Any amount determined to be due from the landlord
which is in excess of the amount deposited shall be paid in full
to the Township prior to the implementation of any rental
increase granted by the Board and/or prior to any future
implementation by the landlord of any rental increase pursuant
to this chapter. In the event that the final application fee is less
than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded by the
Township to the landlord upon vouchers signed by the
landlord, approved by the Chairman or Vice Chairman and
finally approved by the Township Committee.
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 261-10
through 261-14 as §§ 261-11 through 261-15, respectively.
§ 261-9 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-10
249:911
rental increase for the market-adjusted rental unit unless there is another,
separate vacancy event as described in the first sentence of this section.
Further clarifying this Item b), if a multiyear lease is proposed for a marketadjusted
rental unit, only the initial rent set forth in such lease is subject
to market adjustment. All subsequent rentals charged, even those set forth
within the multiyear lease, must comply with the rental restrictions of this
chapter. When seeking to implement a market adjustment, the landlord
shall comply with each of the following:
A. The landlord shall file with the Township Administrator or his/her
designee a certification, in such form as prescribed by the Township
Administrator and signed by the landlord, that the surrender of
possession by the vacating tenant was voluntary and uncoerced or
pursuant to a lawful court-ordered eviction.
B. The landlord shall file with the Township Administrator or his/her
designee the name and address of the vacating tenant, the then current
rental amount of the vacated rental unit, an identification of the vacated
rental unit and the rent to be charged to the new tenant.
C. The landlord shall submit proof that it is in possession of a current
certificate of substantial compliance.
D. Any required certificates or permits as to the manufactured home
located on the rental unit shall have been issued.
E. The Township Administrator or his/her designee shall review the
information submitted by the landlord under this section and notify the
landlord of approval or disapproval of the applicability of the market
adjustment provisions to the particular vacated rental unit. Such
notification shall be rendered within 30 days after all information
required under this section has been submitted. If the Township
Administrator or his/her designee finds the market adjustment
provisions of this section inapplicable to the particular vacated rental
unit, the Township Administrator or his/her designee shall notify the
landlord of the basis for disapproval and of the landlord's right to
request a hearing from the Township Administrator or his/her designee
within 15 days of the landlord's receipt of the Township Administrator's
disapproval. If no hearing is requested or if the Township Administrator
or his/her designee, after hearing, affirms the decision, the landlord
shall be required to reduce the rent to the amount as determined by the
Township Administrator or his/her designee and rebate to the tenant all
monies and security deposits, based upon such rental, paid in excess
thereof.
§ 261-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 261-10
249:912
ARTICLE V
Certificate of Substantial Compliance
§ 261-11. Application; fee; inspection; report.
In order to be issued a certificate of substantial compliance, the landlord
shall make application to the Office of Code Enforcement on such forms as
may be devised by that office, in addition to paying a fee of as provided
in Chapter 150, Fees, per multiple dwelling unit. A landlord's application
may not be made for a portion of his complex, but only for the entire
complex. The Office of Code Enforcement shall issue a report within 45 days
of receipt of a completed application and the appropriate fee. The report
shall set forth the results of the inspection and shall include a certificate
of substantial compliance if the standard set forth in § 261-1, definition
of "certificate of substantial compliance," herein is met. If the inspection
reveals that the aforementioned standard is not met, the report shall list
with particularity those repairs and/or renovations which must be made
before the certificate of substantial compliance will be issued. The landlord
may request a reinspection by paying a fee of provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, per multiple dwelling unit and by certifying to the Office of Code
Enforcement that the repairs and/or renovations required pursuant to the
initial report have been made.
§ 261-12. Procedure in lieu of certificate of substantial compliance.
If emergency conditions and/or lack of sufficient cash flow shall make
it impossible for a landlord to make renovations or repairs necessary in
order to be issued the certificate of substantial compliance as required by
§ 261-8C(7) or 261-9A(1), the following procedure may be utilized by the
landlord:
A. The landlord shall submit to the Board the affidavit of its accountant,
which affidavit shall contain the following information:
(1) His familiarity with the landlord's operations and the landlord's
current financial condition.
(2) His expert opinion as to the ability of the landlord to undertake the
renovations or repairs indicated on the inspection report of the
Township's Office of Code Enforcement in order to bring his
premises into substantial compliance.
(3) Specific and detailed reasons upon which his opinion is based.
Upon such an affidavit being filed with the landlord's application
under § 261-9 or with the notice to tenants under § 261-8C, the
Board may assign a hearing date pursuant to § 261-9A(1) or allow
the implementation of an automatic increase, as the case may be;
provided, however, that the landlord by invoking this provision
shall be deemed to agree to do the following:
§ 261-11 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-12
249:913
(a) Solicit and submit to the Board certified estimates by outside
contractors of the cost to bring the landlord's premises into
substantial compliance with the Township Property
Maintenance Code and the New Jersey Property Maintenance
Code where applicable based upon the inspection report of the
Township's Office of Code Enforcement.
(b) Enter into an escrow agreement to be prepared or approved by
the Township Attorney, which agreement shall provide for the
landlord's depositing into escrow from rentals received over a
six-month period commencing with the implementation of an
automatic increase or commencing upon the date of the
Board's resolution adjudicating the landlord's application for a
hardship increase, as the case may be, sufficient funds to equal
120% of the combined total of the estimates to repair. The
agreement shall provide that all payments from said escrow
are to be approved by the Township's Code Administrator and
shall further provide that the final disbursement of funds is not
to be made until a certificate of substantial compliance has
been issued.
§ 261-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 261-12
249:914
ARTICLE VI
Penalty; Interpretation; Effective Date
§ 261-13. Violations and penalties.
A willful violation of any provision of this chapter including, but not limited
to, the willful filing with the Rent Control Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall upon conviction, be subject to penalties as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Township of Freehold. A violation affecting more than one leaseholder shall
be considered a separate violation as to each leasehold.
§ 261-14. Interpretation.
In recognition of the fact that rent control is an area that is ever expanding
and developing according to court decisions and interpretations, it is
intended that this chapter be interpreted consistent with the developing law
of rent control and the Board in applying this chapter shall do so consistent
with the current status of the law.
§ 261-15. Effective date; termination; renewal; continuation of
jurisdiction.
A. This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and
publication as required by law, and the Rent Control Ordinance as
amended shall remain in full force and effect. If not extended, they shall
terminate. Any provision of any Township ordinance inconsistent
herewith is repealed. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-28;
12-17-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-41; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-18]
B. All provisions of the Freehold Township Rent Control Ordinance
currently in effect which are not amended, modified or supplemented
by the within amendatory ordinance shall be unaffected hereby and
shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 261-13 PUBLIC RECORDS, ACCESS TO § 261-15
249:915
Chapter 265
RIGHT TO FARM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 190.
§ 265-1. Recognition as natural right.
The right to farm all land is hereby recognized to exist as a natural right
and is also hereby ordained to exist as a permitted use everywhere in the
Township of Freehold subject only to size requirements and to Township
Health and Sanitary Codes. The right to farm as it is used in this chapter
includes the use of irrigation pumps and equipment, aerial and ground
seeding and spraying, tractors, farm laborers and the application of
chemical fertilizers, insecticides and herbicides as well as other mechanized
equipment and modern procedures; all for the purpose of producing from
the land agricultural products such as vegetables, grains, hay, fruits, fibers,
wood, trees, plants, shrubs, flowers and seeds, as well as the propagation
and maintenance of horses, cows and other grazing stock.
§ 265-2. Statement of general intent.
The foregoing uses and activities included in the right to farm, when
reasonable and necessary for the particular farming, livestock or fowl
production, and when conducted in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, may occur on holidays, Sundays and weekdays, at
night and in the day, and the reasonable and unusual noise, odors, dust and
fumes that are caused by them are also specifically permitted as part of
the exercise of this right. It is expressly found that whatever legal nuisance
may be caused to others by such uses and activities so conducted is more
than offset by the benefits from farming to the neighborhood, community,
and to society in general, by the preservation of open space, the beauty of
the countryside and clean air and by the preservation and continuance of
farming operations in Freehold Township and in New Jersey as a source of
agricultural products for this and future generations. This statement is one
of general intent and meant to express a basic philosophy by which all other
ordinances are to be considered and interpreted.
§ 261-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 265-2
265:916
Chapter 270
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Water — See Ch. 351.
Water resources protection — See Ch. 355.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 385.
§ 265-2 RIGHT TO FARM § 265-2
265:917

ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewer Use
[Adopted 7-28-1969 (§ 15-2 of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. O-00-33]
§ 270-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams
per liter. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system
of any structure to the service lateral of a collection sewer.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The quantity of chlorine absorbed by a
wastewater, allowing a residual of 0.1 ppm by weight after 30 minutes
of contact, expressed in milligrams per liter. The standard laboratory
procedure shall be that found in the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
COLLECTION SEWER — The Township's collection sanitary sewers
located under highways, roads, streets and rights-of-way with branch
service laterals that collect and convey sanitary sewage or industrial
wastes or a combination of both and into which stormwater, surface
water and groundwater or unpolluted industrial waters or liquids are
not intentionally admitted.
CONNECTION UNIT — Each individual building or house, whether
constructed as a detached unit or as one of a pair or row, which is
designated or adaptable to separate ownership for use as a family
dwelling unit or for commercial or industrial purposes. A school,
factory, apartment, house, individually owned condominium or
townhouse unit, office building or other multiple-unit structure whose
individual apartments or units are connected to a common internal
sewer system, unless each has its own individual water meter, shall be
considered as one connection unit.
EQUIVALENT UNIT (EU) — The unit which produces or delivers to
the sewerage system an average daily flow, said flow to be estimated
annually.[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
GROUND GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions
§ 270-1 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-1
265:919
normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the sewered area upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which structure sanitary sewage or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes resulting from an industry
as defined in the latest edition of the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, except sanitary sewage.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage with a maximum:
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property located in the sewered area. In the event
multiple commercial premises are served by a common sewer meter or,
in the event the sewer charges are calculated based on water charges,
a common water meter, the person or entity holding title to the specific
portion of the premises where the common sewer meter/water meter
is physically located shall be deemed the owner for purposes of this
chapter. In the event a multiple residential project, wherein units are
individually owned, is served by other than an individual water meter
for each individual residential unit, i.e., served by one or more common
water meters, the person or entity holding title to the specific portion
of the premises which is actually served by the sewer service shall be
deemed the owner for purposes of this chapter.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in moles per liter of solution.
PRIVATE SEWER COMPANY — An entity other than the Freehold
Township Municipal Sewer System providing sewerage service in the
Township of Freehold and shall include privately owned public utilities
providing sewerage service.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from an improved property.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer than carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater
and surface water that are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities as of any particular time
for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes situated in the sewered area and owned or operated
by the Township.
(1) Five-day biochemical oxygen demand of 300 milligrams per liter.
(2) Suspended solids content of 300 milligrams per liter.
(3) Chlorine demand of 5 milligrams per liter.
§ 270-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-1
265:920
SERVICE LATERAL — That part of the sewage system from the
collection sewer to a point just beyond the curbline or to a point one
foot beyond the edge of the paved roadway if there is no curbline.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The plant and facilities operated for
the treatment of sewage and industrial wastes by or for the Township
to which the sewer system is to be connected.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sanitary sewer
system used to collect and convey sewage and to which groundwater or
unpolluted industrial waters, surface water and stormwater or liquids
are not admitted intentionally.
SEWERED AREA — That portion of the Township in which there has
been or shall be constructed a sewage collection system within the
Township in accordance with plans approved by the Township and as
from time to time constructed and extended.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures
set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published jointly
by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
STORM SEWER — Any pipe or conduit that carries stormwater, surface
water and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes.
STREET — Any street, highway, road, lane, court, alley or public square
duly accepted by the Township.
SURCHARGE — A charge, in addition to the service charge rental,
which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength
than the concentration values established as representative of normal
sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, expressed in
milligrams per liter. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that
found in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater.
TOWNSHIP'S AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Plumbing Inspector or
Health Officer appointed by the Board of Health.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any substance, including copper, cyanide and
chromium compounds, in such form or concentration as to be toxic or to
§ 270-1 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-1
265:921
§ 270-2. Connection required; permits.
inhibit the activity of humans, animals or organisms used in biological
sewage treatment.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited or
prohibited by the effluent standards in effect, or water whose discharge
will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards.
B. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the Rules and
Regulations of the Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority, as
amended, and the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American
Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and
the Water Pollution Control Federation, and the Federal Guideline for
State and Local Pretreatment Programs, Volume 1, 1977, or the latest
revision thereof.
A. Within 90 days after service of notice to connect is given to the owner of
a connection unit by the Township Engineer, the connection unit
identified in the notice shall be connected with and use the services and
facilities of the Township sanitary sewer system to the exclusion of any
other systems or methods for the collection and disposal of sewage and
industrial wastes.
(1) All connection units within an area served by the sanitary sewer
system shall be connected with and use the service and facilities of
the Township's sewer system, to the exclusion of any other systems
or methods for the collection and disposal of sewage and industrial
wastes, within one year after the issuance of the certificate of
completion issued with regard to the sanitary sewer system serving
that particular area, or as to a new connection unit, before the new
connection unit is used or occupied, notwithstanding the failure of
the Township to serve the ninety-day notice provided for, except
those units specifically excepted by action of the Township
Committee by reason of economic unfeasibility of connection,
which exception may be restricted by the Township Committee
when the connection becomes economically feasible.
(2) No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or
use, alter or disturb in any manner any sewer or the sanitary sewer
system without first obtaining a permit in writing from the
Township. Permits shall be issued to owners required to connect to
a sewer and may be issued by the Township to owners not required
to connect.
(3) If any owner fails to comply with the provisions of this Subsection
A, in addition to other penalties, the Township may engage the
services of a registered or licensed plumber to make the required
connection. Prior to doing so, the Township shall notify the
delinquent owner, in writing, of its intention to have the work done
§ 270-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-2
265:922
at the owner's expense, unless the work is completed by the owner
within 15 days of the mailing of the notice, or such later date
as may be consented to by the Township's authorized agent. If
the work is not completed within that period by the owner, the
Township shall proceed to have the work done, and the Township
Engineer shall certify the cost to the Township. The Township shall
then notify the owner when and where the Township Committee
will examine the certification and any objections will be heard
at that time. The Township, after a hearing, shall determine the
correctness of the certification and cause the cost as shown or as
corrected by the Township to be added to the sewer bill for the
property in question, and the amount of the charge shall become
a lien upon the lands upon filing with the collector of sewer rents.
The charge shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall
be collected and enforced by the collector of sewer rents.
B. Application for the permit required shall be made by the owner of the
improved property to be served or by his authorized representative.
C. No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved
property within a sewer until a permit has been issued by the Township
and until that person shall have given the Township's authorized agent
at least 24 hours' notice of the time when the connection will be made
so that the Township's authorized agent may supervise and inspect the
work of connection and, when necessary, supervise the testing.
D. Except as otherwise provided, each connection unit on each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one connection unit
on one building sewer shall not be permitted except under special
circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good cause
shown, and then only after special permission of the Plumbing
Inspector shall have been secured.
E. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and costs and
expenses of connection of a building sewer to a collection sewer or
service lateral shall be borne by the owner of the improved property to
be connected. The owner shall indemnify and save harmless the
Township from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or
indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of
connection of a building sewer to a service lateral.
F. Materials for a building sewer, jointing materials and methods of
installation shall be in accordance with requirements of § 270-3 and
shall be subject to approval of the Township's authorized agent.
G. The permit shall be displayed prominently upon the improved property
to be connected to a sewer at all times during construction of the
building sewer and connection of the building to a service lateral.
H. A building sewer shall be connected to the sewer system at the end of
the service lateral at the curbline point of connection located in the
§ 270-2 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-2
265:923
§ 270-3. Building sewers and connections.
sidewalk area. No person shall make a connection directly with or
tamper with a service lateral in any manner except in the presence
of the Township's authorized agent. All work of making connection
to any of the Township's sewers shall be done under the personal
supervision of the Township's authorized agent and shall conform to
the following requirements: All joints shall be sealed and made airtight
and shall be made smooth and clean inside, with all sewers in proper
alignment and of proper grade, so as to provide free flow of sewage
matter without any obstructions and to be made in accordance with the
Township's specifications for its sanitary sewers. All work pertaining
to the connection with the Township's sewers shall be, financially and
otherwise, the responsibility of the owner of the property with which
connection is made, subject to the right of supervision reserved by the
Township.
I. A service lateral will be connected to a collection sewer with an
approved saddle-type fitting properly installed and encased in an eightinch
envelope of concrete extending completely around the barrel of
the collection sewer pipe. All service laterals installed after the initial
construction period shall be installed by the Township at the expense of
the owner or the connection unit served by the lateral. The service
lateral shall conform to the Township's specifications and shall be
subject to the right of inspection reserved by the Township. Service
laterals and building sewers for the same connection shall be of the
same size and material throughout and shall in no case be less than four
inches in diameter.
J. Connections to service laterals, if of the same pipe size, shall be made
by properly joining to the bell end of the service lateral provided. If
cast-iron pipe four inches in diameter is used, the connection shall be
made with a standard adapting fitting of cast iron. This applies also to
the connection of the house drain to the building sewer pipe. Projecting
the smaller pipe into the larger and sealing will not be permitted.
Where a building sewer has been constructed with pipe having a larger
diameter than four inches' service lateral provided, the building sewer
shall be extended to the collection sewer using the large-diameter pipe
and properly connected as specified herein. All pipe must conform to
present BOCA standards.
K. Within 90 days following the abandonment of all septic tanks, cesspools
and seepage pits for the treatment of sanitary sewage, these facilities,
except those with concrete lids at least four inches thick, shall be filled
with sand, crushed stone, gravel or shale to prevent the pits from
caving in or from in any way becoming a health or safety hazard. Septic
tanks, cesspools and seepage pits with concrete lids may be used for
the disposal of stormwater from roof drains and other forms of surface
drainage or for the disposal of other wastes as permitted in writing by
the Township or the Township's authorized agent.
§ 270-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-3
265:924
A. Building sewers shall be no less than four inches in diameter.
B. All service laterals and building shall conform to current BOCA Codes.
C. Uniform bearing shall be provided along the entire length of a building
sewer, and all joints of a building sewer shall be watertight and
rootproof. No cement mortar joints shall be used.
D. Where an improved property, at the time of securing a permit to
connect to a sewer, is served by its own sewage disposal system or
device, the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the building
side of the sewage disposal system or device and attachment shall be
made with proper fittings to continue the house sewer line as a building
sewer, undiminished in inside diameter, but not less than four inches to
the service lateral.
E. A building sewer to serve one improved property may occupy the same
trench as a building sewer to serve the next adjoining improved
property, provided that the common trench is on or immediately
adjacent to the common property line and such joint occupancy is by
mutual agreement of the owners concerned. This is subject in all
respects to § 270-2D.
F. It shall be the duty of every person constructing or owning any building
sewer, house drain, soil pipe, waste pipe, vent pipe, plumbing fixtures,
or any other passage or connection between a sewer and any grounds,
building, structure or place of business, and it shall be the duty of the
owners of all grounds, buildings and structures and all parties
interested, to cause and require that the building sewer, vent pipe,
house drain, soil pipe, waste pipe, plumbing fixtures or any other
passage or connection shall be adequate for its purpose and shall at all
times allow free passage of all material that enters or should enter the
same. No change of drainage, sewage or the building sewers of any
building shall be permitted unless notice shall have been given to the
Township's authorized agent or to the Township Engineer and consent
of the Township obtained in writing.
G. Fittings in a building sewer shall conform to the type of pipe used in
construction.
H. Changes in direction of a building sewer must comply with National
Standard Plumbing Codes.
I. Fittings or connections in a building sewer which have an enlargement,
chamber or recess with a ledge, shoulder or reduction of pipe area that
shall offer any obstruction to flow shall not be allowed.
J. Joints in cast-iron soil pipe in a building sewer shall be packed with
oakum in the bell and spigot terminations and thereafter shall be filled
with molten lead to a depth of at least one inch and not to be depressed
more than 1/8 inch below the run of the hub. The lead then must be
caulked in place. No paint, varnish or other coating shall be permitted
§ 270-3 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-3
265:925
on the jointing material until after the building sewer has been tested
and approved as provided in Subsections Q, R and S of this section.
Rubber ring joints of approved design may also be used.
K. Floor drains connected to a building sewer shall comply to the National
Standard Plumbing Codes. Interceptors (including grease, oil and sand
interceptors, etc.) shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Township, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease, flammable wastes, sand, solids and other
ingredients harmful to the building drainage system, the public sewer
or sewage treatment plant or process.
L. All cleanouts shall comply with the National Standard Plumbing Code.
M. Wherever in the opinion of the Township Engineer or the Township's
authorized agent the trenching conditions require either a specific type
of pipe, jointing material or encasement in concrete, such materials as
it may direct shall be installed to protect the property owner or the
Township, for special conditions as follows:
(1) Where the trench is over 12 feet deep, Class 52 ductile iron pipe
must be used.
(2) Where the trench is less than four feet deep in a traveled roadway,
special bedding, consisting of crushed stone or concrete cradle, as
directed by the Engineer or the Township's authorized agent, must
be used.
(3) Service laterals and building sewers for all service stations,
garages, or other establishments storing, using or dispensing
gasoline, kerosene, benzine, or similar solvents shall be
constructed of ductile iron pipe with mechanical joints and gaskets
of approved materials.
(4) Where lines are laid in fill, ductile iron soil pipe with mechanical
joints shall be used.
(5) Where foundation conditions are poor due to groundwater or
subsurface materials, a bedding of quarry blend crushed stone of at
least six inches in depth shall be used.
(6) Where rock is encountered, it shall be excavated to a depth of four
inches below the bottom of the pipe and the trench refilled to the
grade line with clean earth, sand and crushed stone.
N. The slope or grade of a building sewer, when the inside diameter is four
inches or less, shall be no less than 1/4 inch per foot of length and shall
be downward in the direction of flow, provided that when PVC sewer
pipe shall be used the slope may be reduced for lines over four inches in
diameter but shall be not less than 1/8 inch per foot of length.
O. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved. If any part of a building sewer is covered before being
§ 270-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-3
265:926
inspected, tested and accepted it shall be uncovered for inspection and
testing at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property
to be connected to a sewer.
P. When found necessary by the Township's authorized agent or the
Township Engineer, the building sewer shall be tested by filling the
same with water, completely, so that every section shall be tested with
not less than a ten-foot head of water. Water shall be kept in the
building sewer for 15 minutes before inspection starts and no leakage
shall be observable at the time of inspection.
Q. The Township's authorized agent or engineer shall observe all required
testing of a building sewer. All equipment and material required for
testing shall be furnished by the owner of the improved property to be
connected to a sewer.
R. Upon inspection and approval of a building sewer by the Township, a
certificate of approval shall be issued by the Plumbing Inspector to the
owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer. In the event
a building sewer is not approved by the Township, further tests shall be
made following completion of necessary corrections. A fee as provided
in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be charged by the Township for observation
of each test subsequent to the initial test.
S. Whenever the Township has reason to believe any building sewer has
become defective, the building sewer shall be subject to test and
inspection. Defects found upon testing and inspection, if any, shall be
corrected as required by the Township, at the cost and expense of the
owner of the improved property served through the building sewer.
T. Every building sewer of an improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of the property.
U. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to the Township.
V. Street opening permits and restoration of street surface shall be
required. Wherever the surface of any public street, sidewalk or
cartway is disturbed by construction of a service lateral or building
sewer, the surfacing material must be restored in kind and maintained
to the satisfaction of the Township. All construction in a public street of
the Township shall be in compliance with the ordinances of the
Township, and all construction in a state highway shall be in compliance
with New Jersey Department of Transportation requirements and
specifications. All necessary permits shall be obtained from the
Township and other appropriate agencies before construction is
commenced, including the permit required for opening or disturbing
the surface of a street or right-of-way.
§ 270-3 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-3
265:927
W. The construction of building sewers shall, at all times, be subject to
supervision and inspection by the Township or its authorized agent and
shall conform to the Township specifications. The building sewer shall
not be covered until permitted by the Township Engineer or Township's
authorized agent or his representative, and all backfilling of trenches
shall be under his supervision and shall be thoroughly compacted by
tamping in six-inch layers to a minimum height of 24 inches above the
top of the pipe, unless that method is not feasible, in which case an
alternate method, approved by the Township Engineer or the
Township's authorized agent, shall be used.
X. Connections with sewers where the same are run through private
property shall in all respects be governed by this section.
Y. No roof drainage, cellar drainage, surface water, swimming pool
drainage or backwash water, waste from hydrants or groundwater from
underground drainage fields shall be admitted or be permitted to drain
into the sewer system. The sewer system is intended to convey sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes only.
Z. The Township shall have the right to close or disconnect from the sewer
system any building sewer used for carrying rain, cellar drainage,
surface water, groundwater or objectionable matter or whenever any
violations of this section are committed.
AA. The Township shall not be liable for any damage or expense resulting
from leaks, stoppages or defective plumbing or from any other cause
occurring to any premises or within any house or building, and it is
expressly stipulated by and between the Township and the owner that
no claims shall be made against the Township on account of the
breaking or stoppage of, or any damage or expense to, any service
lateral or house connection when the cause thereof is found to be in the
lateral or house connection.
BB. The Township shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure to service
when occasioned by any emergency, required repairs or failure from
any cause beyond control. The Township reserves the right to restrict
the use of sewer service whenever the public welfare may require it; in
consideration of the right to connect to the sewer system, the Township
shall not be liable for any damage or expense resulting from leaks,
stoppages or defective plumbing or from any other cause occurring to
any premises or within any building and it is hereby expressly agreed
by all persons making connection with the sewer system that no claims
shall be made against the Township on account of the breaking or
stoppage of, or any damage or expense to, any service lateral or
building sewer, where the cause is found to be in the service lateral or
building sewer.
CC. The rules and regulations in this section are hereby supplemented by
the provisions of Section 4 of the Rules and Regulations of the
Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority, as amended, to the
§ 270-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-3
265:928
§ 270-4. Persons authorized to do work; registration of contractors.
§ 270-5. Unsatisfactory conditions; rights reserved by Township.
§ 270-6. Industrial wastes and prohibited wastes.
degree that said provisions are not inconsistent with the rules and
regulations set forth herein.
A. Owners, their agents, employees or independent contractors may do
excavation, ditch preparation and plumbing work involved in the
construction of a building sewer and the connection of a building sewer
to a service lateral, upon receipt of a connection permit from the
Township and subject to compliance with these regulations and
inspection requirements.
B. All contractors, before performing any work involving the construction
of a building sewer or the connection of a building sewer to a service
lateral, shall register with the Township's authorized agent, giving their
name, business and home address, telephone numbers and the amount
and nature of their experience.
A. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice from the
Township, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to a
building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of the notice, the Township
may refuse to permit the person to discharge sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system until the unsatisfactory
condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of the Township.
B. The Township reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege of
connection of any improved property to a sewer, or to compel
discontinuance of use of a sewer by any person, or to compel the
pretreatment of industrial wastes in order to prevent discharge into the
sanitary sewer system of wastes which may be deemed by the Township
to be harmful to the sanitary sewer system or to have a deleterious
effect on the sewage treatment process.
C. The Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sanitary sewer system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be part
of this article.
A. Admission of industrial wastes into the sewer system.
(1) Approval required for industrial wastes. The discharge into the
sanitary sewer system of industrial waste having any of the
following characteristics shall be subject to prior review and
approval of the Township:
(a) Any wastewater with a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in
excess of 300 ppm by weight.
§ 270-3 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-6
265:929
(b) Any wastewater with a suspended solids content in excess of
300 ppm or containing suspended solids of such character or
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle or treat such materials.
(c) A chlorine demand greater than five milligrams per liter.
(d) An average daily flow greater than 10% of the average daily
sewage flow of the sanitary sewer system.
(e) Any quantity of substances possessing characteristics
described in Subsection B below.
(f) Any wastewater containing substances in sufficient quantity to
cause injury, damage or hazard to personnel, structures or
equipment, or interfere with the regional or county authority
systems or any portion of the liquid or solids treatment or
handling processes, or that will pass through the treatment
facilities in such condition that it will not achieve state, federal
or other existing requirements for the effluent or for the
receiving waters. The following chemicals are specifically
prohibited: alcohols, aldehydes, arsenic and arsenicals,
bromine, chlorinated hydrocarbons, compounds with chlorine
demands in excess of 100 ppm, chromium or chromium
compounds, copper and copper salts, cresols, cyanides or
cyanide compounds, fluorine, iodine, mercury or mercury
compounds, nickel and nickel compounds, pesticides, silver
and silver compounds, sulfonamides, toxic dyes (organic or
mineral), zinc and zinc compounds; all strong oxidizing agents
such as peroxides, chromates, dichromates, permanganates,
etc., compounds producing hydrogen sulfide or any other toxic,
inflammable or explosive gases, either upon acidification,
alkalization, reduction or oxidation, and strong reducing
agents such as nitrates, sulfites, sulfides, strong acids or
strong alkalis.
(g) Unusual volumes of flow or concentrations of wastewater
constituting slugs as defined herein.
(h) Wastewater containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment, stabilization, or reduction by the wastewater
processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the treated effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over its discharge to the
receiving waters.
(2) Preliminary treatment and handling of industrial wastes.
(a) Whenever necessary in the opinion of the Township, the owner
of improved property shall provide, at his expense, such
facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of industrial
wastes as may be necessary to:
§ 270-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-6
265:930
[1] Reduce BOD to 250 milligrams per liter by weight.
[2] Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
come within the maximum limits permitted in this section.
[3] Control the quantities and rates of discharge over a
twenty-four-hour day and a seven-day week. Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed facilities for preliminary treatment and
handling of industrial wastes shall be submitted for
approval of the Township, and no construction of any
facility shall be commenced until approval shall have been
obtained from any governmental regulatory body having
jurisdiction.
(b) Whenever facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of
industrial wastes shall have been provided by the owner of the
improved property, the facilities shall be maintained
continuously, at the expense of the owner, in satisfactory
operating condition. The Township shall have access to the
facilities at reasonable times for purposes of inspection and
testing.
B. Prohibited wastes.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial or unpolluted
commercial process water into any sewer.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described
wastes or waters into the sanitary sewer system:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
or 60° C.
(b) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter
by weight of fats, oils or grease or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at a temperature of 65° C. All
restaurants, garages, commercial establishments, etc., from
which the substances will be discharged shall be equipped with
grease traps.
(c) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas which, by reason of its nature or
quality, may cause fire or explosion, or which in any other way
may be injurious to persons or the sanitary sewer system or the
sewage treatment plant.
§ 270-6 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-6
265:931
(d) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, shall be capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing
entry into any sewer or the sewage treatment plant for
maintenance and repair.
(e) Any garbage, except properly shredded or ground garbage.
(f) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, bones, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure,
butcher's offal or any other solid or viscous substance which
shall be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in any sewer
or other interference with the proper operation of the sanitary
sewer system or the sewage treatment plant.
(g) Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than
9.5 or found to be excessively corrosive.
(h) Any water or waste containing any toxic substance in quantity
sufficient to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to
interfere with the biochemical process of the sewage treatment
plant in such condition so that it will exceed state, federal or
other validly existing requirements for the receiving stream.
(i) Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense shall
be required to handle the water or waste at the sewage
treatment plant.
(j) Any radioactive substances.
(k) Any drainage from building construction.
(l) Oils, tar, grease, combustible gases and liquids, insoluble
solids of any kind, or other substances which would impair,
impede, affect, interfere with, or endanger the sewer system or
any part thereof.
(m) Wastewaters having an objectionable color which is not
removable in a treatment facility.
(n) Any wastewater containing phenolic compounds over 1.0 ppm,
expressed as phenoil.
(o) Any wastewater having a flashpoint lower than 235° F. (113°
C.) as determined by the Tagliabue (Tag.) closed cup method.
(p) Any other prohibitive discharges under Section 5 of the Rules
and Regulations of the Manasquan River Regional Sewerage
Authority, as amended.
(3) Gas stations and garages are required to provide oil interceptors of
the types Series GA, GX, GNC and GRC of Josam Manufacturing
§ 270-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-6
265:932
Company or equivalent, in the proper location, where the
dangerous liquids are to be intercepted. Restaurants or other
commercial establishments as directed are required to provide
grease interceptors of the type Series J of the Josam Manufacturing
Company or equivalent.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement or arrangement between the Township and
any person whereby industrial wastes of unusual strength or
character may be admitted into the sewer system by the Township
either before or after preliminary treatment.
C. Regulations governing admissions of industrial wastes into the sewer
system.
(1) Required survey data. Any person desiring to make a connection to
the sanitary sewer system through which industrial wastes shall be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system shall file with the
Township an industrial wastes questionnaire to be furnished by the
Township, which shall supply pertinent data, including estimated
quantity of flow, to the Township with respect to industrial wastes
proposed to be discharged into the sewer system.
(2) Control manholes.
(a) Any person who shall discharge industrial wastes into the
sanitary sewer system, when required by the Township, shall
construct and properly maintain, at his own expense, a suitable
control manhole to facilitate observation, measurements and
sampling by the Township.
(b) Any control manhole, when required by the Township, shall be
constructed at an accessible, safe, suitable and satisfactory
location in accordance with plans approved by the Township
prior to commencement of construction.
(3) Sewage sampling. Industrial wastes being discharged into the
sewer system shall be subject to periodic sampling, inspection and
determination of character and concentration. The sampling,
inspection and determination shall be made by the Township as
frequently as may be deemed necessary. Representative samples
for a full working day shall be obtained by taking hourly samples
and compositing them in accordance with the flow at the time of
sampling. Sewage sampling facilities shall be accessible to the
Township at all times. Due care shall be exercised in the collection
and preservation of all samples to ensure preservation in as nearly
the natural state as possible, including refrigeration of all samples
which are intended for analysis by biochemical methods.
(4) Analysis.
§ 270-6 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-6
265:933
(a) The applicant shall be responsible for analysis of samples of
industrial wastes and all related expenses.
(b) Laboratory methods used in the analysis of samples of
industrial wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage
published by the American Public Health Association, provided
that alternate methods for the analysis of industrial wastes
may be used, subject to mutual agreement between the
Township and the person discharging industrial wastes into the
sanitary sewer system.
(5) Changes in type of wastes. Any owner of an improved property
discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system who
contemplates a change in the method of operation which will alter
the type of industrial wastes at the time being discharged into the
sanitary sewer system shall notify the Township in writing at least
10 days prior to consummation of the change.
(6) The rules and regulations set forth in this section are further
subject to the provisions of Section 6 of the Rules and Regulations
of the Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority, as amended.
Nothing contained in the Rules and Regulations of the Manasquan
River Regional Sewer Authority, as amended, shall prohibit the
Township of Freehold from enforcing the requirements set forth in
this section.
D. Slugs and equalized discharge. No person shall cause the discharge of
slugs of water or wastes. Each person producing a discharge into the
public sewers in excess of 40,000 gallons in any one day shall construct
and maintain at his own expense a suitable flow control facility to
ensure equalization of discharge over a twenty-four-hour period. The
facility shall have a capacity of at least 50% of the total normal volume
of a twenty-four-hour production period, and the outlet to the sewer
shall be equipped with a rate discharge controller or other approved
device, the regulation of which shall be directed by the Township.
E. Computation of surcharge. The surcharge for industrial users of the
sewer system shall be established in accordance with Section 7.02 of
the Rules and Regulations of the Manasquan River Regional Sewerage
Authority, as amended.
F. Rates of surcharge. The rates of surcharge for each of the
aforementioned constituents shall be established by the Township
Committee.
G. Revision of rates. The rates of surcharge shall be reviewed annually by
the Township in order to determine whether or not they are sufficient to
defray the fixed charges, amortization costs, and the annual cost of
operation, including a reserve for maintenance as determined from the
sewage treatment plant records. If the difference between the revenue
derived from the rates of surcharge and the total annual cost is
§ 270-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-6
265:934
§ 270-7. Housing, industrial and commercial developments.
§ 270-8. Right of access; general regulations.
sufficient to justify an increase or decrease in the rates the Township
shall make the appropriate change.
A. Builders and developers shall construct collection sewers and shall
install and connect service laterals and building sewers for every
housing, commercial and industrial unit within development prior to
their individual sale or use. The builder or developer must comply with
this article. Plot plans for a development must be submitted to the
Township for approval prior to any construction. Sewer plans
conforming to all original specifications established by the Township as
to type of pipe, location of mains, size of pipe, grades, methods of laying
pipe, and the type and construction of all necessary appurtenances will
be prepared by the developer's or builder's professional engineer and
approval obtained from the Township Engineer and all other necessary
state agencies. Where necessary lines shall be constructed beyond the
housing development areas to connect to the Township's sewer system.
The engineering fees and charges for permits shall be paid by the
builder or developer to the Township. In no case will lesser standards
than exist in the Township's sewer system and as outlined in this article
be permitted for any future extensions. Upon approval of the plans by
the Township, the extensions may be constructed by and at the expense
of the builder or developer, but only under the inspection of an
inspector designated by the Township Engineer. The cost of inspection,
including salaries and expenses, shall be borne by the builder or
developer making the extensions.
B. Upon completion of the sewer system for a development and following
formal acceptance by the Township, the ownership of the sewer system
shall be deeded to the Township, after which time the Township will
assume all maintenance operation of the system except that
maintenance which is specifically excluded at the time of acceptance.
A. Access. The Township shall have the right of access at any reasonable
time to any part of any improved property served by the sewer system
as shall be required for inspection, measurement, sampling and testing
and for performance of other functions relating to service rendered by
the Township through the sewer system. All applications for permits for
connections shall contain, as a condition of granting the permit, an
agreement permitting such access.
B. Additional rules and regulations. The Township reserves the right to
adopt additional rates, rules and regulations from time to time as it
shall deem necessary and proper in connection with the use and
operation of the sewer system or as may be required to meet necessary
costs and expenses or in order to comply with the covenants of the
Township with the holders from time to time of its sewer revenue bonds.
§ 270-6 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-8
265:935
§ 270-9. Connection fee.
C. Control of service. The Township shall not be liable for a deficiency or
failure of service when occasioned by an emergency, required repairs,
or a failure from any cause beyond control. The Township reserves the
right to restrict the use of sewer service whenever the public welfare
may require it.
D. Variance from rules. No officer or employee of the Township is
authorized to vary any rules without action by the Township Committee.
E. Notice of change of ownership. Each property owned must give the
Township or its authorized agent written notice of any change of
ownership.
A. There is charged and imposed upon the owner of each unit a connection
fee pursuant to Chapter 351, Water, § 351-6. All sewage flows shall be
subject to verification by the Township Engineer both at the time of
initial installation and at such time that future building permits are
applied for expansion or modification by the commercial or industrial
user at the site of the sewer connection.
(1) Freehold Township reserves the right to recalculate the connection
fee based on prior consumption, including at least 12 months'
actual flow. Freehold Township will bill the customer for any
additional connection fees based on actual use.
(2) The customer may request a recalculation of the connection fee
due to change of condition or flow. Based upon the consumption
experience, including at least 12 months of actual flow, the
Township's investment in the project and the prospect for longterm
change of flow, the Township shall make a determination if a
recalculation should be allowed.
B. Application to make time payments for the connection fee set forth
herein shall be made to the Township Administrator.
(1) Such time payments may be arranged if the following
circumstances exist:
(a) The income level of the owner(s) of the unit to be connected
must qualify as low or moderate pursuant to Mount Laurel
criteria in effect at the time of application.
(b) The unit to be connected must be the principal residence of the
owner(s).
(c) Submission of documentation establishing Subsection B(1)(a)
and (b) above, to the satisfaction of the Township
Administrator.
(2) If the foregoing items are not satisfied, the Township Administrator
shall deny the application for time payments.
§ 270-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-9
265:936
§ 270-10. Sewer rentals and charges.
(3) If the foregoing items are satisfied, the Township Administrator
shall recommend approval of the application and shall present the
matter to the Township Committee. In the event the Township
Committee shall determine to approve the application, it shall
adopt a resolution authorizing the Mayor and Township Clerk to
enter into an agreement to be prepared by the Township Attorney
providing for payment of the sewer connection fee over a time
period of six years. The agreement shall be in recordable form and
shall be recorded in the Monmouth County Clerk's office. The
agreement shall constitute a lien upon the property until paid in
full.
A. Sewer rentals and charges. Sewer rentals and charges are established
which shall be payable by and collected from the owner of each
connection unit the date upon which the Township shall notify the
owner in writing that the Township is prepared to accept sanitary
sewage or industrial waste from such connection unit for transportation
to and treatment at the required facilities. Sewer rentals and charges
shall be based upon annual debt amortization and operating costs,
including any necessary reserves, provided further that the sewer
rentals and charges for owners of connection units serviced through a
private sewer company shall be as established in Chapter 150, Fees.117
B. Industrial surcharge. All connection units of industrial users shall, in
addition to the sanitary sewer rentals and charges set forth here and
above, be subject to the surcharge provisions of § 270-6E. The Township
may require the installation of twenty-four-hour composite samplers at
the discharge of an industrial connection unit at the sole cost of the
industrial user in order to monitor discharge strength for purposes of
establishing accurate surcharge payments and enforcing the provisions
of this article against such industrial users.
C. Billing procedure.
(1) Sanitary sewer rentals and industrial waste charges shall be billed
in combination with water billing based on water usage on a
quarterly basis and shall be due and payable immediately. If any bill
or part rendered for water and sewer usage or for any other
charges in connection therewith is not paid before the 31st day
following the bill date, the bill shall be considered delinquent and
subject to interest at the prevailing rate fixed for interest for
delinquent real estate taxes from the bill date until such time as the
bill is paid in full, provided further that it shall be the responsibility
of any private sewer company participating in the Township's
sewerage system to establish billing procedures and collect and
117. Editor's Note: Original § 15-2.10b, Sanitary sewer rentals and charges, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 270-9 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-10
265:937
§ 270-11. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
enforce sanitary sewer rentals and charges. Unpaid charges and
rentals for connection with and the use of the water and sewer
systems shall be liens upon the premises connected until paid,
and the Township shall have the same remedies for the collection
thereof with interest, costs and penalties as it has by law for
collection of taxes upon real estate. In the case of a multiple
residential project, wherein units are individually owned and
served by other than an individual water meter for each individual
residential unit, the lien will be upon the premises served.
(2) Whenever service shall commence after the first day of any
quarterly period, sanitary sewer rentals for the first quarterly
period shall be prorated equitably.
(3) Every owner of improved property which is connected to the
sanitary sewer system initially shall provide the Township with and
thereafter shall keep the Township advised of his correct address.
Failure of any person to receive quarterly bills for sewer rentals
and charges shall not be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor
shall such failure result in an extension of the period of time during
which the next bill shall be payable. The Township may combine
billing for water consumption with billing for sewer service under
Chapter 351, Water, § 351-15 and render one statement detailing
both water and sewer charges. The methodology for applying the
sewer rates set forth in Chapter 150, Fees, to individually owned
multiple residential units contained within a development project
which is serviced by one or more common water meters shall be as
described in § 351-6C.
D. Measuring volume of industrial waste. Meters to measure the volume of
discharge of industrial waste from connection units discharging
industrial waste shall be furnished and installed by the Township in
accordance with the Township's standard procedure for installing water
meters. The cost of the meter and its installation shall be borne by the
owner. The meters shall be repaired and maintained by the Township
under the terms and conditions established by the Township. The
meters shall be accessible to the Township at all reasonable times for
reading, testing, inspection or repair.
E. Unpaid claims; liens. Unpaid charges and rentals for connection with
and use of the water and sanitary sewer system shall, to the degree
permitted by law, be liens upon the premises connected until paid, and
the Township shall have the same remedies for the collection thereof,
with interest, costs and penalties, as it has by law for the collection of
taxes upon real estate.
§ 270-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-11
265:938
ARTICLE II
Relocation of Mains
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-76-8 (§ 15-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 270-12. Approval required.
Any individual, partnership, corporation or public or private entity
proposing to widen, enlarge, alter or relocate any public or private rightof-
way within which are situated any municipally owned or operated sewer
and/or water mains and/or other related facilities shall, prior to the
widening, enlarging, altering or relocating of such right-of-way, submit to
and have approved by the Township Engineer and appropriate state agency
having jurisdiction a detailed plan for the relocation and/or protection of
such mains and/or other related facilities to a location at or near the
extremities of such right-of-way.
§ 270-13. Relocation plan.
The relocation plan submitted to the Township Engineer shall be prepared
by a licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey and shall
include plans and profiles of sufficient scale and of sufficient detail to
provide for a complete and independent review.
§ 270-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 270-12 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-14
265:939

ARTICLE III
Connection to Public Sewer System
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-81-22 (§ 15-5 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-86-24]
§ 270-15. Connection required.
Whenever there has been or shall have been established within the
Township a public system of sewage disposal operated and maintained by
the Township or by any public agency lawfully created for such purpose by
the Township Committee and sewage disposal lines have been installed in
any street, public or private, the owners of any and all buildings fronting or
located upon such street or streets shall be required, at their own expense,
to make connections from such buildings to said sewage disposal system.
§ 270-16. Time frame for connection.
The owner of every existing house, building or structure and the owner of
every building, house or structure to be constructed or acquired which may
be occupied or used by human beings located on the property along the
line of any public sewerage system created pursuant to the provisions of the
Sewerage Authority Law, P.L. 1946, c. 138, as amended and supplemented
in Title 40, Chapter 14A of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, now or
hereafter constructed or acquired in the Township shall connect and hook
up the sewerage facilities emanating from such house, building or structure
to such sewerage system within 30 days after the date on which notice has
been given to connect and hook up.
§ 270-17. Inspection.
The Township Engineer or his agent is hereby empowered to inspect and
examine any such proposed connection and to approve or disapprove the
manner, method and materials utilized in making such connection.
§ 270-18. Failure to comply; Township to make connection.
If, following notice as hereinafter provided, the owner of any property
affected hereby shall neglect or fail to make such connection, the Township
Committee may cause the same to be made under the direction of the
Engineer or his agent or award a contract for the making of such
connection.
§ 270-19. Notice of proposed connection.
Before proceeding to make any connection or awarding any contract for
the making thereof, the Township Committee shall cause notice of such
proposed connection to be given to the owner of any properties affected
thereby in the manner provided by law.
§ 270-15 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-20
265:941
§ 270-20. Recovery of costs.
When any sewer connection shall be made either by the Township or by
contract awarded thereby, a true and accurate account of the cost and
expense shall be kept and apportioned to the property or properties thereby
connected, and a true statement of such costs under oath shall be filed by
the Township Engineer with the Township Clerk. The Township Committee
shall examine the same and, if properly made, shall confirm it and file such
statement with the Tax Collector who shall thereupon file said charge as a
special assessment.
§ 270-21. Collection of charges.
Every sewer connection charge shall bear interest and penalties from the
same time and at the same rate as assessments for local improvements and
from the time of confirmation shall be a lien against the respective property
or properties so connected to the sewerage system to the same extent as
assessments for local improvements and shall be collected and enforced in
the same manner.
§ 270-22. Industrial or commercial structures.
If any house, building or structure referred to in § 270-13 above shall be
used for industrial or commercial purposes, the owner thereof shall connect
and hook up the sewerage facilities emanating from the sewerage system
within 30 days after the date on which notice has been given to connect and
hook up, under and pursuant to rules and regulations on file in the office of
the Township Clerk.
§ 270-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall violate this article
shall be subject to a fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II for each day of
delay after the expiration of 30 days in which the provisions of the order or
notice are not complied with.
§ 270-20 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-23
265:942
ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Connections to Public Sewer System
[Adopted 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-7]
§ 270-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Freehold, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit (other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit, NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal Clean
Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317 (a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MSA) — A conveyance
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Freehold or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. "Process wastewater" includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
§ 270-24 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-24
265:943
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 270-25. Prohibited conduct.
§ 270-26. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to the prohibition are as follows:
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Freehold any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
B. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by Township of
Freehold is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also
prohibited.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
§ 270-24 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-26
265:944
§ 270-27. Inspection.
Prior to final acceptance of all storm sewers, to be owned and operated
by the Township of Freehold, the developer shall provide the Township
Engineer's office with a video tape/DVD and report of an internal TV
inspection of all storm sewer pipe. The video/DVD and report will be
reviewed by the Township Engineer's office to ensure there are no defects
in the pipe.
§ 270-28. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer or by the
Township Engineer.
§ 270-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$2,000.
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(2) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 270-26 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-29
265:945

ARTICLE V
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-25]
§ 270-30. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by Freehold Township so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 270-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Freehold Township or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface- or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 270-32. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 270-30 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-32
265:947
§ 270-33. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 270-31 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see § 270-33C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 270-33 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension. For new and reconstructed inlets, use Type "N" curb piece
with the words "Dump No Waste — Drains To Waterway" stamped in the
curb piece.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Township Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 270-32 FREEHOLD CODE § 270-33
265:948
§ 270-34. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Freehold Township Code Enforcement
Officer or by the Freehold Township Police Department.
§ 270-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty or pleading guilty to a violation of this article shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter I, Article II, General Penalty,
for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard
herein.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) Rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 270-33 RIGHT TO FARM § 270-35
265:949
Chapter 273
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY
§ 273-1. Residency within prohibited area.
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the registration requirements
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq. (hereafter "sex offender"), to reside within
1,000 feet (hereafter "prohibited radius") of any public or private primary
and/or secondary school or educational facility, or any public or private
park, playground, tot-lot, library, recreational area, active and passive
parkland or child-care facility (hereafter "prohibited area"). The facilities
listed above do not necessarily have to be located within the boundaries of
the Township, so long as any portion of the prohibited radius around any
such facilities is located within the Township, it will be considered part of
the prohibited area.
§ 273-2. Map depicting prohibited area.
The prohibited area is depicted on a map entitled "Sex Offender Residency
Prohibited Area Map" prepared by the Township Engineer's office.
§ 273-3. Copies of map on file.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 273-1 and to
provide at a reasonable cost a true copy to any person, agency or court
which may request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is
a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is
hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of this chapter
shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk.
§ 273-4. Applicability. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-45]
A sex offender who resides within any prohibited area established pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall have 60 days from the effective date
of this chapter, or upon the termination of any residential lease entered into
prior to the effective date of this article and the term of which is not longer
than one year, whichever is later, to relocate outside the prohibited area.
Failure to move to a location which is in compliance with this article within
the prescribed time period shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 273-5. Exemption. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-45]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any sex offender who has
purchased property to be used as his/her primary residence which is located
within the prohibited area prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 273-6. Compliance; review of registry; procedures. [Added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-45118]
§ 270-35 FREEHOLD CODE § 273-6
273:950
§ 273-7. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 278
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 245. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
§ 278-1. Duty to remove. [Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-23]
A. Monitoring; enforcement. For informational purposes, each sex
offender who must register with the Police Department, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., shall be provided with a copy of this Chapter 273
and a copy of the Sex Offender Residency Prohibited Area Map by the
Police Department. However, it shall not be a defense to a charge of
violating this chapter that, upon registering with the Police
Department, the accused was not given a copy of this chapter and/or
map. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-13]
B. (Reserved)119
C. Township Administrator’s procedures. The Township Administrator is
hereby authorized to initiate and direct, by administrative order, such
additional or supplementary procedures as the Administrator may
determine will be likely to enhance compliance with this chapter.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of residential premises located in close
proximity to a public elementary school or a public middle school, as
depicted on the maps described in the immediately succeeding
paragraph, shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of
such street or the abutting right-of-way actually used by the public, or
in the event of ice which may be so frozen as to make removal
impractical, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand or
ashes within 48 hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed
thereon.
B. Exhibits to this chapter are maps and street listings identifying the
residential properties subject to the removal provisions of the
immediately preceding paragraph.120
118. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 273-6, Violations and penalties,
as § 273-7.
119. Editor's Note: Former § 273-6B, Monthly review of registry, was repealed 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-13.
120. Editor's Note: Said maps are on file in the Township offices.
§ 273-6 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY § 278-1
273:951
§ 278-2. Private roadways.
§ 278-3. Deposit on streets and sidewalks.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or on any street, it being the
intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing,
casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which accumulates within the
private property belonging to that person on the sidewalks or streets of the
Township.
§ 278-4. Removal by Township; recovery of costs.
In case the procedures required by the § 278-2A are not undertaken or in
case snow or ice shall be cast or deposited thereon or placed upon the
sidewalks or the street by the owner, tenant or occupant of any premises
as hereinabove provided, the same may be removed under the direction of
the Mayor, Administrator or Director of Public Works, and the cost of the
removal as nearly as can be ascertained shall be certified by the Director
of Public Works to the Township Committee. The Township Committee shall
examine the certification and if found to be correct shall cause the cost to
be charged against the real estate upon which the private street, highway,
lane, alley or roadway is located or which is abutting or bordering upon
such sidewalks, and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
C. The owner, occupant or tenant of commercial premises used by the
public or business invitees shall remove all snow and ice from the
sidewalks, streets, rights-of-way and parking areas used by the public in
the transaction of business thereat within 10 hours after the same shall
fall or be formed thereon. In the event of ice which may be so frozen to
make removal impractical, the owner, occupant or tenant shall cause
the same to be thoroughly covered with sand or ashes within 10 hours
after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
A. The owner of real property upon which there has been constructed any
private street, highway, lane, alley or other roadway which is open to
the public or residents of the development or to which the public is
invited shall commence snow and ice removal from and application of
sand and/or salt on such street, highway, lane, alley, or other roadway
within four hours after the same shall first fall or be formed thereon;
shall continue snow and ice removal and sanding or salting during the
duration of the storm in such a manner as to render such street,
highway, lane, alley, or other roadway passable and safe; and shall have
removed all snow and ice therefrom within 10 hours after the cessation
of precipitation.
B. If the owner fails to perform as required by Subsection A, the Mayor,
Administrator or Director of Public Works may cause performance to be
undertaken as described in Subsection A and thereafter the provisions
of § 278-4 shall be applicable.
§ 278-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 278-4
273:952
and a tax in the same manner as the taxes next to be levied and assessed
upon the premises and shall bear interest and be enforced and collected by
the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes. The imposition
and collection of a fine or other penalty for violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall not constitute any bar to the right of the Township to
collect the cost, as certified, for the removal of snow or ice in the manner
herein authorized.
§ 278-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 282
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 115.
Environmental impact statements — See Ch.
142.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Floodplains and watercourses — See Ch. 166.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Soil removal and soil fill — See Ch. 286.
§ 282-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Freehold Township Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Ordinance."
§ 282-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control soil erosion and sediment damages
and related environmental damage by providing for and requiring
provisions adequate for surface water retention and drainage and for the
protection of exposed soil surfaces.
§ 282-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter unless otherwise specifically stated:
CRITICAL AREA — A highly erodible or severely eroded area which
produces sediment.
EROSION — Detachment and movement of rock or soil fragments by water,
wind, ice and/or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which indicates
necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of timing for the
§ 278-4 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 282-3
282:953
installation thereof, which plan will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be at least equivalent to the standards.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for the use of land
within its capabilities and treatment within practical limits according to
a chosen use in order to prevent further deterioration of soil and water
resources.
FREEHOLD SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental
subdivision of this state which encompasses the Township of Freehold and
which has been organized in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24,
Title 4, New Jersey Revised Statutes.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water, within the
Township.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving but not limited to clearing,
grading, transporting and/or filling which causes land to be exposed to the
danger of erosion.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this chapter.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to retain
rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STANDARDS — Those criteria for soil erosion and sediment control in New
Jersey as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or other
stabilized soil surfaces, including clearing and/or grubbing operations.
§ 282-4. Plan and permit required.
A. Regulation. No land area shall be disturbed by any person within the
Township unless and until that person shall have first submitted to the
Township Engineer a plan to provide for the prevention of soil erosion
and the control of sediment for such land area consistent with the
provisions of this chapter and such plan shall have been approved and a
valid permit shall have been issued by the Township Engineer. All plans
for soil erosion and sediment control shall be reviewed and approved,
when in conformance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey as promulgated by the New Jersey State Soil
§ 282-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 282-4
282:954
§ 282-5. Design principals; maintenance.
Conservation Committee, within a period of 30 days of submission of a
complete application unless, by mutual agreement in writing between
the municipality and the applicant, this period is extended for an
additional 30 days. Failure of the municipality to make a decision within
such period or such extension thereof shall constitute certification. The
provisions of this section shall apply to all land except that exempted by
§ 282-7.
B. Data required. The applicant for a permit shall submit a separate soil
erosion and sediment control plan for each site sought to be disturbed.
Such plan shall contain, at least, the following information:
(1) Location and description of existing natural and artificial features
on the site and for a distance of 200 feet of the surrounding area
adjacent to the site along every perimeter of the site. It shall
include general topography and soil characteristics as well as a
copy of the State Conservation Soil Survey.
(2) Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
(3) Proposed protective measures for soil erosion and sediment control
which shall meet or exceed the standards. The aforesaid
"standards" are adopted and included in this chapter by reference
as if set forth at length herein. The standards referred to shall be
on file at the offices of the Freehold Soil Conservation District and
the Township Clerk.
(4) A schedule of the sequence of installation of plan erosion and
sediment control measures as related to the progress of the
project, including starting and completion dates.
(5) All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for
approval.
C. Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Township
Engineer on forms supplied by the Township Clerk. In addition to those
items set forth in Subsection B, the application form shall require the
name and address of the applicant as well as a cost estimate for the
installation of any required structure. The fee for processing the
application shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees. The applicant
shall be provided with written notice of such decision by the Township
Engineer (or other authorized municipal agent). A copy of such
decision, including the name of the applicant, site location by street
address and block and lot number, and proposed land use, shall be sent
to the Freehold Soil Conservation District. The municipality shall also
make available such other information as may be required by the
district.
A. General design principals. Control measures shall apply to all aspects of
the proposed land disturbance and shall be in operation in all stages of
§ 282-4 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 282-5
282:955
the disturbance activity. The following principles shall apply to the soil
erosion and sediment control plans:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be
done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
(2) Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected unless the work
sought to be performed makes it impossible.
(3) The extent of the disturbed area shall be kept to a minimum and
shall employ the least amount of site as is practical.
(4) The duration of the exposure of the site shall be kept within
practical limits and with due consideration to the season and
weather conditions but with a view to completion within the least
amount of time possible.
(5) Either temporary mulching or other suitable stabilization measures
shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during construction
or other land disturbance.
(6) Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions during and after
development or disturbance.
(7) Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on the site wherever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge and reduce peak
discharges.
(8) Sediment shall be retained on site to the maximum extent feasible.
(9) Diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures shall
be installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
B. Maintenance. All permanent soil erosion and sediment control
measures installed under this chapter shall be adequately maintained
for a period of one year after the completion of the approved plan. The
Township Engineer shall provide the applicant upon request a
certificate indicating the date upon which the measures called for in the
approved plan were completed.
C. Maintenance guarantees. At the completion of the disturbance
contemplated in the permit, the applicant shall post a maintenance
guarantee in a sum equal to 15% of the amount set forth in the
application to install the soil erosion and sediment control measures
required as a condition of the permit. This guarantee shall be in the
form of cash or certified check and shall be expressly conditioned upon
the maintenance by the permit holder of all of the permanent control
measures installed for a period of one year and shall particularly
guarantee the remedying of any defects in such installations which
occur or become evident during that time period. At the completion of
the one-year time period, the permit holder shall notify the Township
Engineer in writing of the expiration of the time period, and upon
§ 282-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 282-5
282:956
§ 282-6. Violations and penalties.
If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any standard
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply
with the provisions of a certified plan, the municipality or the district may
institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive relief to prohibit
and prevent such violation or violations, and said Court may proceed in
a summary manner. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or any standard promulgated pursuant to this chapter or fails to
comply with the provisions of a certified plan shall be liable to a penalty
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, to be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1 et seq.). The Superior Court, County Court, County District Court,
and Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce said Penalty
Enforcement Law. If the violation is of a continuing nature each day during
which it continues shall constitute an additional separate and distinct
offense.
§ 282-7. Exemptions.
The following activities are specifically exempt from this chapter:
§ 282-8. Inspection and enforcement.
The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Township
Engineer, the Building Inspector, the Zoning Officer or other authorized
representative or agent of the aforesaid who shall also inspect or require
adequate inspection of the work. If the authorized official finds existing
conditions not as stated in the applicant's erosion or sediment control plan:
satisfactory final inspection, the Township Engineer shall advise the
Township Clerk as to his disposition of the funds on file.
A. Soil disturbance associated with existing single-family residential
dwellings or an area of 5,000 square feet or less associated with
existing two-family dwellings.
B. Use of land for gardening primarily for the home consumption of the
person performing the gardening.
C. Agriculture use of lands when operated in accordance with the Farm
Conservation Plan approved by the Freehold Soil Conservation District
or when it is determined by the Freehold Soil Conservation District that
such use will not cause excessive erosion or sedimentation.
A. The municipality may issue a stop construction order if a project is not
being executed in accordance with an approved soil erosion and
sediment control plan;
B. No certificate of occupancy for a project shall be issued unless there
has been compliance with the provisions of the approved plan for soil
erosion and sediment control. A formal report of such compliance must
§ 282-5 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 282-8
282:957
§ 282-9. Appeals.
Appeals from decisions by authorized officials under this chapter may be
made to the Township Committee in writing within 10 days from the date
of such decision. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Township Committee within 30 days from the date of the appeal.
Chapter 286
SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 115.
Environmental impact statements — See Ch.
142.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Floodplains and watercourses — See Ch. 166.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
282.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
§ 286-1. Findings.
The Township Committee finds that the uncontrolled and unregulated
excavation, filling and removal of soil has resulted and will result in
conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and general welfare,
deterring substantially the efforts of the Township to promote and
effectuate the general purpose of Township planning.
§ 286-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision,
development or construction of three or more dwelling houses intended as
single-family residences, in any subdivision, business or industrial buildings
for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by another person or persons.
EXCAVATOR — Any person, firm or corporation, partnership or association
engaged in the moving, removal, importing or excavation of soil or topsoil
from, to, in or upon any land in the Township.121
be filed with the municipal agent authorized to issue certificates of
occupancy. A copy of this report shall be sent to the Freehold Soil
Conservation District; and
C. The applicant shall be required to have the approved soil erosion and
sediment control plan on site during construction.
§ 282-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 286-2
282:958
MOVE — To dig or excavate; to remove; to deposit; to place and to fill;
to grade, regrade, level or otherwise alter or change the location of any
existing contour; to transport and to supply; or to scrape or otherwise
disturb; however, the act of moving soil or topsoil from one portion of a
premises to another portion of the same premises shall not be included
hereunder.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any land, or having such other
interest or estate therein, as will permit the exercise of effective possession
hereof or dominion or control thereover.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation or
any combination of two or more of them.
PREMISES — One or more contiguous parcels of land in single ownership.
Parcels shall not be deemed to be contiguous if separated by a road,
railroad, right-of-way, brook, stream or other natural division.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, irrespective
of the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil, which in its natural state constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more by weight of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation and growth.
§ 286-3. Permit required; review of application.122
A. Applicability. No owner, developer, excavator or other person shall
move or cause, allow, permit or suffer to be moved the soil on or to any
premises in the Township for use other than on the premises from
which it shall be taken or brought to, unless and until a soil removal/soil
fill permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Determination.
(1) Determination of an application submitted under § 286-4A hereof in
conjunction with a land use application shall be by either of the
following boards as the circumstances may require:
(a) Where it is claimed that the removal or importing of soil is in
conjunction with a use permitted under the existing zoning
regulations of the Township, following public notice as
provided under Chapter 190, Land Use, of this Code, a public
hearing shall be held before the Planning Board of the
Township for the purpose of determining that the removal or
importing of the soil applied for is necessary and essential to
the development of the premises from which the soil is to be
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 286-2 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 286-3
282:959
§ 286-4. Contents of application. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
The procedure for filing an application for the issuance of a soil removal/soil
fill permit shall be as follows:
removed or imported and is in conjunction with a use
permitted under the zoning regulations of the Township.
(b) Where it is claimed that the right to remove or import the soil
from the premises is by reason of a valid nonconforming prior
use of the property in conjunction with the removal or
importing of the soil, following public notice as provided under
Chapter 190, Land Use, of this Code, there shall be a public
hearing before the Planning Board of the Township for the
purpose of determining the existence of the valid
nonconforming prior use in conjunction with the removal or
importing of soil from the premises. [Amended 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-26]
(2) The Planning Board shall not act until a written report has been
received from the Township Engineer, which report shall be
rendered within 30 days of the filing of the application for the soil
removal/soil fill permit. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
C. Where the removal or importing of soil is proposed in conjunction with
a development application for which public notice and a public hearing
are required under the terms of Chapter 190, Land Use, then no
separate notice shall be required for the proposed soil removal or soil
fill which shall be considered as an element of the primary development
application. Further, in those instances where the applicant is unable to
precisely calculate the amount of soil to be removed or imported, the
Planning Board may accept an approximation of the amount of the soil
at the time of the public hearing and defer issuance of the permit until
precise calculations are submitted and the report of the Freehold
Township Engineer is received, which deferred action may be taken
without the necessity of any further public notice or public hearing.
D. In all other circumstances the Township Committee shall make the
determination as to the application submitted.
A. Form of application.
(1) On a form to be supplied by the Township Clerk, the applicant shall,
under oath, set forth in triplicate the following:
(a) The identity and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
firm, corporation, partnership or association, the name and
address of its registered agent shall be disclosed.
§ 286-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 286-4
282:960
(b) A description of the land in question, lot, block and tax map
page number.
(c) The identity and address of the owner of the land.
(d) An estimate of the quantity of soil to be removed or imported in
cubic yards.
(e) In the case of removal or importing of soil, the amount to be
removed from or imported to the Township of Freehold shall be
estimated and stated on the application.
(f) The proposed date of commencement and completion of the
work, said completion date in no event to exceed one year from
the date of approval of the application except as provided in
§ 286-7.
(g) An estimate of the type and number of machines and other
equipment to be used in the operation, the daily starting and
finishing time during which such machines are to be operated,
and what protection will be provided to keep children, and
other unwary persons, from gaining access thereto.
(h) The location or locations to which it is proposed that the soil
will be removed upon the issuance of a soil removal permit.
(i) The hauling route for the soil removal.
(j) The name, truck size and daily trips of the contractor removing
the soil.
(2) Where the applicant is not the owner of the land, there shall
accompany the application a letter from the owner authorizing the
application and further authorizing the applicant to remove the soil
if the permit is granted.
B. Topographical map. Accompanying the application there shall be filed a
topographical with cross-sections map in triplicate of the land upon
which the proposed soil moving operations are to be conducted and all
surrounding lands within 200 feet of the perimeter of land which is the
subject matter of the application, prepared and certified by a licensed
professional civil engineer or land surveyor of the State of New Jersey
on the scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet and based upon the
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum showing both as to the
land and as to all of the surrounding land.
(1) The dimensions of the land and the lot and block number of the
land and of each lot surrounding the land within 200 feet thereof as
shown on the current assessment map of the Township.
(2) The present grade on a fifty-foot grid layout with contour lines at
two-foot levels up to and including 20 acres; for more than 20
acres, one-hundred-foot grids with contour lines at five-foot levels.
§ 286-4 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 286-4
282:961
§ 286-5. Fees.
The nonrefundable fees set forth in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be paid to the
Township upon the filing of an application.
Where access to adjoining lands is not permitted, the contour lines
of the perimeter lands shall be taken from the available State of
New Jersey or United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Map of the
particular area.
(3) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets, streams,
bodies of water and watercourses, natural or artificial.
(4) All existing surface or subsurface water drainage conditions and
provisions thereof.
(5) All wooded areas.
(6) The proposed finished grades at points in Subsection B(2) when the
work has been completed with the same requirements as contained
therein.
(7) The quantity in cubic yards of the soil involved in the work.
(8) The average depth of topsoil as determined by taking borings in
approximate center of each fifty- or one-hundred-foot grid. Soil
borings shall be provided at the rate of one boring for each five
acres of area disturbed, except that where soil removal would be
within five feet above the groundwater table, additional borings
may be required by the Township Engineer.
(9) The grades of all abutting streets and lands.
(10) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area upon
completion of the proposed work.
(11) The proposed details of entry and egress for surface water
drainage and of any streams, bodies of water, and watercourses,
natural or artificial.
C. Other data. In addition to the above requirements, the applicant shall
furnish such other pertinent data as the Township Engineer may
require after he has had an opportunity to examine the proposed
project, including the extent, in cubic yards, of topsoil to be removed
and whether such topsoil is to be replaced on the site in question or
moved to some other place and, if so, whether inside or outside of the
Township.
D. Soil Conservation District approval. Accompanying the application shall
be a written approval from the Freehold Soil Conservation District of
plans for the removal from the premises of the soil and approval of the
disposal site for the soil, as may be required under regulations of the
Soil Conservation District.
§ 286-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 286-6
282:962
§ 286-6. Considerations. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-26]
A. Prior to consideration of the application by the Township Committee or
the Planning Board, there shall also be a determination by the Township
Clerk that the application is in order and that all reports have been
submitted by the Township Engineer.
B. In considering whether to approve an application and grant a soil
removal permit, the Township Committee or the Planning Board shall
consider the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of lands in the
Township.
C. In considering whether to approve an application and grant a soil
removal permit, whereby soil will be removed to a location or locations
outside of the Township, the Township Committee and the Planning
Board shall consider the following additional factors:
(1) The composition of the soil in order to encourage, to the degree
possible, the maximum use of retention of topsoil within the
Township.
(2) The need for the soil in a location in the Township readily
accessible for deposit.
(3) The relative cost of removing the soil to a location within the
Township, as opposed to a location outside of the Township.
(4) Any time constraints which would unreasonably restrict the
development of the land from which the soil is being removed to a
location inside or outside the Township.
D. Upon examination of the entire record by the Township Committee and
the Planning Board, including any supplemental reports by the
Township Engineer, if the Township Committee or the Planning Board
determines that the proposed soil removal will not create conditions
inimical to the public health, welfare and safety and will not result in
the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or
fertility problems, or depressed land values, nor create any drainage or
sewage problems or other conditions inimical to the land use in the
Township, it shall authorize the issuance of a soil removal permit by the
§ 286-6 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 286-6
282:963
§ 286-7. Operations under permit.
The following regulations shall govern the operations under the issued soil
removal permit:
Township Clerk. The Township Committee or the Planning Board shall
make its final decision and determination not later than its second
regular meeting following the hearing concerning the application for
the soil removal permit. If no action has been taken within that time
period, the application shall be deemed denied.
A. In the removal of soil, when the permit has been duly granted, the
owner or person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there
shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions, that there shall be no
interruption with natural drainage, and in such a manner that the area
shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to
the contour lines and grades as approved by the Township Engineer.
The Township Engineer or his authorized representative shall make
periodic inspections to determine that there is no deviation from the
information and requirements of the application as approved.
B. The applicant shall be required to section the entire property which is
the subject of his permit into areas which shall be inside of a fence and
he shall so schedule the work of soil removal so that the operation
conducted in one section shall be complete and that section shall be at
final grade before work shall commence in any other section of the
premises.
C. In the event the application for a soil removal permit involves the
complete removal of a bank which extends above the elevation of a
public road or street adjacent to the land upon which the removal
project is to take place, the moving or removal shall be conducted so as
to leave the final grade of the land or lot from which the bank is to be
removed at a grade that will not create a road or street. The final grade
shall not be lower than the grade of the surrounding lands or of the
public road or street, and the final grade shall be established and
maintained at a minimum of 1/2 of 1% to ensure proper drainage. In
establishing final grades, the factors to be considered shall be the same
as those listed but, in any event, shall not be less than 1% (0.5% or six
inches in 100 feet).
D. Where earth is moved in order to lower a grade or to alter an existing
slope, the upper crown or brink shall not be closer to any property line
than 15 feet and this distance shall be increased at the rate of one foot
for each one foot of vertical height of the slope up to a maximum
required distance of 25 feet from any property line.
E. All trees, stumps, brush and other removed vegetation shall be removed
and shall not be burned on the premises.
§ 286-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 286-7
282:964
§ 286-8. Suspension or revocation of permit.
Upon 10 days' notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Township
Committee, the permit of any person may be revoked or suspended for such
time period as the Township Committee may determine for any violation
of the terms hereof, or the terms and conditions of any permit granted
hereunder. The Township reserves the right, in the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare, to withdraw approval of the application and the
issuance of any permit, at which time all operations under the application
and permit are to cease immediately.
§ 286-9. Performance guarantee.
F. The area so excavated shall be graded and covered with four inches of
topsoil and seeded with perennial grass during the planting season. If
sufficient topsoil for four-inch cover was not available from the
premises then a cover crop as prescribed by the Township Engineer
shall be spread on the premises. Thereafter, the snow fence may be
removed. All banks shall be stabilized in a manner satisfactory to the
Township Engineer.
G. Every person who shall transport over the streets, roads or highways in
the Township any soil removed from any land or premises pursuant to a
soil removal permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall sweep,
pick up and remove or cause to be swept, picked up and removed all
dust, dirt and mud from the roadways, streets or highways and shall
apply, or cause to be applied, to the roadways, streets or highways a
dust preventive wherever the same shall be determined necessary,
whenever such fact shall be communicated to the holder of the permit
by the Township Engineer or a member of the Police Department. In the
event of failure, neglect or refusal of any person to sweep, pick up, and
remove dust, dirt and mud, or to apply a dust preventive when required
by this section, the Township Engineer is authorized to suspend any soil
removal permit issued for a period of not less than three days or report
said fact to the Township Committee, in writing, for the purpose of its
determination as to whether or not the soil removal permit shall be
revoked as hereinafter provided.
H. When the permit has been duly granted, no soil shall be removed to a
location outside of the Township unless the Township Committee has, in
issuing the soil permit, specifically approved such removal pursuant to
standards set forth in § 286-6.
A. Before the soil removal permit is issued by the Township Clerk, the
permittee shall file with the Township Clerk a performance guarantee
to assure pavement stability, maintenance, cleaning, traffic direction
when required and utility protection in conjunction with the removal
activity at the premises or land. The guarantee shall be posted for the
duration of the haul cycle for removal of the soil from the premises and
§ 286-7 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 286-9
282:965
§ 286-10. Exemptions.
The following soil removal activities are specifically exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
§ 286-11. Violations and penalties.
land and until released by the Township. The guarantee required shall
be in the following amounts:
(1) Up to 1,000 cubic yards: $15,000 per mile of the haul route which is
along Township roads. The amount for a fractional mile shall be
apportioned.
(2) More than 1,000 cubic yards: $50,000 per mile of the haul route
which is along Township roads for each 25,000 cubic yards or
fraction thereof. The guarantee amount for fractional miles shall be
apportioned.
B. The calculation of the performance guarantee shall be made by or
under the supervision of the Township Engineer.
C. The performance guarantee posted shall be at least 10% by cash or
certified check made payable to the Township of Freehold. The balance
of the performance guarantee may be a performance bond issued by a
surety company, approved by the Township Attorney as to form, or such
other security as may be approved by the Township Committee.
D. The condition of the performance guarantee shall be that the permittee
has properly completed its soil removal work and that pavement
stability, maintenance, cleaning, traffic direction where required and
utility protection have been maintained or restored at the site and along
the haul route. In the event any of the foregoing conditions have not
been met, the permittee and the surety shall be liable to the Township
for the reasonable cost of completion or restoration or reimbursement
of traffic direction costs.
E. Upon completion or abandonment of the work, the Township Engineer
shall inspect the site and haul route and render a written report to the
Township Committee regarding action as to the performance
guarantee. Any reduction or release of the performance guarantee shall
be authorized by resolution of the Township Committee.
A. The removal of soil in connection with the construction or alteration of
a swimming pool or septic system for a single-family residence.
B. The construction, alteration or addition to or of one or two dwelling
houses intended for single-family residential purposes in a subdivision.
C. Any soil removal involving soil disturbance of 100 cubic yards or less on
a particular and specific lot.
§ 286-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 286-11
282:966
Chapter 288
SOLICITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Loitering — See Ch. 204.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 232.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any standard
promulgated pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law or
who fails to comply with a soil removal permit shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. If the violation is of a
continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall constitute
an additional and separate and distinct offense under this section.
B. In the event that construction is involved in the alleged violation, the
Construction Code Official shall issue a stop-construction order until
there has been compliance with the provisions and requirements of this
chapter.
§ 286-11 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 286-11
282:967

ARTICLE I
Commercial
[Adopted 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-7123]
§ 288-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — A person or entity seeking to obtain a license for
commercial solicitation.
CANVASSER — Any person who travels, either by foot or automobile
or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to
house or from street to street to seek or develop support for, to conduct
market research about, to determine feelings or opinions about, to
conduct a survey about, or explain a position about and on behalf of any
commercial product, cause or organization.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual receiving compensation, in any form
whatsoever, from an entity for engaging in solicitation within the
Township.
GOODS and/or SERVICES — Includes but is not limited to food
(including but not limited to ice cream, refreshments and farm
products), magazines and periodicals, advertisements, commercial
handbills, personal property, coupons, products, merchandise, wares,
orders or contracts for a service, home improvement or alterations.
ITINERANT VENDOR or SOLICITOR — Any person who travels, either
by foot or automobile or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house or from street to street taking or attempting
to take orders for the sale of goods of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample
of the object to be sold, and whether he/she is collecting advance
payments on such sales; but shall not include wholesalers calling on
retail merchants.
LICENSE — A license for commercial solicitation issued by the
Township of Freehold pursuant to the provisions of this article.
PEDDLER or HAWKER — Any person who travels, either by foot or
automobile or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from
house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods for the purpose of selling and delivering them to
prospective customers.
PERSON — Not only an individual, but also any organization, firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class, league or other entity or group.
123. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Ch. 288, Solicitation, Commercial, adopted
11-29-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-38, as amended.
§ 288-1 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-1
282:969
§ 288-2. License required.
Except as otherwise provided in § 288-3 below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to solicit, sell or dispose of or to offer to sell or dispose of any
goods, or to solicit orders for the performance of any service or to engage
in commercial canvassing within the corporate limits of the Township of
Freehold without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this article. Such license shall not be transferable from the
person to whom issued to any other person. A separate license shall be
obtained by each solicitor, itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or canvasser
for every agent or employee working for him/her.
§ 288-3. Exemptions from requirements.
The requirements of this article shall not apply to the following:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — To go in or upon the streets, roads, and
semiprivate and private property in the Township of Freehold without
having been invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the property,
for the purpose of advertising, promoting or selling any products, goods
or services or conducting market research or a market or opinion
survey regarding commercial goods or services. Solicitors shall include
but shall not be limited to itinerant vendors, peddlers, hawkers and
canvassers of commercial products or services. Solicitation shall
include the placement upon private property of handbills or other
written material advertising goods or services for sale. Solicitation shall
also include the sale of goods or services which the solicitor promises to
donate or deliver to a charitable or other nonprofit institution on behalf
of the purchaser.
B. Word usage. For the purpose of this article, words and phrases shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
(2) Words used in the singular include the plural, and conversely words
in the plural include the singular;
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; and
(4) Use of the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender.
A. Any person honorably discharged from the military service who has a
license under N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.
B. Any person who is an exempt firefighter of a volunteer fire department,
as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing a license in
conformity with said law.
C. Any public utility or its employees, which said utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
§ 288-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 288-3
282:970
§ 288-4. Application for license.
§ 288-5. Investigation and approval of application.
provided, however, that such employee shall display the identification
badge or card issued by his/her employer.
D. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or
other articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises
of persons who had ordered the same or were entitled to receive the
same by reason of a prior agreement.
E. Any individual engaged in the delivery of newspapers published in the
state.
F. Commercial travelers or selling agents calling upon commercial
establishments in the usual course of business.
G. Any person to whom Article II (noncommercial solicitation) of this
chapter applies.
A. Every applicant for a license under this article shall be 18 years of age
or older and shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 195,
Article I, General Licensing Requirements.
B. Each applicant for a license shall secure through a private agency a
criminal history background check, conducted not more than 14 days
prior to the filing of the application. Such criminal history background
check must be submitted (as part of the application) directly from the
private agency to the Chief of Police. The criminal history background
check shall be in sufficient detail and scope to reveal any criminal
history recorded with the State Bureau of Identification or with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and to allow the Chief of Police to reach
an informed decision as required by § 288-5A(2) below.
A. The investigation required under § 195-3 shall be limited to that
sufficient for the Chief of Police or his designee to make a determination
that:
(1) The issuance of a license is in accordance with the provisions of
§ 288-3 above and N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18 et seq.; and
(2) The applicant has not been convicted of any criminal offense or a
violation of a municipal ordinance relating adversely to the
registrant's fitness to perform activities regulated by this article,
including those involving violence or the threat of violence.
B. For the purpose of this section, a plea of guilty, nolo contendere or any
other similar disposition of alleged criminal activity shall be deemed a
violation.
§ 288-3 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-6
282:971
§ 288-6. License fee.
The license fee payable under this article shall be provided in Chapter
150, Fees, for each license and shall be paid at the time the application is
submitted. The license fee is nonrefundable.
§ 288-7. Time restrictions.
Solicitation shall take place within the Township only between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 7:30 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays.
§ 288-8. Carrying and displaying of badge.
Each individual and/or member of any organization permitted to conduct
solicitations shall attach and display, on the front outer layer of his/her
clothing, a badge to be supplied by the Township. The badges shall be
lettered and delivered by the Clerk and shall be uniform in style and design.
The following information shall be printed on the badge:
§ 288-9. Code of conduct.
Every individual issued a license under this article shall conduct himself/
herself according to the following code of conduct:
A. Name of the solicitor;
B. Name and address of the organization on whose behalf the solicitation
is made. The municipal and state address of the organization shall be
the most conspicuous writing on the badge and shall be at least twice as
large as any other printed matter contained on the badge;
C. Expiration date of the license;
D. A statement that the Township of Freehold has licensed the solicitation
but neither approves nor disapproves of the organization and/or its
activities.
E. Photograph of solicitor.
A. He/she shall not enter or remain upon any resident's property that is on
the "Do Not Solicit" List (See Article III of this chapter.) or upon which it
is posted that solicitors are not permitted, or notice of similar content.
B. He/she shall display his/her badge in a visible manner as described in
§ 288-8.
C. He/she shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling unit without
express invitation from the occupant therein.
D. He/she shall immediately leave the resident's property upon request by
the resident to do so.
§ 288-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 288-9
282:972
§ 288-10. Prohibited practices.
E. He/she shall not leave, on or about the resident's property, any circular,
samples or other matter or material unless same is handed to an
occupant of the property.
F. He/she shall not indicate that the Township endorses or sponsors any of
the views expressed or the organization for which support of
contribution is sought.
G. He/she shall not make false claims, misrepresentations or materially
incorrect statements concerning the solicitation, organizations
represented or the use to be made of the amount solicited.
H. He/she shall not engage in any course of alarming conduct or conduct
himself/herself so as to reasonably alarm or annoy the occupant of the
dwelling.
I. He/she shall not engage in any conduct which is prohibited by any
statute, regulation or ordinance in effect in the Township of Freehold.
J. He/she shall present written receipts in accordance with § 288-12.
K. He/she shall have a complete copy of this article in his/her possession at
all times.
L. He/she shall be wearing a reflective vest and carrying a functioning
flashlight at dusk or later.
M. He/she shall have in his/her possession at all times a copy of the "Do
Not Solicit" List (See Article III of this chapter.) that is no more than two
weeks old. A current copy of the updated "Do Not Solicit" List is
accessible on the Township's official website.
A. No individual shall go upon any property or create any sound in a
manner calculated to attract the attention of any occupant of a
residence on which is posted a sign expressly prohibiting such activity.
B. No individual shall enter a roadway for the purpose of approaching
occupants of motor vehicles using the roadway or approach such
occupants; have any exclusive right to any location; operate or conduct
any of his/her business from a fixed location; or be permitted to operate
in any congested area where his/her operations might impede or
inconvenience the public. For the purposes of this section, the judgment
of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed presumptive
as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced. As used herein, a licensee shall be deemed to be
operating from a fixed location if he/she has been in the same location,
or one within 200 feet in any direction of the location, or remains on the
same lot for more than 30 consecutive minutes.
C. No individual shall solicit any goods or services, including but not
limited to food, ice cream and soft drinks, within 1,000 feet of any
§ 288-9 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-10
282:973
§ 288-11. Solicitation at shopping centers.
Whenever any individual or organization shall be limiting its proposed
solicitation activity to a particular shopping center, as defined in § 190-3, all
approvals for such proposed solicitation shall be received from the shopping
center management. Such person or organization seeking to solicit shall
make application to the shopping center management for permission to
solicit. If the shopping center management approves of the proposed
solicitation, it shall have the applicant complete an application form
provided to the shopping center management by the Township Clerk's
office. The shopping center management shall then forward the completed
application to the Township Clerk, together with notification of the dates
and times during which the solicitation shall take place. The duration,
coordination and timing of any such solicitation(s) shall be at the discretion
of the shopping center management. Upon receipt of a solicitation
application approved by the shopping center management, the Township
Clerk's office shall notify the Township's Code Enforcement Department and
Police Department of the solicitation activity which has been approved at
the particular center.
§ 288-12. Written receipts required.
Any person receiving money or any other thing for a value of $1 or more
from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to this article shall
give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing the
date and the amount received, provided that this section shall not apply to
any contribution collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in
solicitation where the use thereof has been approved by the Township in
accordance with this article where it is impractical to determine the amount
of each contribution. Copies of such receipts shall be kept and available for
inspection upon the request of a police officer.
§ 288-13. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township of Freehold or the
Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 288-14. Violations and penalties.
In addition to license revocation as set forth in § 195-9, any person,
organization or agent thereof found guilty of violating any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in
commercial establishment or machine selling, vending or dispensing
the same or substantially similar goods or services.
D. No individual shall solicit any goods or services, including but not
limited to food, ice cream and soft drinks, in any municipal park or
other place of recreation or cultural activity or upon any public street or
right-of-way adjacent to such municipal park or place of recreational or
cultural activity.
§ 288-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 288-14
282:974
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, unless the penalty prescribed for such
conduct by state statute is less, in which case the lesser penalties shall
apply.
§ 288-14 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-14
282:975

ARTICLE II
Noncommercial
[Adopted 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-8124]
§ 288-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVITY — The act of engaging in noncommercial canvassing or soliciting.
CANVASSER — A person who is canvassing.
CANVASSING — The activity of traveling, either by foot or automobile or
any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house
or from street to street to seek votes, support (not necessarily monetary)
for any noncommercial cause or organization, to determine feelings or
opinions, to conduct a survey, to discuss or debate a topic, or to explain a
position.
CHARITABLE AND PHILANTHROPIC — Those persons and/or
organizations with a valid and unexpired registration and/or a written
exemption from the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:17-1 et seq.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes the giving of alms, food, clothes, money,
subscriptions, pledges or property of any nature or kind.
PERSON — Not only an individual, but also any organization, firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class, league or other entity or group.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The traveling, either by foot or automobile
or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house
or from street to street to request, directly or indirectly, money, credit,
property, financial assistance, and other things of value in the plea or
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value will be used for a charitable or philanthropic purpose
as defined in this article or for a political or other noncommercial purpose.
"Solicitation" shall be deemed to be complete when made, whether or not
the person making the same receives any contribution.
SOLICITOR — A person who solicits.
§ 288-16. License exemption.
Any person may solicit political, charitable and philanthropic contributions
or engage in noncommercial soliciting or canvassing, including doing so
on behalf of a political, philanthropic or charitable organization within the
Township, without first obtaining any license or prior approval authorizing
124. Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 287 but was renumbered to maintain the
organizational structure of the Code.
§ 288-15 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-16
282:977
such activity, provided the person conducts such solicitation and/or
canvassing in compliance with this article, § 288-15 et seq.
§ 288-17. Advance notification.
A. Before any person shall engage in any noncommercial canvassing or
soliciting, including canvassing or soliciting on behalf of a political,
philanthropic or charitable organization, he/she/it shall provide the
following information to the Township Police Department and to the
Township Clerk, at least three days in advance of the commencement of
such canvassing or soliciting:
(1) Name, address and date of birth of each canvasser or solicitor.
(2) Name and address of the affiliated organization, entity or group
sponsoring or conducting the soliciting or canvassing, if any.
(3) If a vehicle is to be used in any portion of the activity, a description
of the vehicle(s), including color, make, model, year, license plate
number, including state of registration, as well as name and
address of registered owner.
(4) If the solicitor or canvasser is employed by another, the name and
address of the employer.
(5) The days of the week and hours of the day over the next 30 days
during which the activity will be conducted.
(6) A description of the section of the Township in which the activity
will be carried out on each such day. Use of street boundaries of the
area is the desirable manner in which to describe the section of the
Township.
(7) A statement as to whether each canvasser or solicitor has ever
been convicted of any crime or the violation of any municipal
ordinance, other than traffic offense, and, if so, the date and place
of conviction and the nature of the offense. The submission of false
information hereunder shall be a violation for the person
submitting such false information.
(8) The general nature of the solicitation and canvassing.
(9) The name, address and cellular telephone number of the person
who will be in direct charge of supervising the solicitation or
canvassing.
(10) A brief outline of the method to be used in conducting the
solicitation or canvassing.
B. The notification provided to the Township pursuant to this section shall
be effective for a thirty-day period. Renotification shall be given every
30 days if the activity extends beyond 30 days.
§ 288-16 FREEHOLD CODE § 288-18
282:978
§ 288-18. Calendar of solicitations.
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to keep a calendar of solicitations
and canvassing for which advance notice has been given to the Township.
Such calendar shall be posted on the official Township website to allow
access to and for the information of Township residents.
§ 288-19. Written receipts requested.
Any person receiving money or any other thing for a value of $1 or more
from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to this article shall
give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing the
date and the amount received, provided that this section shall not apply
to any contribution collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used
in solicitation where the use thereof has been approved by the Township
Committee, where it is impractical to determine the amount of each
contribution. Copies of such receipts shall be kept available for inspection
upon request of a police officer.
§ 288-20. Hours of solicitation and canvassing.
All solicitations and canvassing shall take place between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 288-21. Display of badge.
§ 288-22. Code of conduct.
Every solicitor or canvasser under this article shall conduct himself/herself
according to and shall observe the following code of conduct:
A. Every solicitor or canvasser shall attach and display, on the front outer
layer of his/her clothing, a badge not smaller than two inches by 3 1/2
inches with letters and figures at least 1/4 inch high on contrasting
background and displayed so that the information thereon is easily
discernible from a distance of seven feet. The following information
shall be printed on the badge:
(1) Name of the solicitor.
(2) Picture of the solicitor.
(3) If the solicitation or canvassing is conducted on behalf of an
organization, entity or group, the name of such organization, entity
or group shall be printed on the badge.
B. The badge requirement may be satisfied by utilizing a photo
identification card issued by any governmental agency, school or
employer.
§ 288-18 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-22
282:979
§ 288-23. Use of streets.
No solicitor or canvasser shall have an exclusive right to any location; enter
a roadway for the purpose of approaching occupants of motor vehicles using
the roadway or approach such occupants; or operate or conduct any of
his/her activity from a fixed location in any congested area where his/her
A. He/she shall not enter or remain upon any resident's property that is on
the "Do Not Solicit" List (See Article III of this chapter.) or upon which it
is posted that solicitors are not permitted, or notice of similar content.
B. He/she shall display his/her badge in a visible manner as described in
§ 288-21.
C. He/she shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling unit without
express invitation from the occupant therein.
D. He/she shall immediately leave the resident's property upon request by
the resident to do so.
E. He/she shall not leave, on or about the resident's property, any circular,
samples or other matters or material unless same is handed to an
occupant of the property or is securely attached at an entrance door.
F. He/she shall not indicate that the Township endorses or sponsors any of
the views expressed or the organization for which support of
contributions are sought.
G. He/she shall not make false claims, representations or materially
incorrect statements concerning the solicitation, organizations
represented or the use to be made of the amount solicited.
H. He/she shall not engage in any course of alarming conduct or conduct
himself/herself so as to reasonably alarm or annoy the occupant of the
dwelling.
I. He/she shall not engage in any conduct which is prohibited by any
statute, regulation or ordinance in effect in the Township.
J. He/she shall present written receipts as required by § 288-19 hereof.
K. He/she shall have a complete copy of this article in his/her possession at
all times.
L. He/she shall wear a reflective vest and carry a functioning flashlight at
dusk or later.
M. If he/she is 15 years of age or younger, adult supervision shall be
immediately available within reasonable sight distance.
N. He/she shall have in his/her possession at all times a copy of the "Do
Not Solicit" List (See Article III of this chapter.) that is no more than two
weeks old. A current copy of the updated "Do Not Solicit" List is
accessible on the Township's official website.
§ 288-22 FREEHOLD CODE § 288-23
282:980
activity might unreasonably impede or inconvenience the public or impose
a threat to public safety. For purposes of this section, the judgment of a
Police Officer, exercised in good faith, shall be used to determine whether
the area is congested, the public unreasonably impeded or inconvenienced
or that the activity poses a threat to public safety. As used herein, a solicitor
or canvasser shall be deemed to be operating from a fixed location if he/
she has been in the same location, or within 200 feet in any direction of the
location, for more than 15 consecutive minutes.
§ 288-24. Exemption from regulations.
Soliciting or canvassing by visiting a property where the owner or resident
of such property has directly or implicitly indicated to the solicitor or
canvasser, through prior interaction, that his/her visit would be welcomed
is exempt from the provisions of this article. The burden of persuasion shall
be on the person claiming this exemption.
§ 288-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty not to exceed a fine of $150 for a first
offense. A second conviction under this article, within a two-year period,
shall result in a penalty not to exceed a fine of $500, five days in jail and/or
10 days of community service. A third or subsequent conviction under this
article, within a two-year period, shall result in a penalty not to exceed a
fine of $2,000, 90 days in jail and/or 90 days of community service.
§ 288-23 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-25
282:981

ARTICLE III
"Do Not Solicit" List
[Adopted 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-9125]
§ 288-26. Definitions.
All definitions as set out in Articles I and II of this chapter shall apply to this
article.
§ 288-27. Registration of property.
Any person or entity who owns or rents property within the Township
may register such property to be included on the "Do Not Solicit" List by
registering through the Township Clerk's office.
§ 288-28. Maintenance of list.
Maintenance of the "Do Not Solicit" List shall be as follows:
§ 288-29. Duties of Township Clerk's office.
The Township Clerk's office shall:
A. The "Do Not Solicit" List shall be maintained by the Township Clerk.
The list shall be available through the official Township website.
B. The "Do Not Solicit" List shall consist solely of property addresses and
shall include no further identifying information concerning the
ownership of each property.
C. The Tax Assessor shall notify the Township Clerk of any change in
ownership of property within the Township. The Township Clerk shall
remove from the "Do Not Solicit" List any property which has changed
ownership.
D. Other than by sale of property, a property, once listed, may only be
removed from the list by submitting a written, sworn and notarized
request, sent to the Township Clerk.
A. Post a copy of the "Do Not Solicit" List on the official Township website.
B. Provide a copy of the "Do Not Solicit" List to every applicant to whom a
license is issued pursuant to Chapter 288.
C. Provide a copy of the "Do Not Solicit" List to any person notifying the
Township Clerk's office pursuant to § 288-17 of his/her intention to
engage in noncommercial soliciting or canvassing. The failure of the
Township Clerk to provide the "Do Not Solicit" List to such person or
the failure of such person to have received a copy of the "Do Not Solicit"
List from the Township Clerk shall not provide a defense to the
125. Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 289 but was renumbered to maintain the
organizational structure of the Code.
§ 288-26 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-29
282:983
§ 288-30. Solicitation prohibited.
It is prohibited for any person to conduct any commercial or noncommercial
solicitation or canvassing at any property listed on the "Do Not Solicit" List.
§ 288-31. Exclusion to prohibition.
The prohibition in this article shall not apply to the visiting of a property
where the owner or occupant of such property has directly or implicitly
indicated to the solicitor or canvasser, through prior interaction, that his/
her visit would be welcomed. The burden of persuasion shall be on the
person claiming this exemption.
requirement of having in his/her possession a copy of the updated "Do
Not Solicit" List as required by § 288-27N.
§ 288-29 FREEHOLD CODE § 288-31
282:984
Chapter 290
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storage of recyclable materials — See Ch.
190, § 190-122.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Recycling — See Ch. 253.
§ 288-31 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 288-31
282:985

ARTICLE I
Refuse Receptacles
[Adopted 12-23-1968 (§ 6-5 of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 290-1. Suitable receptacles required.
The owner or his agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of every dwelling, house
or other premises where waste accumulates shall provide and keep in the
premises sufficient and suitable receptacles with tight-fitting covers for
receiving and holding waste.
§ 290-2. Adequate number of receptacles.
There shall be at least one receptacle for each family unit or other occupant
of the premises and at least two receptacles or one of ample capacity and
design acceptable to the Board of Health for each commercial or business
establishment where refuse accumulates. Each occupant of residential or
commercial premises shall provide sufficient receptacles to store all waste
which may be accumulated between the times when the refuse is disposed
of.
§ 290-3. Receptacle specifications.
Each receptacle shall be tight, nonporous metal or plastic with a tightfitting
cover so constructed as to prevent spilling or leakage of contents.
Each receptacle for use at a single residence shall have a capacity of not
more than 30 gallons or less than 20 gallons, shall be of tapered design
and equipped with a pull handle or handles. Each receptacle shall be
verminproof.
§ 290-4. Receptacles for multidwelling units.
Receptacles for waste from multidwelling units or industrial premises may
have a greater capacity than that prescribed in § 290-3, provided that
they meet the qualifications of a suitable receptacle and are equipped for
handling by motorized equipment.
§ 290-5. Receptacles failing to meet requirements.
Garbage in receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this article need not be collected, provided that written
notice has been given to the owner and the Health Officer.
§ 290-6. Location of receptacles.
Receptacles shall be conveniently located on premises for the storage of
refuse and maintained in such a manner with the cover in place as to
prevent creation of a nuisance or menace to public health.
§ 290-7. Preparation of refuse for collection.
§ 290-1 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 290-7
282:987
§ 290-8. Frequency of collection.
§ 290-9. Collection regulations.
A. Garbage shall be drained of all liquids, wrapped in paper or placed in
paper bags, and placed in proper receptacles.
B. Papers not placed in receptacles shall be secured and properly tied into
bundles or other packages in a manner to prevent scattering while
awaiting or during collection. The bundle or package shall be of a size
and weight to permit ease of handling by one man.
C. Combustible or noncombustible waste of such a nature that it cannot be
deposited in a receptacle shall be securely and properly tied into
bundles or packages of a size and weight to permit ease of handling by
one man and shall be packaged or otherwise assembled in quantities
weighing not more than 50 pounds.
D. Rocks, concrete, junk, scrap, metal, plumbing fixtures and
contaminated earth and machinery parts shall be segregated.
A. The person occupying any premises whereon a business or industry is
conducted shall arrange for the removal of refuse on such premises
each day unless sufficient facilities are provided and used for the
storage of refuse within a roofed enclosure on the premises until the
refuse is removed.
B. The person occupying any premises shall be required to arrange for the
pickup or collection of refuse from the premises at least twice a week.
A. All vehicles for which permits are issued shall be of the closed type and
shall be constructed and loaded in such fashion that no part of the
contents shall fall, leak or spill.
B. Vehicles operated under a permit must be properly covered to prevent
the scattering or spilling of rubbish on either private or public property.
C. Any licensee who spills or scatters any refuse collected by him on either
public or private property shall immediately collect the refuse for
disposal.
D. Vehicles for which permits are issued shall be identified as to
ownership, both as required by state law and on the right side of the
vehicle.
E. All licensees shall comply with state laws, the ordinances of the
Township and the rules, regulations and orders of the local Board of
Health and the State Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Collections shall be made between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays, Saturdays and holidays, and shall be done in a quiet and
orderly manner.
§ 290-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 290-9.1
282:988
§ 290-9.1. Dumpsters. [Added 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-42]
No person shall park or leave unattended any waste or refuse container,
commonly known as a "roll-off dumpster" or "roll-off container," on or along
any street, highway or public property in the Township without having
first obtained a permit from the Freehold Township Police Department. No
permits shall issue except where the portion of the premises’ driveway
which is immediately adjacent to the street is in the process of being
replaced/reconstructed and cannot accommodate a dumpster, in which
case, a permit may be granted for a maximum of two days. The cost for each
permit shall be $25.
§ 290-9.2. Reflective markers required. [Added 11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-42]
Any roll-off dumpster or roll-off container parked on or along any street,
highway or public property in the Township shall be equipped with and
display markers consisting of all yellow reflective diamond-shaped panels
having a minimum size of 18 inches by 18 inches in order to warn passersby
of the presence of a traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care.
These panels shall be mounted at the edge of the dumpster at both ends
nearest the path of passing vehicles and facing the direction of oncoming
traffic. The markers shall have a minimum mounting height of three feet
from the bottom of the panels to the surface of the roadway.
§ 290-10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 290-9.1 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 290-10
282:989

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Collection
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-91-38 (§ 6-18 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 290-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROOF OF COLLECTION SERVICE — A written record, log, bill or
document evidencing receipt of service for the collection of solid waste for
the preceding month from a person lawfully engaging in private solid waste
collection services within the Township.
REGULAR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE — The scheduled pickup
and removal of solid waste from residential, commercial or institutional
premises located within the boundaries of the Township at least once a
week.
RESPONSIBLE SOLID WASTE GENERATOR — Any property owner, tenant
or occupant of any single-family residential dwelling or multiple dwelling, or
the owner of any commercial or institutional building or structure located
within the boundaries of the Township, who generates solid waste at those
premises.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials resulting
from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from domestic
and community activities and shall include all other waste materials
including liquids, except for solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by
swine producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The activity related to pickup and
transportation of solid waste from its source or location to a solid waste
facility or other destination.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A covered receptacle or container or bag
suitable for the depositing of solid waste.[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-48]
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The storage, treatment, utilization, processing
or final disposal of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE FACILITIES — Includes the plants, structures and other real
and personal property acquired, constructed or operated or to be acquired,
constructed or operated by any person pursuant to the provisions of this
article or any other act, including transfer stations, incinerators, resource
recovery facilities, sanitary landfill facilities or other plants for the disposal
of solid waste, and all vehicles, equipment and other real or personal
property and rights therein and appurtenances necessary or useful and
convenient for the collection or disposal of solid waste in a sanitary manner.
§ 290-12. Mandatory contract for service.
§ 290-11 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 290-12
282:991
§ 290-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty or pleading guilty to a violation of this article shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 290-14. through § 290-15. (Reserved)
A. In the case of single-family and multifamily residential housing, each
responsible solid waste generator shall, if he or she has not already
done so, enter into a contract for regular solid waste collection service
with any person lawfully providing private solid waste collection
services within the Township, except that any such responsible solid
waste generator who is transporting the solid waste which is generated
at his residential premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by
the Township for disposal shall be exempt from this requirement. In the
case of multifamily residential housing, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the multiple dwelling to provide a sufficient number of
appropriate solid waste containers for the deposit of nonrecyclable
waste materials to be disposed of as solid waste.
B. Any responsible solid waste generator at any commercial or
institutional building or structure shall enter into a contract with any
person lawfully providing private solid waste collection services within
the Township.
C. In the case of a responsible solid waste generator, within the
municipality, who is transporting the solid waste which is generated at
his residential premises directly to an approved solid waste facility
utilized by the Township for disposal, every such responsible solid
waste generator shall furnish proof that the responsible solid waste
generator is transporting the solid waste which is generated at his
residential premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by the
Township for disposal to the Township Committee at least once every 12
months. In order to fulfill the requirements of this subsection, the
responsible solid waste generator may include the proof of service with
the municipal tax payment mailed to the Municipal Tax Collector.
[Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
§ 290-12 FREEHOLD CODE § 290-14
282:992
ARTICLE III
Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
[Adopted 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-24]
§ 290-16. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to supplement and amplify §§ 290-1 and
290-3 and to require dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibit
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by Freehold Township and/or the waters of the state so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 290-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Freehold Township or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface- or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 290-18. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 290-16 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 290-18
282:993
§ 290-19. Exceptions to prohibition.
The following are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in the article:
§ 290-20. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Freehold Township Code Enforcement
Officer or by the Freehold Township Police Department.
§ 290-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty or pleading guilty to a violation of this article shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by Freehold Township.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 290-18 FREEHOLD CODE § 290-21
282:994
Chapter 295
SPORTS CODE OF CONDUCT
§ 295-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE OF CONDUCT — A written specification of the behavior of players,
parents, guardians, coaches and officials prepared by the Township of
Freehold which will at a minimum incorporate the terms of this chapter
and must be consented to in writing by the coaches, players, parents and
legal guardians of the minor participants of each youth sports organization
utilizing any facilities or properties owned, controlled, leased or operated
by the Township.
CODE OF CONDUCT COMMITTEE — Comprised of designated members
from each youth sports activity and the Commissioners of the Freehold
Township Board of Parks and Recreation Commission, as outlined in this
chapter.
EXTERNAL SPORTS ORGANIZATION — Any sports organization pursuant
to a Township-sponsored or a nonprofit or similar charter which is affiliated
with or receives monetary or other support or services from the Township of
Freehold or regularly utilizes any facilities owned, operated, or maintained
by the Township, which sports organization participates in sporting
competitions involving minors.
INTERNAL SPORTS ORGANIZATION — Any sports organization pursuant
to a Township-sponsored or a nonprofit or similar charter which is affiliated
with or receives monetary or other support or services from the Township of
Freehold or regularly utilizes any facilities owned, operated, or maintained
by the Township, which sports organization participates in sporting
competitions involving minors, whose sports events are sponsored solely by
the Parks and Recreation Commission.
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION — The Freehold Township Board
of Parks and Recreation Commission.
TOWNSHIP SPORTS EVENT — Any competition, practice or instructional
event involving one or more Township internal and external sports
organizations.
§ 295-2. Adherence to Code of Conduct required.
The participants, parents or legal guardians of minor participants, coaches
and officials of every sports organization shall be required to follow the
Code of Conduct, set forth as follows:
§ 290-21 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 295-2
282:995
I hereby pledge to be responsible for my words and actions while
attending, coaching or participating in a Township sports event and shall
conform my behavior to the following Code of Conduct:
1. I will not engage in unsportsmanlike conduct with any coach, parent,
player, participant, official or any other attendee.
2. I will not encourage my child, or any other person, to engage in
unsportsmanlike conduct with any coach, parent, player, participant,
official or any other attendee.
3. I will not engage in any behavior which would endanger the health,
safety or well-being of any coach, parent, player, participant, official
or any other attendee.
4. I will not encourage my child, or any other person, to engage in any
behavior which would endanger the health, safety or well-being of
any coach, parent, player, participant, official or any other attendee.
5. I will not use drugs or alcohol while at a youth sports event and
will not attend, coach, officiate or participate in a youth sports event
while under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
6. I will not permit my child, or encourage any other person, to use
drugs or alcohol at a youth sports event and will not permit my
child, or encourage any other person, to attend, coach, officiate or
participate in a youth sports event while under the influence of drugs
or alcohol.
7. I will not engage in the use of profanity.
8. I will not encourage my child, or any other person, to engage in the
use of profanity.
9. I will treat any coach, parent, player, participant, official or any
other attendee with respect regardless of race, creed, color, national
origin, sex, sexual orientation or ability.
10. I will encourage my child to treat any coach, parent, player,
participant, official or any other attendee with respect regardless of
race, creed, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation or ability.
11. I will not engage in verbal or physical threats or abuse aimed at any
coach, parent, player, participant, official or any other attendee.
12. I will not encourage my child, or any other person, to engage in
verbal or physical threats or abuse aimed at any coach, parent,
player, participant, official or any other attendee.
13. I will not initiate a fight or scuffle with any coach, parent, player,
participant, official or any other attendee.
14. I will not encourage my child, or any other person, to initiate a fight
or scuffle with any coach, parent, player, participant, official or any
other attendee.
15. I will abide by any decision rendered by the Code of Conduct
Committee or the Township Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 295-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 295-2
282:996
16. I will be responsible for the behavior of all those attending a
Township youth sports event on my child's behalf.
Signature
§ 295-3. Availability of code.
The Code of Conduct will be made available to all coaches and players,
parents and legal guardians of each child participating in a sports
organization.
§ 295-4. Prohibited acts; penalties.
§ 295-5. Authority of sports events officials.
Any parent, official, coach or spectator at any Township sports event shall
be subject to the authority of all field officials, including umpires, referees,
elected league officials, Parks and Recreation Commission personnel or
coaches of the Township sports event. This authority shall include the
authorization to direct any person or persons involved in any incident in
violation of this chapter or the Code of Conduct to immediately remove
themselves or be removed from the premises.
§ 295-6. Violation procedures for internal sports organizations.
A. A coach, parent, player, participant, official or other Township sports
event attendee who violates one or more of the provisions contained in
the Code of Conduct may be banned from attending, coaching or
participating in at least one Township sports event if the person:
(1) Has been issued a prior written warning for violating one or more
of the provisions contained in the Code of Conduct;
(2) Throws or causes to be deposited any object on the field of play,
court or rink during any youth sports event; or
(3) Violates the Code of Conduct by engaging in verbal or physical
threats or abuse aimed at any coach, parent, player, participant,
official or any other attendee.
B. Any parent, guest, spectator, coach or official at any Township sports
event who participates in a fight, scuffle, or any type of physical
confrontation, abuse or threats of abuse towards any player, coach,
official, parent, or spectator will be banned from attendance at all
Township sports events within the Township of Freehold for a period to
be determined by the Code of Conduct Committee.
C. Any violation of a discipline or ban issued by the Code of Conduct
Committee or Parks and Recreation Commission may result in
additional penalties being added to the discipline or ban.
§ 295-2 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 295-6
282:997
A. Any violations of the Code of Conduct will fall under the jurisdiction of
Township sports event officials.
B. Any person receiving a penalty from Township sports event officials
who wishes to contest the same shall appeal to the Parks and
Recreation Commission within 14 calendar days from the date of the
penalty by forwarding a written statement of the penalty and the basis
of such person's contest of the penalty via personal delivery, fax or
certified mail to the Chairperson of the Parks and Recreation
Commission, c/o Township of Freehold, One Municipal Plaza, Freehold,
New Jersey 07728.
C. Should no penalty be issued by Township sports event officials, any
individual involved in the incident in question may report the incident
to the Parks and Recreation Commission within 14 calendar days from
the date of the incident to the Chairperson of the Parks and Recreation
Commission, c/o Township of Freehold, One Municipal Plaza, Freehold,
New Jersey 07728.
D. Upon receipt of such appeal, or upon receipt of a complaint from a
parent, official, coach, Parks and Recreation Commission personnel,
spectator, or participant, three members of the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall convene within 14 calendar days and provide an
opportunity for said person and any interested person or persons to
appear and be heard with respect to the occurrence of any violation and
action taken by the Township sports event officials. [Amended
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-8]
E. The three members of the Parks and Recreation Commission will review
statements, firsthand accounts and any other pertinent information or
documentation relevant to the violation and, upon a majority vote of the
members of the Parks and Recreation Commission present at such
hearing, may sustain, overturn, or modify the penalty by increasing or
decreasing the penalty, if any, or issue a penalty where none was
previously issued, consistent with this chapter or the Code of Conduct.
[Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-8]
F. Any person who has been issued a penalty other than a ban from
attending, coaching or participating in a Township sports event will be
reinstated with full rights and authority until such time that a
determination and disposition of his/her appeal has been made by the
members of the Parks and Recreation Commission who hear the appeal.
[Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-8]
G. All notices of banning shall remain in effect until overturned or modified
by the three members of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
[Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-8]
H. In the event any notice of violation is not appealed within 14 calendar
days of such notice, said notice of violation and action taken by the
§ 295-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 295-6
282:998
§ 295-7. Violation procedures for external sports organizations.
official or the Parks and Recreation Commission, including banning
from Township sports events, or other action taken shall become final.
I. Any person who, in violation of a finding of the Parks and Recreation
Commission, knowingly enters onto facilities or properties owned,
controlled, leased or operated by the Township, after being given notice
of a ban pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to prosecution as a
defiant trespasser pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:18-3 or such other provisions
of the law deemed appropriate.
A. Any parent, official, coach, Parks and Recreation Commission
personnel, spectator, or participant may file a complaint with the
governing board of the external sports organization alleging a violation
of the Code of Conduct within 14 days from the date of the incident
giving rise to the complaint.
B. Upon determination by a majority vote of the governing board of the
external sports organization that a parent, guest, spectator, coach or
official at any sports event sponsored by such sports organization has
violated a provision of this chapter or the Code of Conduct, the external
sports organization will forward to such violator and to any other
individuals involved in the action leading to the violation a notice, via
regular and certified mail, identifying the date, location and nature of
the violation and the period of the banning or other action to be taken in
response to such violation. Said determination must be reached by the
external sports organization within 14 calendar days from the date of
the incident. Should no notice be filed by the external sports
organization within the applicable time frame, any individual involved
in the incident in question may report the incident directly to the Code
of Conduct Committee within 30 calendar days from the date of the
incident to the Chairperson of the Code of Conduct Committee at the
address specified and, if none, to the Code of Conduct Committee, c/o
Township of Freehold, One Municipal Plaza, Freehold, New Jersey
07728.
C. Any person receiving a notice from the governing body of the external
sports organization who wishes to contest the same shall appeal to the
Code of Conduct Committee within 14 calendar days of the mailing of
said notice by forwarding a copy of said notice of violation, specifically
setting forth the basis of such person's contest of the notice of violation,
via personal delivery, fax or certified mail, to the Chairperson of the
Code of Conduct Committee at the address specified and, if none, then
to the Code of Conduct Committee, c/o Township of Freehold, One
Municipal Plaza, Freehold, New Jersey 07728.
D. Upon receipt of such appeal, or upon receipt of a complaint from a
parent, official, coach, Parks and Recreation Commission personnel,
spectator, or participant, the Code of Conduct Committee shall convene
within 14 calendar days and provide an opportunity for said person and
§ 295-6 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 295-7
282:999
§ 295-8. Code of Conduct Committee.
any interested person or persons to appear and be heard with respect
to the occurrence of any violation and action taken by the governing
board of the sports organization.
E. The Code of Conduct Committee will review statements, firsthand
accounts and any other pertinent information or documentation
relevant to the violation and, upon a majority vote of the Code of
Conduct Committee present at such hearing, may sustain, overturn, or
modify the notice of violation, if any, or issue a notice of violation where
none was previously issued, consistent with this chapter of the Code of
Conduct.
F. Any person who has been issued a penalty other than a ban from
attending, coaching or participating in a Township sports event will be
reinstated with full rights and authority until such time that a
determination and disposition of his/her appeal has been made by the
Code of Conduct Committee.
G. All notices of banning shall remain in effect until overturned or modified
by the Code of Conduct Committee.
H. In the event any notice of violation is not appealed within 14 calendar
days of such notice, said notice of violation and action taken by the
official or the Code of Conduct Committee, including banning from
Township sports events, or other action taken shall become final.
I. Any person who, in violation of a finding of the Code of Conduct
Committee, knowingly enters onto facilities or properties owned,
controlled, leased or operated by the Township, after being given notice
of a ban pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to prosecution as a
defiant trespasser pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:18-3 or such other provisions
of the law deemed appropriate.
A. There is hereby created and established a Code of Conduct Committee.
The Code of Conduct Committee will have jurisdiction over matters
brought to it involving external sports organizations. The Code of
Conduct Committee shall be comprised of a designated member from
designated external sports organizations (three), three members of the
Parks and Recreation Commission and the Superintendent of the
Freehold Township Parks and Recreation Department or his/her
designee. Should an external sports organization increase to 500
members, the Township reserves the right to designate a seat on the
Code of Conduct Committee for that organization. Should an additional
external sports organization be granted a seat on the Code of Conduct
Committee, the three seats granted to the external sports organizations
shall be rotated on a seasonal basis as determined by the Township.
B. For complaints pertaining to internal sports organizations/Township
recreation programs, the Code of Conduct Committee will consist of
§ 295-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 295-8
282:1000
§ 295-9. Anger management counseling; permission to resume
participation
three members of the Parks and Recreation Commission. The
Superintendent of the Freehold Township Parks and Recreation
Department or his/her designee shall act as Chairperson of the meeting
and will not exercise a vote. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-8]
C. Each external sports organization shall annually designate a member
who shall serve on the Code of Conduct Committee. Should a conflict of
interest arise with respect to any member of the sports organization
who sits on the Code of Conduct Committee, that member of the sports
organization shall be replaced with another member of the sports
organization, which member shall be designated by the sports
organization.
D. Meetings.
(1) In order to conduct business and hearings or recommend changes
to the Code of Conduct, a quorum of Committee members must be
present pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order and will have all
authority as set forth in this chapter. For external sports
organizations, the Chairperson of the Committee shall be the
Superintendent of the Freehold Township Department of Parks and
Recreation or his/her designee, who shall only vote during hearings
in the event of a tie vote amongst the remaining members who
participate in a hearing. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-8]
(2) The Code of Conduct Committee may establish rules and
procedures as it deems appropriate for the conduct of its business
and, in default thereof, shall operate pursuant to Robert's Rules of
Order to the extent they are not in conflict with this chapter.
A. Any parent, league official, coach or spectator who is banned from a
Township sports event for a violation of this chapter or the Code of
Conduct shall be required to complete anger management or an
equivalent counseling program at his own expense, consisting of not
less than 12 hours of instruction, and shall provide proof of satisfactory
completion to the Parks and Recreation Commission or the Code of
Conduct Committee, as applicable.
B. A coach, parent, player, spectator or league official or other Township
sports event attendee may be permitted to attend, coach, officiate or
participate in a youth sports event from which the person has been
banned pursuant to § 295-4 if the person:
(1) Provides a written request for permission to resume participation
or attendance to the Parks and Recreation Commission or the Code
of Conduct Committee, after the one-year ban has expired; and
§ 295-8 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 295-9
282:1001
Chapter 300
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150. Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 278.
(2) Provides a written apology to the youth sports organization which
issued the ban and to the person or persons who were the subject
of the behavior which constituted the violation of the code, as
directed by the youth sports organization.
C. An anger management counseling program must, at a minimum, offer
services to individuals, singly or in groups, for the purposes of
promoting anger control principles and shall be administered by an
individual:
(1) Licensed as a professional counselor pursuant to the provisions of
the Professional Counselor Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:8B-33 et seq.,
or
(2) Licensed as a practicing psychologist pursuant to the provisions of
the Practicing Psychology Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:14B-1 et seq.
§ 295-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 295-9
300:1002
ARTICLE I
Street and Right-of-Way Excavations
[Adopted 12-22-1969 (§ 16-1 of the Revised General Ordinances), as
amended through Ord. No. O-83-2]
§ 300-1. Permit required.126
No person shall dig up and excavate or make any opening in any street,
road, avenue, highway or right-of-way owned or under the jurisdiction of
the Township for any purpose whatsoever without having first obtained
a written permit therefor. Application for a permit shall be made to the
Township Clerk. Permits shall not be issued for a period in excess of
three months and expired permits may be renewed on written request. No
permits will be issued between November 15 and March 15 unless it is
reviewed and recommended by the Township Engineer.
§ 300-2. Procedure for obtaining permit.127
§ 300-3. Fees and deposits.128
A. Applications shall be submitted and contain the following information:
(1) When the work shall begin.
(2) How long the trench shall be open.
(3) The distance from the center of the road where the trench will be
dug and a diagram pertaining thereto.
(4) A description of any special conditions.
(5) The name and address of the person who may be served with any
notice as provided in this section.
(6) Such additional information as the Township Committee requires
by resolution.
B. The application shall further provide that the applicant agrees to open
no part of the road, street, highway or right-of-way at any time not
approved by the Township Engineer or other person in charge for the
Township Committee.
A. Every applicant shall pay an application fee and an engineering
inspection fee plus a minimum deposit as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees. Said deposit shall be by certified check or cash. Any cash or
certified check deposit shall be held in escrow by the Township
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-3
300:1003
§ 300-4. Acceptance of work; return of deposit.
§ 300-5. Protection for traveling public.
The permittee shall keep the opening properly guarded and at night shall
have adequate and sufficient lights placed thereat. In doing the work, there
shall be as little interference as possible with travel along the road, and no
greater part of the road shall be opened at any time than shall be allowed
Treasurer without interest. The cash bond deposit amount less any
expenditures incurred by the Township for emergency road repair shall
be returned to the applicant upon acceptance by the Township
Engineer of completion of pavement restoration by the applicant and
the posting of a one-year maintenance guaranty if required by the
Township Engineer. The cash bond portion of the performance guaranty
shall be the last portion released by the Township to the applicant.
B. Each public utility desiring to obtain permits pursuant to this article
shall file each year with the Township Clerk a bond which may be the
bond of such corporation's surety in the sum of $10,000 conditioned
upon compliance with the applicable provisions of this section for
minimum deposits required.
A. Acceptance of the work and approval thereof by the Township Engineer
shall be indicated in writing. In the event the work is not satisfactorily
completed and not accepted by the Township Engineer, the Township
may do the necessary work to complete the same and the cost shall be
deducted from the deposit money posted. Upon completion of the work
by the Township and within two weeks thereafter, the final charge made
shall be billed to the permittee and deducted from the original deposit
to the extent that it will pay the same any sum not so covered to be
payable by the permittee immediately. The cost to the Township for
doing the work shall be on the basis of and according to a computation
to be made by the Township Engineer, which shall include the actual
cost of all material, labor and overhead incurred by the Township.
B. The applicant shall at all times comply with the established
requirements by the Township Engineer or his representative. The
Township Engineer or other person in charge for the Township
Committee may delay approval and acceptance for a sufficient period of
time to allow the fill in any opening to settle. He shall determine the
time when final acceptance and approval of the fill and other work shall
be given.
C. If the work is satisfactorily performed and accepted by the Township
Engineer, the deposit shall be returned within one week after
acceptance. The Township Engineer shall notify the Township
Treasurer in writing that the work has been satisfactorily performed, is
acceptable to the Township Engineer, and authorize the return of the
deposit, and the Township Treasurer shall then return the deposit to the
applicant.
§ 300-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 300-5
300:1004
by the Township Engineer or other person in charge. Transverse openings,
involving the full width of the highway, shall be made so that only 1/2 of
the highway will be excavated at any one time. The work shall be scheduled
and executed so as to present a minimum of inconvenience to the traveling
public. Where feasible, pipes, mains and conduits shall be bored under all
pavements. Tunnels may be driven if and where directed.
§ 300-6. Protection from suits.
The permittee shall hold the Township, its officers and servants harmless
from and against any loss, injury or damage resulting from any negligence
or fault of the permittee, his agents or servants.
§ 300-7. Time limit.
In case the work has not been completed before expiration of the permit
and the permittee has not requested an extension of time, the Township
Engineer or other person in charge, may, if he deems it advisable, take steps
to backfill the trench and restore a permanent pavement over the opening
for which the permit has been issued. If any extension of time is needed for
the completion of the work, a new application must be filed if required by
the Township Engineer.
§ 300-8. Excavation.
The work shall be so conducted as not to interfere with any existing water
main, sewer, gas or telephone lines or to damage any existing trees or roots
until permission of the proper authorities has been obtained. All rock within
five feet of a water main or other pipe which will be damaged shall be
removed without blasting. No excavation which will damage trees shall be
made without the approval of the Township Engineer and the Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 300-9. Backfilling and temporary paving.129
The permittee shall completely backfill and puddle the excavation and
the trench with sand, gravel or other material, acceptably compressed as
required, and shall remove excess material from the premises. If tamping
alone is employed, the material shall be placed in layers not exceeding
six inches in thickness, moistened if directed, and each layer shall be
mechanically tamped until thoroughly compacted. Longitudinal ditches may
be compacted by rolling with a suitable heavy mechanical self-powered
roller. Dual-tired trucks shall not be used for this purpose. Trenches may not
be flushed except under specific permission of the Township Engineer. If, for
any reason, immediate replacement of permanent pavement is not feasible,
the excavation shall be backfilled and consolidated as specified above,
after which not less than three inches bituminous stabilized base course
in accordance with New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-9
300:1005
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as amended, and the New
Jersey Department of Transportation Supplemental Specifications for Roads
and Bridge Construction, as amended, shall be installed on a temporary
pavement.
§ 300-10. Restoration of bituminous pavement.130
After backfilling of the trench has been completed, replacement of the
bituminous pavement shall be made by the permittee. Bituminous pavement
replacement shall consist of a minimum of six inches of bituminous
stabilized base course in accordance with the current New Jersey
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, as amended, and the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Supplemental Specifications for Roads and Bridge
Construction, as amended, surfaced with a minimum thickness of two
inches New Jersey Department of Transportation Specifications as stated
herein.
§ 300-11. Restoration of bituminous surface treated roads.131
§ 300-12. Supervision of work.
All work performed in connection with the making of openings in the
public streets, roads and highways shall be done only under the immediate
supervision of the Township Engineer or his representatives, and the
applicant shall be responsible for obtaining the presence of the Township
Engineer or his representatives for such supervision at the site before
A. The Mayor and Township Committee reserve the right to remove and
replace any defective patch work made by the permittee and charge the
cost of labor and materials for such removal and replacement to the
permittee, as provided for under § 300-3.
B. In no event shall any opening or excavation be made in any public
street, road or highway within the Township which shall be of a greater
size or length than can be filled in and completed within the same day
by the available material and equipment located at the site.
C. If any opening is not completely enclosed at night or is partially
completed and not finished, then during the hours of darkness there
shall be, in addition to any other precautions required for the safety of
the public during the daytime, sufficient barriers which shall be lighted
with sufficient lighting so as to enable the public using the street, road
or highway to be warned of the presence of the excavation. Lights used
shall be in accordance with the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, as amended.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 300-12
300:1006
the work may proceed. All expenses and fees incurred in connection with
supervision shall be charged to and paid for by the applicant, and a certified
check or cash payment to cover these expenses and fees shall be paid by
the applicant to the Township Clerk before the permit is issued.
§ 300-13. Revocation of permit; hearing.
Every permittee shall fully comply with all rules, regulations and conditions,
and in addition to any other remedies available to the Township, the
Township shall have the right at any time to suspend or revoke any permit
issued to any permittee who has violated any rule, regulation or condition.
Revocation may be by written notice to that effect, served upon the foreman
or other person in charge of the work of the applicant. A hearing on any
revocation or suspension may be had before the Township Committee upon
application for same being made by the permittee, upon giving five days'
notice to that effect, and by serving a notice upon the Township Clerk.
§ 300-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 300-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-14
300:1007

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction and Removal
[Adopted by Ord. No. O76-29A (§ 16-2 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-93-10]
§ 300-15. Permit required.132
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or remove, or cause to
be constructed or removed, any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter
or any part thereof within any public right-of-way in the Township without
first having obtained a permit to do so from the Township Committee. No
permits will be issued between November 15 and March 15 unless it is
reviewed and recommended by the Township Engineer.
§ 300-16. Application information.
Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Township
Clerk by the owner of the premises or his agent upon forms provided by the
Township and shall contain the following information:
§ 300-17. Fees.
Applicant shall pay an application fee and an engineering inspection fee for
all sidewalk, driveway apron or curb construction and/or removal within any
public right-of-way as provided in Chapter 150, Fees. The applicant shall
pay all costs for tests which the Township Engineer deems necessary. The
applicant shall post a refundable deposit as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 300-18. Specifications.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed
work, and the name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed, if other than the applicant.
C. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the
work is to be done.
D. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
E. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact
location with respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and
prominent object, as well as its width and relationship to the grade of
the street and the adjacent property and, in the case of a driveway
apron, its slope or pitch.
F. Any other information that the Engineer deems necessary in order to
determine whether the work will comply with this article.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-18
300:1009
§ 300-19. Notice required.
The applicant shall notify the engineer at least 24 hours prior to the time of
pouring or laying any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter so that the
Department may arrange for adequate inspection and testing.
§ 300-20. Fee exception.
This section shall not apply to:
§ 300-21. Repairs.
A. All materials and work shall be in accordance with Township
specifications on file in the office of the Engineer.
B. Any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter which is removed shall be
promptly replaced in accordance with Township specifications.
C. No concrete sidewalk shall be replaced or covered with blacktop.
D. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire
section or sections of curb or curb and gutter shall be removed and
replaced. The breaking and recapping of curbing is specifically
prohibited.
A. The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or gutters
in a major subdivision where the work is covered by performance
guaranties required by the Planning Board.
B. The repair or replacement of less than eight lineal feet of an existing
sidewalk.
A. Except when the Township determines to utilize the provisions of
Subsection B below, the cost and expense of the construction, repair,
alteration, or maintenance of sidewalks and driveway aprons when such
is deemed necessary shall be paid by those owners of lands fronting and
bordering upon those areas affected. If the owner can demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer that the repair or
maintenance is occasioned through no fault of the owner or his
servants, agents or representatives excepting normal wear and tear,
then and in that event, the Township shall perform the repair
maintenance as required. For the purpose of this article, an abutting
landowner is any person, individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or entity having title and/or an interest paramount to title
in real estate which abuts a public street, road or other thoroughfare of
the Township.
B. Sidewalk maintenance program.
(1) In order to encourage property owners to maintain sidewalks in
good order, the Township of Freehold will, under certain
conditions, participate in the cost or repairing/replacement of
§ 300-18 FREEHOLD CODE § 300-21
300:1010
§ 300-22. Determination for construction.
The Township Committee shall decide from time to time which sidewalks
and/or driveway aprons are in need of repair, alteration, or replacement
or which new sidewalks and/or driveway aprons should be installed, based
sidewalks and/or driveway aprons located along the frontage of a
lot upon which an occupied single-family residence is situated, in
an amount not to exceed 50% or prevailing rates for such work
as determined and/or approved by the Township Engineer. The
Township Engineer will give consideration to the following
recommending application of this Subsection B: [Amended
9-19-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-33]
(a) The maintenance or improvement schedule for the street
adjacent to the property owner.
(b) The need for sidewalk to be replaced based upon engineering
considerations.
(c) The extent of other property improvements being undertaken
by the property owner.
(d) The overall demand for such sidewalk maintenance program.
Towards this end, the Township Engineer will maintain a list of
all such requests in order of receipt.
(e) The funds available for this purpose as determined annually or
otherwise by the Township Committee.
(2) In the event that engineering approval has been granted and the
Director of Finance has certified the availability of funds, the
property owner may be reimbursed up to 50% of approved costs
upon the Township Engineer approving the work done and upon
submitting the evidence to the Township Engineer that full and
complete payment has been made by the property owner for the
work completed. The Township Engineer shall prepare an
appropriate application form for use under this article.
C. To replace curbing, necessitated by the repair or replacement of
driveway aprons or sidewalks, the following shall apply:
(1) Upon the determination of the Township Engineer, the Township
may perform the necessary repairs or permit the property owner to
make such curb repairs/replacement as approved by the Township
Engineer. The Township will reimburse the property owner for all
approved repairs, at the prevailing rates as determined by the
Township Engineer.
(2) Acceptable curb replacement shall include vertical curb,
combination curb/gutter and asphalt pavement resulting from curb
and curb/gutter removal.
§ 300-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-22
300:1011
upon the recommendations of the Township Engineer, who shall evaluate
same according to the standards set forth in Chapter 190, Land Use, which
standards are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 300-23. Costs of repairs.
In those situations wherein the owner or occupant of such lands shall not
comply with the requirements of such notice aforesaid, it shall be lawful for
the Township Engineer to cause the required work to be performed, and
said work will be paid for out of municipal funds available for that purpose,
whereupon the cost of said work shall be certified by the Township Engineer
to the Township Committee.
§ 300-24. Cost to become lien.
The Township Committee shall certify to the Tax Collector of the Township
the amount so certified by the Engineer, and it shall become a lien upon
the lands in front of which said work was performed to the same extent
that assessments for local improvements are liens, and the same shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of such other
assessments and shall bear interest at the same rate. Additionally, the
Township may have an action to recover the amount against the owner of
said lands in any court having competent jurisdiction thereof. A certified
copy of the aforesaid certificate of cost shall in such action be prima
facie evidence of the existence of a debt due from the said owner to the
municipality.
A. Such determination having been made, the Township Committee, by
resolution, shall cause a notice in writing to be served upon the owners
of said lands requiring the necessary specified work to said sidewalk
and/or driveway apron to be done by the owner within a period not to
exceed 60 days from the date of service of the notice.
B. Whenever any lands are unoccupied and the owner cannot be found
within the municipality, the notice may be mailed, postage prepaid, to
his or her post office address, if the same can be ascertained.
C. If the owner is a nonresident of the Township or his or her post office
address cannot be ascertained, then a notice may be inserted for four
weeks, once a week, in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Township.
§ 300-22 FREEHOLD CODE § 300-24
300:1012
ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Private Roads
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-92-20 (§ 16-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 300-25. Purpose.
The governing body having been advised that it has the discretion to
maintain private roads within the Township if, in its opinion, such
maintenance is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
residents of the Township and if travel along such private roads is sufficient
to warrant such action, it is the purpose of this article to set forth the policy,
criteria and standards for such action.
§ 300-26. Declaration and determination.
It is the opinion of the Township Committee of the Township of Freehold,
as to the private roads eligible for maintenance hereunder, that the
expenditure for the maintenance described in § 300-28 is warranted
because:
§ 300-27. Eligibility.
A road within the Township not dedicated to and accepted by the Township
as a public road shall be eligible for maintenance as described in § 300-28
by the Township, provided that:
§ 300-28. Maintenance.
The level of maintenance to be given to the private roads shall be under
Subsection B or C as follows:
A. Travel along such roads is sufficient.
B. The health, safety and welfare of sufficient residents and members of
the public may be advanced.
A. It has a minimum road width of 10 feet.
B. It has four or more dwelling units existing on it within 1,000 feet which
use such private road exclusively for ingress and egress to a public
road, in which case it will be qualified for Level 2 service pursuant to
§ 300-28B.
C. It has fewer than four dwelling units existing on it within 1,000 feet
which use such private road exclusively for ingress and egress to a
public road, in which case it will be qualified for Level 3 service
pursuant to § 300-28C.
D. The dwelling units referred to in Subsections B and C above are not
located on lots which are adjacent to a public road, unless access to the
public road is unavailable by virtue of the existence of wetlands.
§ 300-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-28
300:1013
§ 300-29. Nonexclusive control.
Nothing herein shall be deemed as effecting exclusive control in the
Township over such eligible private roads. Others may undertake any action
in maintaining and/or improving such private roads. The Township assumes
no liability for any injury or damage resulting from the use of such private
roads. Nothing herein shall be deemed to constitute acceptance of any
private roads by the Township. The Township will cease all maintenance
activity relating to such private roads in the event that those with the legal
right to exercise control over the private road forward written requests
to the Township Clerk and a copy to the Department of Public Works and
Automotive Services that no further maintenance activity is desired.
§ 300-30. Assumption of risk.
Those choosing to use the eligible private roads for any purpose whatsoever
shall do so at their own risk.
A. Level 1: grading to be done as needed with a minimum of once a year,
snow plowing, and road overlay pursuant to determination of the
Township Committee. Such level of service shall apply to public rightsof-
way, and not to private roads.
B. Level 2: snow plowing when accumulation has approximated 12 inches
or more; grading as needed pursuant to determination of Road
Superintendent; such other minimum maintenance as shall be
reasonable and necessary in the opinion of the Road Superintendent to
prevent damage to emergency equipment.
C. Level 3: grading as needed pursuant to determination of Road
Superintendent, such other minimum maintenance as shall be
reasonable and necessary in the opinion of the Road Superintendent to
prevent damage to emergency equipment.
§ 300-28 FREEHOLD CODE § 300-30
300:1014
ARTICLE IV
Work Zone Safety
[Added 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21]
§ 300-31. Adoption of MUTCD.
The Township does hereby adopt the most current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (hereafter known as the
"MUTCD"), except as may be supplemented and amended, as it controls
and regulates construction, maintenance operations or utility work which
obstructs or affects the normal flow of traffic. The MUTCD shall apply to all
public roadways in the Township of Freehold and private roadways where
the Police Department is authorized by ordinance to enforce Subtitle 1, Title
39 of the revised statues of the State of New Jersey.
§ 300-32. Preconstruction meetings.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or a public utility
as required under N.J.A.C. 16:25-9.2 of the New Jersey Administrative
Code, wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway which
involves a detour, road closure, is located so close to a school as to
affect the safe passage of students or buses, or when the expected
duration of the work zone exceeds one day, to arrange with the
Freehold Township Traffic Bureau, or in its absence the Patrol Shift
Supervisor, a preconstruction meeting and submit plans, as required,
for the safe movement of traffic during such period of construction or
work. No road closure or detour shall be permitted without the
approval of the Freehold Township Police Department.
B. A preconstruction meeting shall be scheduled a minimum of 48 hours in
advance of the start of construction. The Freehold Township Traffic
Bureau or the Patrol Shift Supervisor may waive the preconstruction
meeting when the Traffic Safety Officer or Shift Supervisor is satisfied
that all of the requirements of the MUTCD and this article have been
met.
C. Traffic control plans submitted to the Traffic Safety Bureau shall be
legible. The plans shall clearly show the area where work will be
performed and precisely indicate what signage and warning devices
will be used. It shall not be the responsibility of the Freehold Township
Police Department to design traffic control plans, but only to review,
modify as needed, and approve such plans.
D. Emergency utility repair work, where unrepaired may create an
imminent hazard, shall not require a preconstruction meeting or the
submission of a traffic control plan, but shall comply with the MUTCD.
Planned projects do not constitute an emergency.
E. This article shall not serve to replace any separate requirements
imposed by the Township Engineer.
§ 300-31 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-33
300:1015
§ 300-33. Hours of operation.
The Police Department reserves the right to limit the hours of operation
when the proposed construction times would unreasonably impact traffic,
schools, events or otherwise cause a safety hazard.
§ 300-34. Traffic directors.
§ 300-35. Work stoppage and removal of violators.
§ 300-36. Reimbursement of expenses.
A. Traffic directors shall be used when required by the MUTCD. All traffic
directors shall be trained, certified and operate in accordance with the
MUTCD. All civilian traffic control directors shall be required to have
their certification card or other appropriate proof of training present
when directing traffic.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-81, only police officers may control traffic at
intersections controlled by a traffic signal or regulatory signage. This
shall include construction so close to the intersection as to constitute an
immediate hazard to traffic operating in the intersection.
A. Any Freehold Township police officer, authorized by a supervisor, shall
have the authority to stop work, order the removal of vehicles,
equipment, dumpsters, and stored material located within the street
right-of-way, the backfilling of open excavations and/or related work, in
order to abate any nuisance, safety hazard or any violation of this
article. If the contractor is unable or unwilling to eliminate the hazard
or violation, any Freehold Township police officer, authorized by a
supervisor, shall have the authority to call in members and equipment
of the State Highway Department, County Highway Department,
Freehold Township Department of Public Works and Automotive
Services or other appropriate authority, to make safe the hazardous
condition or eliminate the violation.
B. When a public safety hazard occurs at a construction site when no
construction workers are present, and the responsible party cannot be
located, any Freehold Township police officer, authorized by a
supervisor, shall have the authority to call in members and equipment
of the State Highway Department, County Highway Department,
Freehold Township Department of Public Works and Automotive
Services, or other appropriate authority, to make safe the hazardous
condition or eliminate the violation.
A. The Township may bill for any and all expenses incurred by it in making
safe a hazardous condition or eliminating a violation. Reimbursable
expenses shall include traffic control performed by the Police
Department on private, municipal, county and state roadways.
§ 300-33 FREEHOLD CODE § 300-36
300:1016
§ 300-37. Commencement of work and finished or suspended work
sites.
§ 300-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or utility violating any provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the fines and penalties as set forth in Chapter
1, Article II, General Penalty.
B. The Township may bill any individual or company for any and all
expenses incurred by the Township when assisting in emergency repair
work. Reimbursable expenses shall include traffic control performed by
the Police Department on private, municipal, county or state roads.
Such work shall include, but not be limited to, damaged or broken
utility poles, downed power lines, broken or damaged water or sewer
lines, broken or damaged cable, phone or fiber optic lines, etc.
A. No materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or
sidewalk until all safety devices, construction signs, barricades, cones,
lighting devices and pavement markings are installed in accordance
with the MUTCD and the traffic control plan, if required, has been
approved by the Township Police Department.
B. Work area and/or detour signage, when applicable, shall be removed or
covered by the contractor when the work is completed for the day or
the detour is not in effect. All signage related to the project shall be
promptly removed upon completion of the project.
§ 300-36 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-38
300:1017
Chapter 305
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Land use — See Ch. 190, § 190-115.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 389.
§ 305-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION — Building or installing a new swimming pool or
enlarging an existing swimming pool or any of its facilities.
POOL — Any private swimming pool of more than 100 cubic feet capacity
of permanent construction, and all equipment and appurtenances thereto,
used by any person for swimming or bathing.
PORTABLE POOL — Any above-surface-type pool of more than 100 cubic
feet capacity, not stationary or fixed and capable of being removed for
storage.
WADING POOL — A permanently constructed pool not designed or used for
swimming, with a maximum area of 100 square feet and a maximum water
depth of 12 inches.
§ 305-2. Permit required.
Application for a permit to construct, establish or maintain or to alter,
remodel or add to a permanent private swimming pool or permanent wading
pool shall be made to the Building Inspector by the owner of the property.
The application shall be accompanied by two sets of sketch plats showing
location of the pool with relation to the boundary lines of the premises and
adjacent structures situated thereon and showing all existing or proposed
fences and their height. The application shall also be accompanied by two
sets of plans and general specifications for the proposed private swimming
pool or wading pool and auxiliary structures and appurtenances, setting
forth the size and capacity of the pool and the extent of filtration, the
water supply arrangement and materials to be used, and also setting forth
the location, height and aperture dimensions of the fence to be erected,
together with the gate.
§ 305-3. Approval of sketch plat, plans and specifications.
No permit for a private swimming pool or wading pool shall be issued by the
Building Inspector until the sketch plat, plans and specifications have been
§ 300-38 FREEHOLD CODE § 305-3
305:1018
approved by the Township Engineer and the approval properly certified on
the plans.
§ 305-4. Permit fees.
The fees to be charged for a permit for construction of a private swimming
pool or wading pool shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees. No permit
shall be issued until the fee is paid.
§ 305-5. Maintenance.
All materials used in the construction of private swimming pools or wading
pools shall be waterproof and so designed and constructed as to facilitate
emptying and cleaning, and shall be maintained and operated in such a
manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. Inlets of the treated water
shall be so located and spaced as to secure satisfactory dispersion of the
water throughout the pool and to permit draining, cleaning and disinfecting
of the bottom and sides. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
§ 305-6. Accessory buildings.
Any accessory buildings that are to be constructed must comply with that
portion of Chapter 190, Land Use, pertaining to accessory buildings. Locker
rooms, bathhouses, cabanas, shower rooms, toilets, runways and all other
physical facilities or equipment incident to the operation of any private
swimming pool or wading pool, shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times.
§ 305-7. Order to close pool.
§ 305-8. Discharge system.
All private swimming pools, wading pools or portable pools with a water
depth of more than one foot shall be provided with the necessary equipment
to completely pump out or empty the pool or shall be emptied by providing
one drainage outlet, to be installed at the lowest point of the pool, not
in excess of three inches in diameter extending from the pool to a storm
sewer, lawn sprinkling system, adequate dry well or sand filtering pit on
the premises on which the private pool, wading pool or portable pool is
located. The discharge of water from such pools into a storm sewer shall
A. All pools not equipped with facilities for the recirculation and reuse of
the pool water shall be subject to closure by order of the Board of
Health during any period of emergency water shortage.
B. Whenever any pool, by reason of mechanical defects or failure to
comply with the requirements of this chapter, is a hazard to the health
of users, the Health Officer is authorized to close the pool and keep it
closed until no further hazard to users exists, subject to right of appeal
to the Board of Health by the owner of the pool. No appeal, however,
shall stay the action of the Health Officer.
§ 305-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 305-8
305:1019
be permitted only where the capacity is adequate as determined by the
Township Engineer. No private pool drain, wading pool drain or portable
pool drain shall be connected into the sanitary sewer system. Pool water
may not be discharged at the curb or upon the surface of any street. The
discharging waters shall in no case cause or create a nuisance to the
abutting property or to the public.
§ 305-9. Disinfecting agents.
Chlorine-gas-bearing compounds in solution shall be required as
disinfecting agents for swimming pools, wading pools or portable pools.
The use of ozone, ultra violet light or any other method wherein a residual
cannot be determined is prohibited.
§ 305-10. Location.133
The location of private swimming pools shall be as provided in § 190-115 of
Chapter 190, Land Use, of the Code of the Township of Freehold.
§ 305-11. Fencing.
All private swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed, installed,
established or maintained shall be enclosed by a permanent fence of
durable material at least four feet in height but no more than six feet in
height and shall be so constructed as not to have openings, mesh, holes
or gaps larger than four square inches in any dimension except for doors
and gates, and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal
dimension shall not exceed four inches. All gates used in conjunction with
the fence shall meet the same specifications as the fence itself and shall be
equipped with approved locking devices and be locked at all times when the
private swimming pool is not in use.
§ 305-12. Lighting.
A. No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
a private swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool in such a manner
as to be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring properties. Lighting
shall not shine directly upon any abutting property. No unshielded
lights shall be permitted.
B. No artificial underwater lighting shall be permitted in any private
swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool unless the installation has
first been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector of the
Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 305-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 305-13
305:1020
§ 305-13. Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any pool to be operated or used between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
§ 305-14. Enforcement.
§ 305-15. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 311
TAXATION
A. Every private swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool
constructed, installed, established or maintained in the Township shall
at all times comply with the requirements of the Board of Health. Any
nuisance or hazard to health which may exist or develop in or in
consequence of or in connection with the private swimming pool,
wading pool or portable pool, shall be forthwith abated and removed by
the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises on which the pool is
located upon receipt of notice from the Building Inspector or Health
Officer of the Township.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and Health Officer to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
C. The owner or operator of any pool within the Township shall allow the
Building Inspector and the Health Officer, or any authority or official,
access at all reasonable times to any private swimming pool, wading
pool or portable pool and appurtenances thereto for the purpose of
inspection to ascertain compliance with this chapter and all other
pertinent Township ordinances.
§ 305-13 TAXATION § 305-15
311:1021

ARTICLE I
Horse Race Meeting Admission Tax
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-75-8 (§ 2-29 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 311-1. Preamble.
The legislature has adopted Senate Bill #1446, amending N.J.S.A. 5:5-48,
to take effect January 1, 1975. The amendment provides an admission
tax of $0.05 per person to be charged spectators at horse race meetings.
The aforesaid amendment provides that the tax shall be distributed to the
municipality in which the race meeting is held. The Freehold Raceway holds
race meetings simultaneously in Freehold Township and the Borough of
Freehold. The legislature has not determined in what manner and amount
these monies shall be distributed where a race meeting is held in two
municipalities simultaneously. The Township Committee is aware that the
Borough of Freehold has adopted an ordinance substantially similar to that
which follows below. It is the intention of the Township Committee that
this article shall complement that of the Borough of Freehold and be in
accordance with the laws provided.
§ 311-2. Admission tax imposed.
An admission tax of $0.05 per person, as authorized under N.J.S.A. 5:5-48,
as amended by Chapter 181 of the Laws of 1974, shall be imposed at every
racing meeting regulated by the New Jersey Racing Commission and held
in the Township of Freehold.
§ 311-3. When effective.
Such admission tax shall remain in effect until repealed by the Township
Committee and shall be imposed at every race meeting held in the Township
of Freehold subsequent to April 14, 1975.
§ 311-1 TAXATION § 311-3
311:1023

ARTICLE II
Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-5134]
§ 311-4. Imposition of occupancy tax.
There is hereby imposed within the Township of Freehold a tax to be
charged in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1 et seq., on
charges of rent for every occupancy within a hotel or motel. The tax shall be
at the rate of 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy. Said tax shall be
in addition to any and all taxes or fees imposed under state statute or local
ordinances upon the occupancy of a hotel or motel. For purposes of this
article, the word "hotel" shall be defined as a building regularly used and
kept open for the lodging of guests, including motels, bed-and-breakfasts
and inns.
§ 311-5. Payment of and responsibility for occupancy tax.
§ 311-6. Collection of tax.
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the occupant of the
room. "Occupant" shall be defined as a person who, for a consideration,
uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel or
motel, under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to
use or other agreement or otherwise.
B. The owner of the hotel/motel and/or the person or entity making the
hotel/motel room available for occupancy, shall not assume or absorb
any of the tax imposed by this article.
C. The owner of the hotel/motel and/or the person making the room
available for occupancy shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to
any person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the owner, that
the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the occupant, or
that the tax would be refunded to the occupant.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the
municipality by the person collecting the rent from the hotel/motel
occupant. That person shall either be the owner of the hotel/motel, the
manager or salesperson or other employee of the owner who arranges
with the occupant for the rental of the room.
B. Individual liability. Each person required to collect the tax imposed by
this article shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or
required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the
same right in respect to collecting the tax from an occupant as if the tax
were a part of the rent and payable at the same time.
134. Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 179 of the Code and renumbered for
codification purposes.
§ 311-4 TAXATION § 311-7
311:1025
§ 311-7. Payment of tax to state; distribution by state to Township.
§ 311-8. Violations and penalties.
A. A person required to collect the tax imposed under this article as
described above shall, on or before the 28th day of each month, forward
to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of Treasury
the tax collected in the preceding month and shall make and file a
return for the preceding month with the Director on any form and
containing any information as the Director shall prescribe as necessary
to determine liability for the tax in the preceding month during which
the person was required to collect the tax. Should the Director
determine to require payments of tax liability at any intervals and based
upon any collection classifications other than described in this article,
the person required to collect the tax shall comply with any
determinations made in that regard by the Director.
B. The Director of the Division of Taxation shall collect and administer the
tax imposed under this article, and shall determine and certify to the
State Treasurer on a quarterly or more frequent basis the amount of
revenues collected in each municipality. The State Treasurer, upon
certification of the Director, shall pay and distribute on a quarterly or
more frequent basis, as prescribed by the State Treasurer, the amount
of revenues determined and certified as described above to the
Township of Freehold.
A. Each assumption or absorption of a tax by an owner or employee of an
owner, as described in § 311-5B above, shall be deemed a separate
offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor as
described in § 311-5C above, for each day the representative or
advertisement continues, shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Penalties. For any violation or offense committed under this article, the
offender shall be subject to penalties in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article II, § 1-3 of the Township Code.
§ 311-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 311-8
311:1026
Chapter 315
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 11.
§ 315-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-48]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITIONAL STOP — All stops with the exception of the final destination
of which the taxicab driver proceeds at the direction of the passenger.
APPLICANT — A person seeking a license to own or drive a taxi in the
Township of Freehold.
AUTOCAB — The meaning set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-1, as amended and
supplemented.
BASE — A place of business from which for-hire vehicles are dispatched.
BASE OWNER — Any individual, partnership or corporation or other entity
licensed by the Township of Freehold to own and operate a base.[Added
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
CRUISING — The practice of driving along the streets of the Township
with a taxicab so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the
taxicabs to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab driving along
the streets of the Township for any purpose other than while transporting
a passenger, going to a definite destination by the most direct route in
response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger, or returning
by the most direct route to the taxicab's base or home terminus after
discharging a passenger or going to or from the base to the driver's home
by the most direct route shall be prima facie evidence of cruising.
DELIVERIES — Any situation where the taxicab driver delivers any item to
the customers.
DISPATCH — An instruction to a driver by a base to provide transportation
to a passenger who has previously arranged for such transportation with
the base.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxi or autocab within the Township.
MAILING ADDRESS — The address designated for the mailing of all notices
and correspondence from the Township and for the issuances of
summonses.[Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
MEDALLION or DECAL — The official number and medallion/decal issued
by the Township of Freehold to each taxicab.[Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-4]
§ 311-8 TAXATION § 315-1
311:1027
OPERATOR — Taxi owner, person operating the taxi business or leaseholder.
The operator must obtain a license to operate.
OWNER — Any persons in whose name title to any taxicab or autocab is
registered within the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles or who
appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or licensee thereof.
PASSENGER — A person who has engaged a for-hire vehicle for the
purposes of being transported to a destination or a person who is awaiting
the arrival of a dispatched for-hire vehicle.
RENEWAL APPLICANT — A person seeking to renew a taxi driver's license
within the time period established by the Township.135
TAXICAB or TAXI — Any automobile or motor vehicle engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire within the Township.
§ 315-2. License required. [Amended 3-25-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-7;
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
No person shall operate a taxicab within the Township unless both the
owner and the driver of the taxicab are licensed under this chapter.
§ 315-3. Types of licenses.
§ 315-4. Licensing of taxicab/autocab owners.
A. Owner's license. No person, corporation or entity shall hire out, keep or
use for hire or pay or cause to be kept for use for hire or pay any vehicle
commonly known as a "taxicab," within the Township without first
having obtained a license for that purpose. A taxicab owner's license
shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be operated in the
Township, provided that the person driving the cab holds a valid
taxicab/autocab driver's license. The owner's license shall not be
transferable. No more than 10 owner's licenses shall be issued in any
year. [Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-28]
B. Driver's license. No person shall drive a taxicab/autocab in the
Township of Freehold without first having obtained a license therefor.
The holder of a taxicab/autocab driver's license shall be entitled to
operate within the Township any taxicab/autocab whose owner has
been licensed under this chapter.
A. Applications.
(1) All applications for a taxicab/autocab owner's license shall be in
writing upon a form to be furnished by the Township Clerk. The
application shall contain but not be limited to full name and
address of the owner, the serial number, type, color, year and model
of the vehicle to be licensed and the number of persons it is capable
135. Editor's Note: The former definition of "risk retention group," added 3-23-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-4, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 7-27-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-12.
§ 315-1 FREEHOLD CODE § 315-4
311:1028
of carrying and shall be accompanied by the required fee. Each
applicant for a license shall secure through a private agency a
criminal history background check, conducted not more than 14
days prior to the filing of the application. Such criminal history
background check must be submitted (as part of the application)
directly from the private agency to the Chief of Police. The criminal
history background check shall be in sufficient detail and scope
to reveal any criminal history recorded with the State Bureau
of Identification or with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.136
[Amended 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-20]
(2) With the application there shall be furnished two recent
photographs of the applicant of a size measuring two inches by two
inches.
B. No person shall be issued a license unless the vehicle can accommodate
a minimum of four passengers and the owner provides the insurance
certificate as set forth herein.
C. The names and addresses of two responsible persons in the County of
Monmouth as references shall be provided.
D. All applications shall be filed with the Clerk who shall forward a copy of
the application to the Police Chief for review and recommendation. The
Police Chief or his designee shall submit a report or review of the
application to the Township Committee within 14 days of the receipt of
the criminal history report. A copy of the application together with the
report and recommendation of the Police Department and proof of
insurance shall be submitted to the Township Committee at the next
succeeding meeting for action, and any and all applications may be
granted or refused by the majority vote of the members of the body
present at such meeting.
E. The following factors will be considered by the Township Committee in
determining whether to grant or deny the license:
(1) The character, business and financial responsibility and experience
of the applicant and the probability that, if granted a license, the
applicant will operate the taxicab/autocab in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
(2) Any factors contained in the review or report from the Police
Department, including, but not limited to, convictions of any of the
New Jersey Criminal Code, motor vehicle violations and Township
Ordinance violations; [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
(3) The licensee is over 21 years of age, can read, write and speak the
English language and provides an employer identification number.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Licensing, Art. II, Criminal History Background Investigations.
§ 315-4 TAXATION § 315-4
311:1029
§ 315-5. Taxicab/autocab driver's license.
(4) Any other factors directly related to the granting or denial of the
license which would substantially affect the public safety or
convenience.
F. Number of license limited. No license to operate a taxicab/autocab shall
be granted unless the number of such licenses issued and outstanding
is less than 10 except as hereinafter set forth. [Amended 10-23-2007
by Ord. No. O-07-28]
G. Issuance of license. The Township Committee shall, by resolution, grant
or deny the license. If the application is approved, the Township Clerk
shall issue the license upon forms established by the Township
Committee by resolution.
H. License terms; fees. A taxicab/autocab owner's license shall expire on
December 31 of each year. The license fee as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, shall be payable upon the filing of an application for the issuance
or renewal of a license, a portion of which, as set forth in Chapter 150,
Fees, shall be nonrefundable for the processing of the application. In
addition to the application fees set forth in this chapter, every applicant
shall also pay to the Township Police Department a sum in the amount
charged by any county, state and/or federal agency for a fingerprint
inquiry concerning the applicant. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-48]
I. Owner's license.
(1) The owner's license may be renewed by the Township Committee
upon the licensee's filing with the Township Clerk a new application
and fee annually and provided that the owner has not been
convicted of three or more ordinance or motor vehicle violations in
the preceding 36 months and further provided that the criminal
history report is satisfactory. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-4]
(2) The owner's license shall at all times be prominently displayed and
adequately protected in the interior of the taxicab and be plainly
legible to any passenger in the rear seat.
A. Application.
(1) Every applicant for a taxicab/autocab driver's license shall, in
addition to the requirements herein provided and of any law in the
state:
(a) Be 21 years of age or older.
(b) Present the required doctor's physical report to the Township
Clerk, evidencing that he or she has been examined within the
last thirty-day period and that he or she is of sound physical
§ 315-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 315-5
311:1030
condition, with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of the body or mind
which may make him or her unfit for the safe operation of a
vehicle.
(c) Never have been convicted of a felony or any drug offense and
shall not have violated any provision of this chapter.
(d) Be able to read, write and speak the English language.
(e) Be of good character.
(f) Not have been convicted of driving while intoxicated or
reckless driving within three years next preceding the filing of
such application and not have more than six points on his or
her driver's license within the three years next preceding the
filing of such application. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-4]
(g) Have knowledge of the state motor vehicle laws and traffic
regulations.
(h) Have and evidence knowledge of the ordinances and
geography of the Township of Freehold. The Township may
establish a written test to determine the applicant’s knowledge
of the streets and points of interest in the Township. If so
established, each applicant must take and pass such test by
completing at least 75% of the questions correctly. [Amended
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
(i) Furnish with the application two recent photographs of the
applicant of a size measuring two inches by two inches.
(j) Provide the names and addresses of two responsible persons in
the County of Monmouth as references.
(k) Provide to the Chief of Police a motor vehicle driving abstract
and a criminal history report with each application for a
driver's license and/or renewal to be provided at the
applicant's own cost and expense. Instructions for obtaining
the motor vehicle driving abstract and criminal history report
may be obtained through the Police Department. The applicant
shall be responsible for any fees related to the driving abstract
and criminal history report.
(l) Pay a fee as provided in Subsection C below, a portion of which,
for processing of the application, shall be nonrefundable in the
event the license is not granted.
(m) Provide to the Township Clerk the following documentation
with the application:
[1] Social security card or permanent alien registration card.
§ 315-5 TAXATION § 315-5
311:1031
[2] Birth certificate.
[3] Valid New Jersey driver's license.
[4] A certified New Jersey driver’s abstract, dated no longer
than one month prior to the application. [Added
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
[5] Within 60 days of the issuance of a temporary taxi driver’s
license, provide to the Township Clerk proof of having
satisfactorily completed a state-certified defensive or safe
driving program. Failure to do so will result in an
automatic revocation of the temporary or permanent taxi
driver license, and, in the event the permanent license has
not yet been issued, no such permanent taxi driver license
shall issue. Any applicant who fails to provide the requisite
proof of having satisfactorily completed a state-certified
defensive or safe driving program shall be banned from reapplying
for a taxi driver license for a period of two years.
Satisfactory completion of a state-certified defensive or
safe driving program shall be effective for a period of two
years. Any applicant who is the holder of a CDL duly issued
by the State of New Jersey shall be exempt from this
requirement as long as the CDL is current. [Added
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
(n) Provide to the Clerk a sworn statement setting forth place of
residence for the preceding five years, age, height, color of
eyes and hair, place of birth, previous employer and marital
status.
(2) All applications for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the
Township Clerk who shall submit the application to the Police
Department for review and to the Township Committee, after
receipt of the report from the Police Department and the results of
the criminal history report, and payment of all fees. The Township
Committee shall act upon such application at the next succeeding
meeting, and any and all applications may be granted or refused by
the vote of the majority of the members of the body present at the
meeting.
B. Issuance of license; content.
(1) Upon approval of the application by the Township Committee, the
Clerk shall immediately issue the applicant a taxicab/autocab
driver's license. The license shall contain the licensee's name and
address, physical description, signature and photograph.
(2) Pending the receipt of the criminal history report and, upon the
recommendation of the Police Chief or the Chief's designee, the
Township Committee may, in its sole discretion, issue a temporary
driver's license which shall expire in 60 days in the event the final
§ 315-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 315-5
311:1032
§ 315-6. License form.
Each applicant granted a taxicab/autocab driver's license shall be issued a
printed license in a form approved by the Clerk. This license shall, at all
times, be prominently displayed and adequately protected in the interior of
any taxicab/autocab operated by the licensee so that the face thereof shall
be at all times in full view and plainly legible to any passenger seated in the
rear seat of such taxicab/autocab and there be affixed to such license, in full
view of such passenger, a photograph of such licensed driver measuring not
less than two inches by two inches. Each photograph shall have indicated
thereon the words "licensed taxicab/autocab driver" or "licensed taxicab/
autocab owner," as the case may be.
§ 315-7. Inspection of vehicles.
license is not approved before that date. The temporary license
may be immediately revoked by the Clerk, with no notice, upon the
recommendation of the Police Chief or failure of the applicant to
provide any of the requirements set forth herein. In the event the
final police report/recommendation is not received within 60 days,
the Township Committee may, at its sole discretion, elect to extend
the temporary driver’s license for an additional thirty-day period.
[Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
C. Term of license. Fees. The fee for a taxicab/autocab driver's license
shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, a portion of which shall be
nonrefundable in the event the license is not granted. The taxicab
driver's license shall expire on December 31 of each year. The license
may be renewed annually upon payment of all fees and provided that
the driver meets all of the requirements set forth above.
A. Initial inspection. Before any vehicle is used as a taxicab/autocab within
the Township it shall be inspected by the Chief of Police, or a police
officer designated by him or her, or by the Superintendent of Public
Works, or an employee designated by him or her, to ascertain that it is
in a safe, clean, and sanitary condition, and contains all safety devices
required by law.
B. Reinspections. All taxicabs/autocabs shall be reinspected annually or
more frequently if the Township Committee so requires by resolution.
In addition, a police officer may inspect a taxicab/autocab at any
reasonable time to determine if it is clean, sanitary and in a safe and
proper operating condition.
C. Failure to pass inspection. Any taxicab/autocab which fails to pass
inspection shall be immediately taken out of service and shall not be
operated again within the Township until the defects which led to its
rejection are corrected. In the case of minor defects which do not
constitute an immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, the
taxicab/autocab may continue to operate for a period of one week, at
the end of which time it shall be reinspected. If the defect has not by
§ 315-5 TAXATION § 315-7
311:1033
§ 315-8. Identification of taxicabs/autocabs.
Each taxicab/autocab operated in the Township shall have a sign painted
on each rear door. The sign shall contain the owner's name and the words
"taxicab" or "taxi" in letters which shall not be less than four inches nor
more than eight inches in height.
then been corrected, the vehicle shall immediately be taken out of
service and shall remain out of service until the defect is corrected.
D. Proof of state inspection. No vehicle covered by the terms of this
section shall be licensed until proof has been presented that the vehicle
has been inspected and approved as required under Title 39 of the
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
A. Upon the issuance of a taxicab\autocab owner's license, the Township
Clerk shall provide to the owner two decals or medallions to be
attached to the front driver and passenger door of the taxicab and
which will identify the taxicab/autocab as having been licensed by the
Township. There shall be a charge as set forth in Chapter 150, Fees, for
each set of medallions or decals issued and a fee for each replaced set
of medallions or decals. Decals or medallions shall be placed on those
taxicab/autocabs set forth in the owner's application and may not be
transferred from vehicle to vehicle without prior permission of the
Chief of Police. No new decal shall be issued without proof presented to
the Clerk of removal or destruction of both decals from the original
vehicle and proof that the original vehicle is no longer included in the
insurance policy of the taxi owner. Proof of insurance for any
replacement vehicle must be presented to the Township Clerk before
the issuance of decals for the replacement vehicle. [Amended
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
B. Each taxicab/autocab operated in the Township shall have a number on
the front and rear bumper measuring no less than three inches in
height. Each vehicle owned and operated by a licensed owner shall bear
a different number, which number shall be set forth in the application
indicating the specific number for each specific taxicab/autocab.
[Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4137]
C. Operation of a taxicab/autocab without the required decal or medallion
shall be a violation of this chapter.
D. Each driver of a taxicab who has been issued a license shall prominently
display a copy of the license in the interior of the taxicab/autocab while
the driver is operating same. The copy of the license shall at all times be
prominently displayed and adequately posted in the interior of any
taxicab or autocab operated by the licensee so that the face thereof
shall be at all times in full view and plainly legible to any passenger
137. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections B and C as
Subsections C and D.
§ 315-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 315-8
311:1034
§ 315-9. Fares.
§ 315-10. Records.
The owner of each taxicab shall keep or cause to be kept a written daily
record of each trip made by the taxicab showing the date, time and place
the cab was engaged, the place and time of the discharge of the passenger,
the number of passengers carried, fare received, distance traveled and the
seated on the rear seat. The owner's license shall also be prominently
displayed and adequately posted in the interior of the taxicab so as to
be plainly legible to any passenger seated on the rear seat.
A. Setting and display of fares.
(1) The fare which may be charged by the driver or owner of a taxicab/
autocab for a trip wholly within the limits of the Township may not
exceed the rates approved by ordinance. A schedule of approved
rates, together with a schedule of rates charged for trips outside of
the Township, shall be displayed in the taxicab in a manner so as to
be easily read by all passengers.
(2) Taxi fares as set forth hereinafter may be amended by the Township
by ordinance from time to time. The initial taxi fares are as follows:
(a) The taxi fare is $3.50 per trip for those up to 60 years of age,
and $3 per trip for those over 60 years of age.
(b) Each additional passenger shall be charged $1.
(c) Each additional stop shall be charged $1.
(d) Deliveries shall be charged $5.
(e) Waiting time once the taxicab is employed by the user shall be
charged $2 per five minutes waiting time.
(f) The loading/unloading of all bags, luggage and similar items
shall be charged at $0.25 per item for all items over two.
B. Receipts. The driver of a taxicab/autocab, upon request, shall give the
passenger a receipt for the amount charged. The receipt shall show the
name of the owner, the license number of the taxicab/autocab with the
amount of the fare and the date of the transaction.
C. Refusal to pay fare. No person after hiring a taxicab/autocab shall
refuse to pay the legal fare, nor shall any person hire a taxicab/autocab
with the intent not to pay the legal fare.
D. Disputes over fares. All disputes as to the rate of fare shall, upon
request of the driver or passenger, be determined by the police officer
in charge of the Township police station. Failure to comply with the
officer's determination shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 315-8 TAXATION § 315-10
311:1035
driver license number of the person driving the taxicab on the trip. The
records shall be kept in a place that is convenient for a proper authorized
representative of the Township to inspect the same and the owner shall give
his/her cooperation in expediting any inspection.
§ 315-11. Insurance policy.
A. Amount; policy; provider.
(1) Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall submit and file
with the Clerk an insurance policy of a company duly authorized to
transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New
Jersey with an AM Best rating or Standard and Poors rating of “A”
or better, in the sum of a minimum of $100,000 against loss from
liability imposed by law upon the taxicab owner for damages on
account of bodily injury or death suffered by any one person and
$100,000 for damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered
by more than one person and in the sum of a minimum of $50,000
against loss on account of property damage suffered by any person
or persons as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the
ownership, maintenance or use of such taxicab, covering the
taxicab or taxicabs to be licensed. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-4]
(2) The taxicab owner's license shall be effective and operation
thereunder shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy
shall remain in force to the full and collectible amounts as
aforesaid. The insurance policy shall specifically provide for the
payment of any final judgment recorded by any person on account
of the ownership, maintenance or use of the taxicab or any faults in
respect thereto and shall be for the benefit of every person
suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid. [Amended
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-12]
(3) No owner's insurance policy may contain a "Named Driver
Endorsement" that would exclude coverage if the vehicle was being
driven by any individual other than the named driver, or a "Radius
of Operation" endorsement which limits coverage to a specific
radius of operation. [Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4;
amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-12]
(4) The insurance provider must be a member of an insolvency fund in
the event of default, or, in the alternative, must provide an
alternative guarantee for coverage of claims. [Added 3-23-2010
by Ord. No. O-10-4; amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-12]
B. Power of attorney. Concurrently with the filing of the insurance policy
with the Clerk, the applicant for a taxicab/autocab owner's license shall
execute and deliver to the Township Clerk a power of attorney wherein
and whereby the owner shall nominate, constitute and appoint the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township his or her true and lawful
§ 315-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 315-11
311:1036
§ 315-12. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may establish, by resolution, rules and regulations
relating to the operation of taxicabs/autocabs and the conduct of licensees.
A copy of the rules and regulations shall be furnished to each licensee.
§ 315-13. Suspension or revocation of driver's or owner's licenses.
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out
of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by
virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
C. Bond. If the taxicab/autocab owner applicant operates more than one
taxicab/autocab, he or she may file with the Clerk, in lieu of the policy, a
bond or insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of this state, in the sums
hereinabove provided, which shall be blanket insurance covering all
taxicabs/autocabs operated by such owner, which bond shall provide for
the payment of any final judgment recorded by any person on account
of the ownership, maintenance and use of any such taxicabs/autocabs
or any faults in respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of every
person suffering loss, damage or injury.
D. Issuance of certificate. The Township Clerk, upon filing of the required
insurance policy or bond, shall issue a certificate in duplicate showing
that the owner of the taxicab/autocab has complied with the terms and
provisions of this chapter, which certificate shall recite the name of the
insurance company, the number and date of expiration of the policy or
bond, a description of the taxicab/autocab insured thereunder and the
registration number of the same. The duplicate certificate shall be filed
with the Division of Motor Vehicles before any such car is licensed as a
taxicab/autocab. The original certificate shall be posted in a
conspicuous place within the taxicab/autocab. The fee for this
certificate shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.
A. Taxi stands. No person shall park or place any taxicab/autocab on any of
the streets of the Township at any time except at such place or places as
the Mayor and Township Committee may, by resolution, from time to
time designate as municipal taxi stands.138
B. Cruising prohibited. No person shall cruise on the streets of the
Township with any taxicab/autocab at any time for the purpose of
soliciting passengers.
A. Generally. In addition to the causes for revocation of a license set forth
in this chapter, any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or
suspended, or any application for the issuance or renewal of a license
denied, for any of the following reasons:
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Traffic.
§ 315-11 TAXATION § 315-13
311:1037
(1) Failure to render reasonable, prompt, safe and adequate taxicab/
autocab service.
(2) The existence of a judgment unsatisfied of record against the
licensee or applicant in any suit arising over the operation of a
motor vehicle.
(3) Permitting any taxicab/autocab owned or driven by the licensee to
become unsafe, unsanitary or dirty.
(4) Failure to comply with all applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey, the ordinances of the Township or the rules and regulations
adopted in accordance with this chapter.
(5) Conviction of a felony crime or conviction of three or more
ordinance or motor vehicle violations in the preceding 12 months,
or conviction of a motor vehicle violation of three points or greater
in the preceding 12 months.
(6) Determination that the licensed motor vehicle is unsafe or
unsanitary, is dangerous to the safety or health of the occupants or
others, or if the policy of insurance or bond or power of attorney
required herein has not been furnished or kept in force or if the
owners shall fail to comply with any terms or conditions imposed by
the Township Committee or any laws of the state.
B. Drivers. If the licensee is a driver, his or her license may also be
revoked or suspended for the following reasons:
(1) Revocation or suspension of his or her New Jersey motor vehicle
operator's license.
(2) Contracting by the licensee of a communicable or contagious
disease.
(3) Operating a taxicab/autocab in a reckless or grossly negligent
manner, or habitually operating a taxicab/autocab in a negligent
manner.
(4) Conviction of a felony crime or drug offense or conviction of three
or more ordinance or motor vehicle violations in the preceding 12
months, or conviction of intoxicated or reckless driving or a motor
vehicle violation of three points or greater in the preceding 12
months.
(5) The applicant has made false answers in the application for this
license or the New Jersey state driver's license application, or any
renewal thereof or has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt,
safe and adequate taxicab service or has not complied fully with all
of the requirements of this chapter for such class of license.
(6) Failure of the applicant to provide proof of satisfactory completion
of a New Jersey-certified defensive or safe driving course within 60
§ 315-13 FREEHOLD CODE § 315-13
311:1038
§ 315-14. Regulations for taxicab/autocab.
§ 315-15. Regulations governing taxicabs licensed by other
municipalities. [Amended 3-25-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-7]
Owners and drivers of taxicabs licensed out of the jurisdiction of the
Township, and who have their principal office or place of business out of
the jurisdiction of the Township, may be allowed to enter their taxicab in
the Township on a specific call only while in the process of discharging a
passenger transported from outside of the Township limits to a point within
the Township limits or picking up a passenger in the Township as a result
of having been specifically called to do so by the prospective passenger.
Such taxicabs shall not be parked in the Township nor shall the drivers
thereof cruise on the streets of the Township at any time for the purpose
of soliciting passengers, nor shall they in the nighttime or other periods
of darkness, when in the Township, permit any advertising lights on the
taxicab to remain lighted.
§ 315-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty.
days of the initial issuance of the temporary driver’s license.
[Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-4]
A. Stopping restriction. No person shall park or place any taxicab on any
of the streets of the Township at any time except at such place or places
as the Township Committee may designate as municipal taxi stands
unless the operator is stopped while in service or stopped for the
purpose of obtaining food for himself/herself.
B. Prohibited solicitation of passengers. No person shall cruise the streets
of the Township with any taxicab at any time for the purpose of
soliciting passengers.
C. No taxicab driver or other person shall solicit, attempt to solicit or
otherwise seek to engage a passenger of any public street and/or
sidewalk in the Township.
D. Refusal to carry certain passengers. Every person so licensed as
aforesaid shall not refuse to carry local fares or passengers unless the
fare or passenger is unruly or intoxicated.
§ 315-13 TAXATION § 315-16
311:1039
Chapter 319
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150. Cable televisions franchise — See Ch. A411.
§ 315-16 FREEHOLD CODE § 315-16
311:1040
ARTICLE I
General
§ 319-1. Purpose and findings.
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
(1) Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers
and services;
(2) Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;
(3) Promote competition in telecommunications;
(4) Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications
providers and services;
(5) Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive
telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the
businesses, institutions and residents of the Township;
(6) Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the
Township for telecommunications purposes on a competitively
neutral basis;
(7) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in
trust by the Township;
(8) Assure that the Township's current and ongoing costs of granting
and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully
paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
(9) Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities
within the Township comply with the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Township;
(10) Assure that the Township can continue to fairly and responsibly
protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(11) Enable the Township to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry
competition and technological development.
B. The Township Committee finds that due to the passage of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the proliferation of
telecommunication companies seeking to use its public ways, the
passage of this chapter is necessary to ensure the health, safety and
welfare of its residents. The Committee further finds that it is
empowered to enact such a licensing ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:42-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:17-11.
§ 319-1 TAXATION § 319-2
311:1041
§ 319-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise:
AN AFFILIATE — A person that directly or indirectly owns or controls,
is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with
another person.
EXCESS CAPACITY — The volume or capacity in any existing or future
duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public
way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OTHER WAYS — The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other
rights-of-way within the Township but under the jurisdiction and control of
a governmental entity other than the Township.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES — Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies
and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET — Any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way
for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the Township
which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway
purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY — Includes all public streets and utility easements, as those
terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the Township, but
only to the extent of the Township's right, title, interest or authority to
grant a license to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES — Small wireless facilities, consistent with
47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(1), are facilities that meet the following
conditions:[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-8]
The facilities:
Are mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height including their
antennas; or
(1)
Are mounted on structures no more than 10% taller than other
adjacent structures; or
(2)
Do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a
height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10%, whichever is
greater;
(3)
A.
§ 319-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-2
311:1042
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
SURPLUS SPACE — That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which
has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the
orders and regulations of the Board of Public Utilities, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — Includes every person that directly
or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment, or
property within the Township, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — The plant, equipment and
property, including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts,
pedestals, antenna, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be
used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications
services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Includes every person who
provides telecommunications services over telecommunications facilities
without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The providing or offering for rent,
sale or lease, or an exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of
voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or
among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite
or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission
medium.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Freehold.
TOWNSHIP PROPERTY — Includes all real property owned by the
Township, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms
are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the
Township, which are not subject to the right-of-way licensing as provided in
this chapter.
TREE — Any perennial plant having a diameter of four inches or greater
measured at a point four feet above the ground.
Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated
antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume;
B.
All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including
the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any
preexisting associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28
cubic feet in volume;
C.
The facilities do not require antenna structure registration under 47
C.F.R. Part 17; and
D.
The facilities do not result in human exposure to radiofrequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47
C.F.R. § 1.1307(b).
E.
§ 319-2 TAXATION § 319-2
311:1043
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES — Utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundation or supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE — The total distance between the top of the utility pole and
the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Board of
Public Utilities (BPU).
UTILITY EASEMENT — Any easement owned by the Township and
acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES — The plant, equipment and property, including but
not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant
and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within
the public ways of the Township and used or to be used for the purpose of
providing utility or telecommunications services.
§ 319-3. Telecommunications license required. [Amended 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. O-19-8]
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carriers
who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
Township for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons in areas outside the Township shall first obtain a license granting
the use of such public ways from the Township pursuant to Article II of this
chapter. Any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install,
operate, maintain, or otherwise locate small wireless facilities in, under,
over or across any public way of the Township shall first obtain a license
granting the use of such public ways from the Township pursuant to Article
VI of this chapter.
§ 319-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. A separate
and distinctive offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 319-5. Other remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies
that the Township may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 319-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-5
311:1044
ARTICLE II
Licensing Procedure and Requirements.
§ 319-6. Applicability. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-8]
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the Township for the
sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas
within or outside the Township. The provisions of this Article II shall not
apply to small wireless facilities. The licensing procedure and requirements
for small wireless facilities are governed by Article VI.
§ 319-7. License application information.
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this
Article II shall file an application with the Township which shall include the
following information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Township, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
(1) The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
(2) The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other
facilities in the public way along the proposed route.
(3) The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other communications carriers.
(4) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that
surplus space is available for loading its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts
or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
§ 319-6 TAXATION § 319-7
311:1045
§ 319-8. Standards for granting or denying license.
Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under § 319-7
hereof, the Township Committee shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the
following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination
shall include the reasons for denial.
(1) The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(2) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
(1) The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
(2) The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the New Jersey
Department of Transportation regulations.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
M. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article III of this
chapter.
N. Such other and further information as may be required by the Township
Committee.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
§ 319-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-8
311:1046
§ 319-9. Agreement.
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the
Township have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular
terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways
of the Township will be granted.
§ 319-10. Nonexclusive grant.
No license granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the
Township for delivery of telecommunications services or any other
purposes.
§ 319-11. Rights granted.
No license granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest
in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the
public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further,
no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
§ 319-12. Term of grant.
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications
license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.
§ 319-13. License route.
A telecommunications license granted under this article shall be limited to
a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is
granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest.
§ 319-8 TAXATION § 319-14
311:1047
§ 319-14. Location of facilities.
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions:
§ 319-15. Construction permits.
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in Article IV of this chapter;
provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the Township
and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provided substantially equivalent safeguards for reasonable
construction practices and are not in derogation of any applicable
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code.139
§ 319-16. Amendment of grant.
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such utility facility.
B. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its
telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility
poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public
way of the Township, a licensee with permission to occupy the same
public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities
underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground
within a public way of the Township, a grantee that currently occupies
the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the Township Engineer, such relocation shall be made
concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity
of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for
nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers.
A. A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 115, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 319-14 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-16
311:1048
§ 319-17. Renewal applications.
A licensee that desires to renew its license under this article shall, not more
than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license,
file an application with the Township for renewal of its license which shall
include the following information:
§ 319-18. Renewal determinations.
Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under § 319-17
hereof, the Township shall issue a written determination granting or
denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following
standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination
shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
§ 319-19. Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of
this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be
taken by the grantee has been approved by the Township.
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Township which are
not included in a license previously granted under this chapter.
B. If ordered by the Township to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
Township shall grant a license amendment without further application.
A. The information required pursuant to § 319-7 of this article.
B. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between
the Township and the grantee.
C. Such additional reasonable and relevant information as may be
determined by the Township Committee as essential for acting upon the
renewal application.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
the license agreement.
E. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest.
§ 319-16 TAXATION § 319-19
311:1049

ARTICLE III
Fees and Compensation
§ 319-20. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the payment and recovery of
all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Township related to the
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
§ 319-21. Application fee.
§ 319-22. Other Township costs.
All license applicants and licensees shall establish and maintain an escrow
deposit in the amount of $3,000 with the Township. The Township shall
be entitled to reimbursement from the escrow account for all direct and
indirect costs and expenses incurred by the Township in connection with
any review, modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license,
license application or any license agreement. Any interest earned on the
deposit shall accumulate and be credited to the escrow amount being held
by the Township. In the event the escrow or deposit shall be reduced to
$1,000 or less, upon notice from the Township's Chief Financial Officer, the
applicant or licensee shall replenish the escrow account to $3,000 within 15
days of the date of the notice. Upon written request made by the applicant
or licensee upon the Township's Chief Financial Officer, it shall be entitled
to an itemized accounting of deposits and withdrawals to and from its
escrow fund. Such request may not be made more often than monthly and
may not cover a period of time more than 12 months prior to the request.
§ 319-23. Construction permit fees.
Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay
a permit fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, which represents the
Township's costs of processing said permit.
§ 319-24. Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this article are separate from,
and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and Township taxes as may
be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider,
its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or
transmission of telecommunications services.
A. Any applicant for a license pursuant to Article II of this chapter shall
pay a fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, which represents the
Township's costs in processing said application.
B. The application fee shall be deposited with the Township as part of the
application filed pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
§ 319-20 TAXATION § 319-24
311:1051

ARTICLE IV
Additional Conditions of License
§ 319-25. Compliance with other regulations.
All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction
in the public ways, comply with all regulations of the BPU and of the
applicable state, federal and local regulations.
§ 319-26. Interference with public ways prohibited.
No licensee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as
to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the Township,
by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in
or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the licensee,
temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 319-27. Damage to property.
No licensee nor any person acting on a licensee's behalf shall take any
action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any
Township property, public ways of the Township, other ways or other
property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
§ 319-28. Notice of works.
Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, no licensee nor any
person acting on the licensee's behalf shall commence any nonemergency
work in or about the public ways of the Township or other ways within 10
working days advance notice to the Township.
§ 319-29. Repair and emergency work.
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a licensee may
commence such repair and emergency response work as required under
the circumstances, provided that the licensee shall notify the Township as
promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon
thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable.
§ 319-30. Maintenance of facilities.
Each licensee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and
in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local
requirements.
§ 319-31. Relocation or removal of facilities.
Within 30 days following written notice from the Township, a licensee shall,
at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public
§ 319-25 TAXATION § 319-31
311:1053
ways whenever the Township shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
§ 319-32. Removal of unauthorized facilities.
Within 30 days following written notice from the Township, any licensee,
telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or
maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related
appurtenances within the public ways of the Township shall, at its own
expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of
the Township. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
§ 319-33. Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.
The Township retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the
Township, as the Township may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
§ 319-34. Damage to licensee's facilities.
Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or
malicious acts by the Township, the Township shall not be liable for any
damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways
of the Township as a result of or in connection with any public works,
public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of
any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the Township.
§ 319-35. Restoration of public ways, other ways and Township
property.
A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or
other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
B. The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in or upon
the public ways.
A. Upon expiration or termination of the licensee's telecommunications
license.
B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the Township.
C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a telecommunications license.
D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior
issuance of a required construction permit.
E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the licensee's telecommunications license.
§ 319-31 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-35
311:1054
§ 319-36. Facilities maps.
Each licensee shall provide the Township with an accurate map or maps
certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public
ways. In addition, the licensee shall provide a computer aided design and
drafting (CADD) diskette containing the facilities' mapping in the .dxf
format. Each licensee shall provide updated maps and diskettes annually.
§ 319-37. Duty to provide information.
Within 10 days of a written request from the Township Committee, each
licensee shall furnish the Township with information sufficient to
demonstrate:
§ 319-38. Leased capacity.
A licensee shall have the right, without prior Township approval, to offer or
provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers, provided that:
§ 319-39. Licensee insurance.
A. When a licensee or any person acting on its behalf does any work in or
affecting any public ways, other ways or Township property, it shall, at
its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and
restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before
the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Township.
B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration
required by this section, the licensee shall temporarily restore the
affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the
licensee's sole expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and
complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or
other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.
C. A licensee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required
for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury
or damage to any person, vehicle property by reason of such work in or
affecting such ways or property.
A. That licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.
B. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the
licensee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be
made available for inspection by the Township at reasonable times and
intervals.
A. The licensee shall furnish the Township with a copy of any such lease or
agreement.
B. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 319-35 TAXATION § 319-39
311:1055
§ 319-40. General indemnification.
Each license agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law,
licensee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the Township
and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and
against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the licensee or its affiliates,
officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontracts in the construction,
A. Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, each licensee shall,
as a condition of the license, secure and maintain the following liability
insurance policies insuring both the licensee and the Township, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as
coinsureds.
(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
(a) For bodily injury or death to each person: $5,000,000.
(b) For property damage resulting from any one accident:
$5,000,000.
(c) For all other types of liability: $5,000,000.
(2) Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each
accident.
(3) Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's
liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.
(4) Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with
limits of not less than $3,000,000.
B. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the licensee throughout the term of the
telecommunications license, and such other period of time during
which the licensee is operating without a license hereunder, or is
engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such
insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the
Township, by registered or certified mail, of a written notice, addressed
to the Township Clerk, of such intent to cancel or not to renew."
C. Within 60 days after receipt by the Township of said notice, and in no
event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the licensee shall
obtain and furnish to the Township replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
§ 319-39 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-40
311:1056
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications
facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over
the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a grant agreement made or
entered into pursuant to this chapter.
§ 319-41. Performance and construction surety.
Before a license granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as
necessary thereafter, the licensee shall provide and deposit such monies,
bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance
acceptable to the Township as may be required by this chapter or by an
applicable license.
§ 319-42. Construction and completion bond.
Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, a performance bond
written by a corporate surety acceptable to the Township equal to at least
100% of the estimated cost of constructing licensee's telecommunications
facilities within the public ways of the Township shall be deposited before
construction is commenced.
A. The construction bond shall remain in force until released by the
Township. Licensee may apply, in writing, for such release upon the
lapse of at least 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as
determined by the Township Engineer, including restoration of public
ways and other property affected by the construction. The Township
Engineer shall, within 45 days of receipt of the licensee's written
request for release, file a written recommendation with the governing
body concerning the release. The Township Committee shall take
formal action on the request for release within 45 days of the filing of
the Township Engineer's recommendation.
B. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the
Township:
(1) Timely completion of construction;
(2) Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards;
(3) Proper location of the facilities as specified by the Township;
(4) Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the
construction;
(5) The submission of as-built drawings, as well as a computer aided
design and drafting (CADD) diskette containing the drawings in the
.dxf format, after completion of the work as required by this
chapter; and
§ 319-40 TAXATION § 319-42
311:1057
§ 319-43. Coordination of construction activities.
All licensees are required to cooperate with the Township and with each
other.
§ 319-44. Assignments or transfers of license.
Ownership or control of a telecommunications system or license may not,
directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease,
merger, consolidation or other act of the licensee, by operation of law or
otherwise, without the prior consent of the Township, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by formal act and
then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein.
(6) Timely payment and satisfaction of all payments then due to the
Township, all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or
services provided in connection with the work.
A. By February 1 of each year, licensees shall provide the Township with a
schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that
may affect the public ways.
B. Each licensee shall meet with the Township, other licensees and users
of the public ways annually or as determined by the Township to
schedule and coordinate construction in the public ways.
C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated,
as ordered by the Township Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
A. No license shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12
months after the initial grant of the license, unless otherwise provided
in a license agreement.
B. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant,
system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred
before construction of the telecommunications system has been
completed.
C. Licensee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or
system shall provide and certify the following information to the
Township not less than 150 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
(1) Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and
conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment;
(2) All information required of a telecommunications license applicant
pursuant to Article II of this chapter with respect to the proposed
transferee or assignee;
(3) Any other information reasonably required by the Township.
§ 319-42 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-44
311:1058
§ 319-45. Transactions affecting control of grant.
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of
10% or more of the ownership or working control of the licensee, of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or the
ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the licensee or of a telecommunications system, or
of control of the capacity or bandwidth of licensee's telecommunications
system, facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an
assignment or transfer requiring Township approval pursuant to § 319-44
hereof. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from
Township approval.
§ 319-46. Revocation or termination of license.
A license granted by the Township to use or occupy public ways of the
Township may be revoked for the following reasons:
D. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the
legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold
and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.
E. Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, the grantee shall
reimburse the Township for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and
expenses reasonably incurred by the Township in considering a request
to transfer or assign a telecommunications license.
F. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or
integral part of a system without prior approval of the Township under
this section or pursuant to a license agreement shall be void and is
cause for revocation of the license.
A. Construction or operation in the Township or in the public ways of the
Township contrary to a license grant.
B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
C. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the licensee.
D. Unauthorized assignment of a license.
E. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of licensee's assets, or a
substantial interest therein.
F. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a licensee in any
application to the Township.
G. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
H. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.
I. Failure to pay fees and costs when and as due the Township.
J. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the licensee.
§ 319-44 TAXATION § 319-46
311:1059
§ 319-47. Notice and duty to cure.
In the event that the Township Committee believes that grounds exist
for revocation of a license, it shall give the licensee written notice of
the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise
statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance,
and providing the licensee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30
days to furnish evidence:
§ 319-48. Hearing.
In the event that a licensee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory
to the Township Committee as provided in § 319-47 hereof, the committee
shall provide the licensee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be
heard concerning the matter.
§ 319-49. Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.
If persuaded that the licensee has violated or failed to comply with material
provisions of this chapter, or of a license agreement, the Committee shall
determine whether to revoke the license or to establish some lesser
sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and
gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
K. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
L. Violation of the material terms of a license agreement.
A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
B. Whether substantial harm resulted.
C. Whether the violation was intentional.
D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
§ 319-46 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-49
311:1060
ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 319-50. General.
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation
or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Township except as
provided in this article.
§ 319-51. Construction codes.140
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local codes,
rules and regulations including the Electrical Code currently in effect.
§ 319-52. Construction permits.
No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within
the Township without first obtaining a construction permit therefor;
provided, however, that:
§ 319-53. Applications.
A. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the
telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license
pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
B. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction
permit fee established in § 319-23 of this chapter.
A. Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall
be submitted upon forms to be provided by the Township and shall be
accompanied by detailed engineering drawings, plans and
specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
(1) That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations.
(2) The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing
utility poles.
(3) The location and route of all facilities to be located under the
surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for
the burial at all points along the route which are within the public
ways.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 319-50 TAXATION § 319-53
311:1061
§ 319-54. Engineer's certification.
All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a
professional engineer licensed in New Jersey that the drawings, plans and
specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable
technical codes, rules and regulations.
§ 319-55. Traffic control plan.
All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any
public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating
the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent
with the New Jersey Department of Transportation regulations, to prevent
injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The plan will be submitted to the
Freehold Township Chief of Police for review and approval. The Township
may require the applicant to hire traffic directors (off-duty police officers)
on an as-needed basis.
§ 319-56. Issuance of permit.
Within 45 days after submission of all plans and documents required of
the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this chapter, the
Township Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and document
comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit
authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions,
restrictions, or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of
performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate.
(4) The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts,
pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways
along the underground route proposed by the applicant.
(5) The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the
Township, but not within the public ways.
(6) The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public
ways.
(7) The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to
the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together
with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing,
replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during
construction.
B. The plans are to be designed utilizing a current survey based on the
New Jersey State Plan Coordinate System.
§ 319-53 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-57
311:1062
§ 319-57. Construction schedule.
The licensee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Township
Engineer 10 working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways. The licensee shall further notify the Township Engineer not
less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the
public ways.
§ 319-58. Compliance with permit.
All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the
permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The
Township Engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the
work and such further information as he or she may reasonably require to
ensure compliance with such requirements.
§ 319-59. Display of permit.
The licensee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved
plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available
for inspection by the Township Engineer or his representatives at all times
when construction work is occurring.
§ 319-60. Survey of underground facilities.
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line,
grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the licensee shall
cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a licensed New Jersey
land surveyor. The licensee shall relocate any facilities which are not
located in compliance with permit requirements.
§ 319-61. Noncomplying work.
Upon order of the Township Engineer, all work which does not comply
with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this chapter, shall be removed.
§ 319-62. Completion of construction.
The licensee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to
minimize disruption of the Township ways and other public and private
property. All construction work authorized by a permit within Township
ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date
of issuance.
§ 319-63. As-built drawings.
Within 60 days after completion of construction, the licensee shall furnish
the Township with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified
to the Township as accurately depicting the location of all
telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. This
§ 319-57 TAXATION § 319-63
311:1063
information shall be provided on computer aided design and drafting
(CADD) diskette in a .dxf file format.
§ 319-64. Restoration of improvements.
Upon completion of any construction work, the licensee shall promptly
repair any and all public and provide property improvements, fixtures,
structures and facilities in the public ways or otherwise damaged during
the course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its
condition before the start of construction.
§ 319-65. Landscape restoration.
§ 319-66. Construction surety.
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the licensee shall provide a
performance bond, as provided in § 319-42 of this chapter.
§ 319-67. Exceptions.
Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, all telecommunications
carriers are subject to the requirements of this Article V.
§ 319-68. Responsibility of owner.
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the licensee,
are responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of
this article.
A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a
result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or
replacement of telecommunications facilities replaced or restored as
nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to
performance of work.
B. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in accordance
with landscape plans approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 319-63 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-68
311:1064
ARTICLE VI
Small Wireless Facilities
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-8]
§ 319-69. License application information.
Any person that desires a telecommunications license for a small wireless
facility pursuant to this Article VI shall file an application with the Township
which shall include the following information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Township, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
(1) The location requested for applicant's proposed small wireless
facilities.
(2) A description of the type and height of the structure on which the
small wireless facilities are being mounted, and a description of the
proximity of the equipment to any other equipment on the same
structure.
(3) The size and weight of the proposed equipment.
(4) A description of any proposed lighting, and if any, proposed
focusing/shielding to avoid projection towards adjacent/nearby
properties.
(5) A description of the noise output of the proposed small wireless
facility in decibels.
(6) A description of any proposed excavation.
(7) Radiofrequency radiation levels of the proposed equipment.
(8) The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other
facilities in the public way along the proposed route.
(9) The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other communications carriers.
(10) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate.
§ 319-69 TAXATION § 319-69
311:1065
§ 319-70. Review of small wireless facilities applications.
Applicants seeking to install small wireless facilities within the Township,
including within the public right-of-way, shall submit an application to the
Township. Small wireless facilities applications shall be reviewed by the
Township Committee pursuant to the following:
E. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts
or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
(1) The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(2) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
(1) The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
(2) The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
H. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the New Jersey
Department of Transportation regulations.
I. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
J. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
K. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
L. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to this Article VI.
A. The Township Committee shall review applications to collocate small
wireless facilities on existing structures within 60 days of receipt of the
application, and applications for new construction of small wireless
facilities within 90 days. "Batch" applications seeking both to collocate
and to construct new small wireless facilities shall be reviewed within
90 days.
B. The time period for review shall be tolled during any period in which
the applicant is notified that it has not submitted a complete
application.
§ 319-69 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-70
311:1066
§ 319-71. Nonexclusive grant.
No license granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the
Township for delivery of telecommunications services or any other
purposes.
§ 319-72. Rights granted.
No license granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest
in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the
public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further,
no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
§ 319-73. Term of grant.
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications
license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.
§ 319-74. License route.
A small wireless facilities license granted under this article shall be limited
to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof.
§ 319-75. Construction permits.
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for small wireless
facilities as required in Article IV of this chapter; provided, however, that
nothing in this article shall prohibit the Township and a licensee from
agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures,
provided such alternative procedures provided substantially equivalent
safeguards for reasonable construction practices and are not in derogation
of any applicable provisions of the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 319-76. Amendment of grant.
C. Complete applications that comply with the standards set forth in
§ 319-69 shall be granted within the applicable time period.
A. A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its small
wireless facilities in public ways of the Township which are not included
in a license previously granted under this chapter.
B. If ordered by the Township to locate or relocate its small wireless
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
Township shall grant a license amendment without further application.
§ 319-70 TAXATION § 319-77
311:1067
§ 319-77. Renewal applications.
Renewal of small wireless facilities licenses is required and is governed by
§§ 319-17 through 319-19 of Article II of this chapter.
§ 319-78. Small wireless facilities fees.
§ 319-79. Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this article are separate from,
and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and Township taxes as may
be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider,
its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or
transmission of telecommunications services.
§ 319-80. Small wireless facilities standards.
A. Applicants seeking to install up to five small wireless facilities shall pay
an initial application fee of $500. An additional $100 shall be required
for each small wireless facility beyond five.
B. An annual fee of $270 per small wireless facility per year for access to
and inspection of such facilities shall be required.
A. Small wireless facilities shall be collocated on existing structures when
possible. Collocation of small wireless facilities is preferred to
construction of new structures intended to solely support a small
wireless facility, unless the new structure is designed to conceal the
small wireless facility.
B. Absent a showing of necessity, the following shall apply:
(1) There shall be no more than one small wireless facility located on
any single structure.
(2) Small wireless facilities shall not be located within 1000 feet of any
existing small wireless facilities.
C. No new small wireless facilities shall be located within five feet of a
private driveway or in a manner that would otherwise obstruct visibility
from a private driveway to the public right of way.
D. Any required accessory equipment, not including the antenna, shall be
located underground to the extent possible. Accessory equipment that
cannot be located underground must be located on the structure. No
accessory equipment may be located on the ground adjacent to the
structure.
E. Any disturbance to the public right of way as a result of the
construction of the small wireless facilities shall be restored to its
original condition post construction to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer.
§ 319-77 FREEHOLD CODE § 319-80
311:1068
Chapter 323
TOPOGRAPHICAL MAPS
§ 323-1. Purpose.
The Township Committee of the Township of Freehold makes the following
findings and determinations:
§ 323-2. Custody of maps.
The Township Engineer shall be and is hereby charged with the custody,
safekeeping, care, control and use of the hereinabove specified maps.
§ 323-3. Use and storage regulations.
The following regulations are established to govern the storage and use of
said GIS data and maps and shall be enforced by the Township Engineer:
A. The Geographic Information System (GIS) data prepared in conjunction
with the Monmouth County Geographic Information System data and
the topographic maps of the Township of Freehold prepared by the
Midlantic Aerial Surveyors, Inc., constitute valuable and irreplaceable
property of the Township of Freehold; and
B. This GIS data and these maps constitute a valuable and irreplaceable
record of the physical condition of the surface of the land in the
Township at the time of the flight photograph; and
C. Careful supervision of the use and custody of the foregoing is necessary
to prevent loss of or damage; and
D. The unsupervised handling of these maps will cause physical
deterioration of the same and will expose the same to an unreasonable
risk of damage, deterioration and destruction; and
E. The maps have been prepared in reproducible form on mylar; and
F. The Township has facilities to make prompt accurate reproductions
which will not expose these maps to any unreasonable risk of loss,
damage, deterioration or destruction; and
G. The cost of the preparation of the GIS data and the topographical maps
and the cost of supervision of the care and custody of the same and the
cost of making prints has and will be paid out of general taxation,
therefore, it is right and proper that fee for such prints and copies shall
be established to recover these past and future costs, in advance, with
the value of the information and data that such copies have, being
based on a tile sheet basis.
A. The GIS data and maps shall be kept in secured files.
§ 319-80 TOPOGRAPHICAL MAPS § 323-3
323:1069
B. No one shall remove any GIS data or map from the office of the
Township Engineer.
C. No one shall make any tracing or copy by any other method of any such
map.
D. During normal office hours, on request, the Township Engineer or his
designate may expose to view in the office of the Township Engineer
any single sheet of the aforesaid maps without releasing or
surrendering physical possession of same without charge or other fee.
E. During normal business hours, on written request and payment of
proper fees as herein established, the Township Engineer or his
designate shall reproduce and deliver the requested GIS data in digital
or printed copies of any of the foregoing digital data or maps and
receive a receipt therefor which shall contain over the recipient's
signature the following statement:
"The undersigned, for and in consideration of the above specified
copies of digital data or maps at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
property of the Township of Freehold, in the County of Monmouth,
agrees that I or my agents will not reproduce, sell, assign or transfer
any copies thereof, that I and/or my agents will not sell, transfer
or assign the above specified requested copies and that I and/or my
agents will not permit, suffer or allow the sale, assignment or transfer
of the above specified copies nor the sale, assignment or transfer of
copies thereof during the next 10 years, except that I may transfer
or assign to a subsequent purchaser a copy of any portion of digital
data or map which I have purchased or legally received, which depicts
property I own and have contracted to sell to another."
In addition, the Township Engineer shall require that each digital data
or print delivered as aforesaid shall bear the recipient's signature
under the following statement:
"The undersigned, for and in consideration of the receipt of this copy
of digital data or map of a part of the Township of Freehold agrees
that the undersigned will not sell, assign or transfer this copy, will
not sell, assign or transfer a reproduction of this copy and will not
suffer, allow or permit the sale, assignment or transfer thereof of any
copy or reproduction thereof, except that I may transfer or assign to a
subsequent purchaser a copy of any portion of the digital data or map
which I have purchased or legally received, which depicts property I
own and have contracted to sell to another."
In addition, each print delivered as aforesaid shall bear or be clearly
stamped with the following:
§ 323-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 323-3
323:1070
§ 323-4. Sale of prints prohibited; exception.
No person who obtains a print of any sheet or portion of a sheet of the
aforesaid digital data or map shall sell, assign or transfer or permit, suffer
or allow the sale, assignment or transfer or permit, suffer or allow the
sale, assignment or transfer of such reproduction or copy thereof or the
sale, assignment or transfer or any portion thereof or the sale, assignment
or transfer of any reproduction or copy of a portion thereof, except to a
purchaser of property which is depicted on the map.
§ 323-5. Application for copies.
All applications for copies of the aforesaid maps shall be made to the
Township Engineer in writing.
§ 323-6. Fees.
§ 323-7. Loan of data or maps.
It may be in the public interest and permissible to lend, without charge,
copies of the digital data or maps to agencies of the federal, state or county
governments whenever there will be a benefit to the Township of Freehold.
The free loan of said digital data or maps to other public agencies shall be
accomplished by filing a written application to the Township Clerk with a
copy to the Township Engineer who shall comply with the request with due
dispatch following approval by the Township Committee.
§ 323-8. Disclaimer.
"The sale, assignment or transfer of this digital data or map or of
any portion or transfer of any copy or reproduction of any portions of
this map is prohibited; and any such action will, upon conviction in
the Freehold Township Municipal Court, subject the individual to the
penalties established by law, except that a purchaser may transfer or
assign a copy of any portion of this digital data or map to a purchaser
of property which is depicted on the map."
A. All fees herein established shall be paid to the Engineer prior to the
delivery of the requested prints of such maps or any portion thereof.
B. There shall be a charge as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, for each
digital tile or printed map or any portion thereof of a digital tile or
printed map.
A. The Township of Freehold does not certify the accuracy of the digital
data or topographical mapping prepared from the aerial photographs
taken and does not insure the accuracy of same nor the acceptance of
same by the Township or any of its authorities or agencies.
§ 323-3 TOPOGRAPHICAL MAPS § 323-8
323:1071
§ 323-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who knowingly violates any provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 327
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 11. Fees — See Ch. 150.
§ 327-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the towing and storage of private
motor vehicles which result from Police Department calls for assistance
within the Township in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 and N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(u).
§ 327-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile of a private passenger
or station wagon type that is owned or hired and is neither used as a
public or livery conveyance for passengers, nor rented to others with a
driver; and a motor vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a van,
or a panel truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes
owned by an individual or by husband or wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the insured, other than farming.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
DISABLED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is unable to operate under
its own power.[Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-6]
IMPOUNDED VEHICLE — A vehicle which, at the direction of the police
department, is taken into police custody because the operator of the vehicle
was alleged by a police officer to be engaged in a violation of the law,
B. Each digital data tile or print delivered as aforesaid shall bear or be
clearly stamped with the following: "Accuracy of this digital data or
map subject to field check by recipient."
§ 323-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 327-2
323:1072
including but not limited to, the operator being arrested on a DWI charge,
the operator having been arrested for driving without registration or
insurance, or the operator having been arrested for stealing the motor
vehicle, or the vehicle having been involved in a serious accident.[Added
4-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-6]
STORAGE RATE CHARGES — Begin at 12:01 a.m. of the next day and each
day shall end at 11:59 p.m.
TOW LIST — A list of towing and storage contractors maintained by the
Police Department containing the names and addresses of towing and
storage contractors who will be called on a rotating basis when the Police
Department determines that the assistance of such services are required
within the Township.
TOWNSHIP STORAGE FACILITY — A storage area or lot owned and
operated by the Township of Freehold.[Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-6]
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a broom or brooms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of private
passenger automobiles.
§ 327-3. Enforcement of section.
The Chief of Police or member of the Police Department designated by him/
her is authorized to enforce the provisions set forth in this chapter.
§ 327-4. Establishment and operation of tow list.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall establish a list of towing
and storage contractors designated to provide towing and storage services
required by the Police Department. Any towing and storage contractors
qualifying pursuant to this chapter shall be included on the list and those
on the list shall be called on a rotating basis to provide the required towing
and storage services. Whenever a towing and storage contractor is called
through the Police Department, whether as a result of being next on the tow
list, or for another reason, that towing and storage contractor will rotate to
the bottom of the list. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall establish
such other written procedures for the operation of the tow list as he/she
shall deem appropriate. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Chief of
Police or his/her designee from requesting additional towing service from
others, if, in the judgment of such person, the size, nature or scope of the
accident conditions or the performance of the called towing service requires
that assistance be rendered.
§ 327-5. Application and fee.
All towing and storage contractors desiring to be included on the tow list
shall annually file an application with the Police Department on a form to be
approved by the Chief of Police, together with an application fee as provided
§ 327-2 TOPOGRAPHICAL MAPS § 327-5
323:1073
in Chapter 150, Fee. By filing such application, the applicant shall agree
to the conditions outlined on the application, including compliance with all
provisions of this chapter. Said application must be filed by January 30 of
each calendar year.
§ 327-6. Standards and qualifications.
The following are the minimum standards/qualifications required to be
considered for inclusion on the tow list:
A. Accidents involving large vehicles. The towing and storage contractors
must be prepared to promptly clear the roadway of any or all types of
disabled vehicles. Where the vehicles are too large for the service to
remove from the scene, after clearing the roadway, the service may call
for assistance of others. The towing and storage contractor is required
to have appropriate arrangements for this assistance at all times.
B. Response time.
(1) The towing and storage contractor must meet the following
response times within the Township of Freehold:
(a) Day (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., seven days a week): 15 minutes.
(b) Night (7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., seven days a week): 20 minutes.
(c) Large vehicle service requirements: normal day or night
response plus 30 minutes when required.
(2) Response time determination is to be initiated when the police call
requesting towing is completed. Where the police cannot reach the
next eligible contractor on the list, that contractor shall be deemed
to have forfeited its position and the next succeeding contractor on
the list shall be called.
C. Performance standards. The towing and storage contractor will meet
the following response performance standards:
(1) Ninety percent of all calls referred will be answered (towing
vehicle on scene) within the response time outlined above.
(2) Not more than 10% of the calls will be answered within an
additional 10 minutes (day or night).
(3) No response will be later than 25 minutes, whether day or night,
with the exception of Subsection B(1)(c) above.
(4) The performance standard will be reviewed periodically. Where the
towing and storage contractor performance record is found to be
unsatisfactory, it will be removed from the tow list for at least six
months and until it shall have provided satisfactory evidence to the
Chief of Police that it has undertaken effective steps and
§ 327-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 327-6
323:1074
implemented such procedures as are necessary to meet the
foregoing performance standards.
D. Equipment specification. The towing and storage contractor must have
specialized towing equipment in good repair which meets the following
specifications:
(1) Tow vehicle. The towing service must have ownership of two
professionally constructed tow vehicles, one of which being a
flatbed-type tow vehicle capable of removing certain types of
damaged vehicles or those, which by design, cannot be removed by
conventional wreckers without sustaining additional damage. The
towing service must also have available, by ownership or
agreement, two additional tow vehicles in case of emergency. All
towing vehicles used in performance of the contract must meet the
standards specified by the State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Codes
and this specification in all respects. Each applicant is required to
list all equipment/vehicles to be used including registered name,
type and license number of each.
(2) Safety equipment. Each vehicle shall have beacon and warning
lights, tow vehicle illumination and stop lights and portable fire
extinguishers.
(3) Specialized equipment. At least one of the available tow vehicles
must be equipped for dolly service and winching.
(4) Cleanup equipment.
(a) All tow vehicles must carry road cleanup equipment and
supplies such as brooms, rakes, trash cans and shovels.
(b) The towing service is responsible for the prompt and safe
removal of the disabled vehicle and for the prompt and
complete removal of all litter and debris resulting from the
accident.
E. Disabled vehicle storage. The towing service must operate a suitable,
fenced and secure vehicle storage area in an area zoned for such use.
The lot must be able to store at least 25 full-size vehicles. Said storage
yard must be within a one-mile radius of the Township of Freehold. If
there is in excess of 25 vehicles to be stored, they may be stored
elsewhere as long as the alternate lot complies with the specifications
of the regular storage lot, and appears on the towing and storage
contractor's insurance certificate. Upon request, authorized personnel
of the Police Department shall be able to have access to vehicles 24
hours per day within the storage area.
F. Insurance.
(1) The towing and storage contractor shall maintain the following
minimum insurance coverage in the name of the applicant:
§ 327-6 TOPOGRAPHICAL MAPS § 327-6
323:1075
(a) Automobile liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limits.
(b) Workers' compensation as required by statute.
(c) Garage keeper's liability in an amount not less than $60,000
per location.
(d) Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit.
(e) Policies in force to provide collision coverage for vehicles in
tow.
(2) Certificate of insurance. At time of application, the towing and
storage contractor shall present a certificate of insurance
evidencing the above coverage by an insurance company licensed
to do business in the State of New Jersey. Included on such
certificate shall be a statement that the insurance company or
agent will notify the Chief of Police immediately of any change,
cancellation or lapse of such coverage. Such statement shall not
include language making such notification permissive, nor
language absolving the company/agent from liability for failure to
notify.
(3) By virtue of making application to be included on the tow list, the
applicant will be deemed to agree to indemnify and hold the
Township of Freehold and its officers and employees harmless from
any liability, expense or costs of suit, including reasonable
attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting from any action of the
applicant in performing towing and storage services in the
Township of Freehold.
(4) The applicant agrees to notify the Chief of Police immediately of
any change, cancellation or lapse of insurance coverage.
G. Prohibition of oral inquiry. No towing and storage contractor included
on the tow list shall make oral inquiry regarding its position on the tow
list, violations by other towing and storage contractors or any other
matters relating to performance under this chapter. All other inquiries
must be made in writing addressed to the Chief of Police.
H. Customer fees and billing. Each applicant shall attach a copy of its
current fee schedule, which must not be in excess of that provided for in
§ 327-7. In the event an applicant is included on the tow list and will be
amending its fee schedule from that previously filed with the Chief of
Police, such applicant shall notify the Chief of Police, in writing, of such
amendment, together with a complete amended fee schedule at least 30
days prior to implementing and charging pursuant to such amended fee
schedule. The fact of filing a fee schedule with the Chief of Police shall
not in any way be construed as authority to charge any fees in excess of
§ 327-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 327-6
323:1076
those permitted by § 327-7. All customer bills must be in an amount not
exceeding the rates provided for herein.
I. Authorized Township service receipt form. The towing and storage
contractor will complete and file with the Police Department a towing
service receipt form for every vehicle serviced on Township assignment.
(1) A preprinted form supplied by the towing and storage contractor
will include at least the following information:
(a) Towing and service fee schedule.
(b) Authorized service business name, address and business phone
number.
(c) Time, location and vehicle information.
(d) Towing representative's signature.
(e) Service charge and fees.
(2) The receipt will be multicopy and issued as follows:
(a) Original: issued immediately to owner upon completion of
service and payment of bill.
(b) Police: issued monthly to Police Department upon completion
of services.
(c) Owner's accident receipt: issued at the accident site to the
owner prior to removal of the vehicle. In the event the owner is
incapacitated or disputes the assignment, the owner's accident
receipt may be issued to the Police Department.
(d) Copies: as deemed necessary by towing service.
J. Follow-up report. A monthly report must be filed with the Police
Department containing the following information.
(1) Description of each vehicle towed pursuant to request by Police
Department during month for which report is given.
(2) Name and address of title owner of vehicle.
(3) Date vehicle was towed.
(4) Amount charged for tow.
(5) Amount charged for storage to date of report.
(6) Date vehicle was released.
(7) List of all vehicles towed pursuant to Police Department request
which are unclaimed for over 30 days.
§ 327-6 TOPOGRAPHICAL MAPS § 327-6
323:1077
§ 327-7. Towing and storage fees.
§ 327-8. Arrangements by person responsible for automobile.
[Amended 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-6]
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent a person responsible for
a disabled vehicle disabled upon the public streets or highways within
Freehold Township to arrange for the prompt removal of the vehicle from
the scene of an accident or disablement by wrecking or towing services of
his/her own selection. The person responsible will be advised of the ability
to select such towing service at the required time of removal, providing
such person is present, fully conscious and capable of taking prompt action.
§ 327-9. Removal from tow list.
In the event that a person or entity shall fail to perform satisfactorily, or
performs in violation of this chapter, such person or entity may immediately
be removed from the tow list by the Chief of Police. As soon as practical
after such removal, the Chief of Police shall cause written notice of such
removal to be given to the person or entity removed. The notice shall set
forth the reason(s) for such removal. The person or entity removed shall
have the right to submit in writing such rebuttal as deemed appropriate and
an explanation of the steps being taken and procedures being implemented
to correct any deficiencies. After review of such response, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee may continue the removal from the list, return
K. Storage provision during emergency condition. During emergency
situations (snow storms, etc.) the towing and storage contractor must
provide additional vehicle storage spaces as needed. Said storage space
does not have to be located at the primary facility. Said spaces will only
be used during the period of the aforesaid emergency.
A. No towing and storage contractor shall charge fees in excess of those
set forth in this subsection. Allowable fees shall be as provided in
Chapter 150, Fees.
B. Towing operators may charge additional rates for cleanup and labor
rates, if additional labor other than basic towing services are provided.
C. Rates specified herein will be reviewed by the Finance Committee of
the Township Committee on a yearly basis. Operators are permitted to
petition the Township Committee, in writing, as to prevailing rates.
D. Special towing services.
(1) If special towing services are required, the towing and storage
contractor shall quote the vehicle owner or his authorized agent
directly. In the event that the owner is incapacitated, a written copy
of the price quote should be filed with the Police Department.
(2) No release fees may be charged for the release of vehicles after
normal business hours.
§ 327-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 327-9
323:1078
the person or entity to the list either immediately, or after a specified period
of time.
§ 327-10. Availability of towing and storage fees.
The Police Department and the office of the Township Clerk shall maintain
copies of this chapter as well as copies of all fee schedules of towing and
storage contractors submitted to the Township pursuant to § 327-6H, which
section and fee schedule shall be available for inspection by the public
during regular business hours of the municipality.
§ 327-11. Storage of impounded vehicles. [Added 4-27-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-6141; amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-19]
All impounded vehicles shall be removed to the Township Storage Facility
unless otherwise directed by the Township Police. The towing contractor
shall submit its bill for tow services to the Township, which shall process
and make payment for same. To secure release of the vehicle after the
police impound has been lifted, the vehicle owner must pay to the Township
the daily storage fee provided in Chapter 150, any administrative fees
for vehicle release or surrender of title fees charged by the Township,
as provided in Chapter 150, plus the fee for tow services charged to the
Township by the towing contractor.
§ 327-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who shall be found to have violated any subsection of
this chapter, or to have submitted a false or misleading application shall, in
addition to removal from the tow list, be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Township of
Freehold.
Chapter 331
TOWNSHIP BUILDINGS
§ 331-1. Findings.
Use of Township owned buildings shall be performed in such a way to
preserve property; avoid undue wear and tear, to protect municipal records,
to promote good order, avoid detrimental and/or injurious conduct and
to ensure that all persons shall have an equal opportunity of use of the
facilities available.
§ 331-2. Authorization.
The Township Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered:
141. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 327-11 as § 327-12.
§ 327-9 TOWNSHIP BUILDINGS § 331-2
331:1079
§ 331-3. Rules available in Clerk's office.
Any and all rules and/or regulations promulgated as a result of this chapter
shall be posted conspicuously in the Municipal Building at all times, and
copies shall be available in the Clerk's office for inspection and/or copying.
Copies of same will be provided only upon prepayment of the fee established
therefor.
Chapter 332
TOWNSHIP-OWNED PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Parks and Recreation — See Ch. 10.
Traffic — See Ch. 11.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 232.
Township buildings — See Ch. 331.
A. To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of the purposes set forth above subject to prior submission
and approval by the Township Committee.
B. To delegate his function hereunder to any officer or employee such of
his powers he may deem necessary to carry out efficiently the
provisions of this chapter and to designate certain persons to enforce
the regulations contemplated hereunder.
§ 331-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 331-3
331:1080
ARTICLE I
Regulation of Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-7]
§ 332-1. Purpose.
The use of motor vehicles in an unauthorized fashion on Township property
causes undue wear and tear on the property, is invasive of public peace
and good order, can lead to injuries to members of the public and inhibits
the equal opportunity to peaceful use and enjoyment of the property. It is
deemed to be in best interests of the public to strictly regulate operation of
motor vehicles on Township property.
§ 332-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof,
the following words and phrases should have the following meanings, unless
the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
LICENSED DRIVER — A person possessing a valid license to operate the
type of motor vehicle being driven and issued by the state or country of his/
her residence.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, including but not limited to cars, trucks, and any variations thereof,
motorized bicycles, mopeds, motorcycles, motor scooters, all-terrain
vehicles, go-carts, motorized dirt bikes, dune buggies, tractors, riding lawn
mowers, snowmobiles.
REGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle validly registered in the
state or country in which it is principally garaged.
TOWNSHIP-OWNED PROPERTY — Any real estate or improvements located
on real estate, title to which is held by the Township or in which the
Township has a possessory interest, including but not limited to easements,
rights-of-way and leaseholds. This term shall not be deemed to include
public streets or highways because operation thereon is controlled by state
statute.
§ 332-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. No person shall use, operate, drive or ride in or upon or permit the use,
operation, driving or riding upon any motorized vehicle on any
Township-owned property except:
(1) A registered motor vehicle which is being operated in an improved
parking lot ("parking lot") or upon an improved roadway
("driveway") providing access to or from a parking lot for the
purposes of gaining access to a Township facility. Operating a
registered motor vehicle in or upon the parking lot or driveway for
any other purpose, including operation for recreational purposes,
does not fall within this exception.
§ 332-1 TOWNSHIP BUILDINGS § 332-3
331:1081
§ 332-4. (Reserved)
(2) A specialized motor vehicle required by a medical condition in
order to assist with ambulation.
(3) Motorized vehicles operated by Township employees, agents or by
special permission of the Township, as required for property
maintenance or construction of Township facilities.
(4) Police, fire, first aid, rescue or military vehicles, or motor vehicles
registered to the federal, state, county or local government, while
such vehicles are being operated by authorized personnel in the
performance of an official duty.
B. No person owning or having custody of a motor vehicle as defined
herein, whether registered or unregistered, shall allow the vehicle to be
operated in areas prohibited herein by a minor.
§ 332-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 332-4
331:1082
ARTICLE II
Regulations for Use of Certain Parks
[Adopted 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-18]
§ 332-5. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof,
the following words and phrases should have the following meanings, unless
the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
CODE OF CONDUCT — Rules and regulations governing the conduct of
each person using or being present at a pocket park. Such rules and
regulations shall be adopted and from time to time amended by resolution
of the Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners.
POCKET PARKS — The following schedule contains the identification of
each property known as a "pocket park" owned by the Township:
Block Lot Location Designation Size
33.10 4 10 Parkside Avenue Sandybrook Park 5.25 acres
37.04 10 Colts Neck Road Orchard Hills
Park
3.53 acres
37.07 1 Hunt Road Park 6.23 acres
71.13 6 240 Stonehurst
Boulevard
Stonehurst Park 3.42 acres
71.13 25 240 Stonehurst
Boulevard
Stonehurst Park 2.70 acres
72 95 Koenig Lane Rear Park 2.37 acres
72 95.01 Koenig Lane Rear Wynnefield Park 93 x 278
72.05 21 130 Hibernia Way Wynnefield Park 5.00 acres
80.03 35 Sargent Road Sargent Park 4.70 acres
85.02 22 Spruce Street Woodcrest Park 4.26 acres
85.25 19 75 Coldspring Road Greentree Park 2.81 acres
85.43 15 Ticonderoga Boulevard Woodgate 10.61 acres
93.03 15 1 Medford Boulevard Fence/paving 215 x 200
§ 332-6. Adherence to Code of Conduct.
All persons using or being present at a pocket park shall adhere to the Code
of Conduct.
§ 332-7. Posting of Code of Conduct.
A copy of the current Code of Conduct shall be available at the office of the
Township Clerk and at the office of the Township Recreation Department. At
each pocket park, a copy of the Code of Conduct shall be posted in at least
one reasonably prominent location as deemed appropriate in the discretion
§ 332-5 TOWNSHIP BUILDINGS § 332-7
331:1083
of the Director of the Recreation Department. Posting of such regulations at
the time of an alleged violation shall not be deemed a required element in
any case in which a person is charged with violating such Code of Conduct.
§ 332-8. Required permit.
No group of persons numbering 20 or more, including all participants and
spectators, may use a pocket park without first having obtained a permit
issued by the Director of the Recreation Department.
§ 332-9. Application for permit.
Application for a permit as provided in this article shall be made on forms
available at the Recreation Department of the Township. Such application
shall include and have appended thereto the Code of Conduct, which shall
be agreed to and executed by the applicant for the permit. Included in
the application shall be the affirmative statement by the applicant for the
permit that if the permit is so granted, the applicant will make copies of
and distribute to each group member, whether a participant or spectator,
the Code of Conduct. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this
article. A presumption shall arise that each person participating in or being
a spectator to an activity taking place at the pocket park is a member of the
group and has been advised of the Code of Conduct which accompanied the
application.
§ 332-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 332-9
331:1084
ARTICLE III
Prohibited Uses
[Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-6]
§ 332-10. Prohibited uses of parks and other public property owned
by Township.142
The Township's parks and other public property shall only be used for
purposes consistent with Township-designated governmental uses, public
recreation and enjoyment. Set forth below are specifically prohibited uses
or activities. Such list is not to be deemed all-inclusive, but representative
of specifically prohibited uses or activities:
A. Any use or activity which violates any law, ordinance, regulation or
restriction.
B. Any hunting, pursuing, taking or killing, or attempting to hunt, pursue,
take or kill any bird or animal, without the specific permission
evidenced by a writing signed by the Township Administrator and in the
possession of the person.
C. Littering in violation of Chapter 203 of this Code.
D. Committing an act of graffiti.
E. Use of motor vehicles in violation of Article I of this chapter of this
Code.
F. Violation of any provision of this chapter of this Code.
G. Engaging in any use or activity for which one or more of the
participants or instructors is receiving any remuneration. For example,
Township tennis courts shall not be used by any person(s) to facilitate
giving of tennis lessons for remuneration. Exceptions to this prohibition
shall be:
(1) Remuneration paid to referees, umpires or others officiating an
activity which takes place under the auspices of the Township
recreation program or organized by one of the nonprofit youth
sports organizations which has permission to use the Township
facility.
(2) The sale of fundraising items by a charitable nonprofit
organization, the proceeds of which shall be used to subsidize
recreational activity of Township residents under the age of 18
years, provided such organization shall register with the Township
Clerk at least three days in advance of the fundraising activity and
receive a written permit from the Township Clerk, at no cost, which
permit shall set forth:
142. Editor’s Note: Former § 332-10, Violations and Penalties, which was part of Art. II,
Regulations for Use of Certain Parks, was renumbered as Art. III, § 332-11, 3-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-6.
§ 332-10 TOWNSHIP BUILDINGS § 332-10
331:1085
§ 332-11. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
(a) The name of the charitable nonprofit organization conducting
the fundraising activity.
(b) A description of the fundraising activity.
(c) The date(s), time(s) and location(s) when and where such
activity shall be conducted.
(d) Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the
fundraising supervisor in charge.
§ 332-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 332-11
331:1086
Chapter 333
TOY GUNS
§ 333-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTIQUE FIREARM — Any look-alike, nonfiring, collector replica of a
firearm developed prior to 1898.
MINOR — Any individual who is under 18 years of age.
TOY GUNS — Any imitation of any original firearm that was manufactured,
designed and produced since 1898, including water guns, replica non-guns,
air-soft guns firing nonmetallic projectiles, and BB, paintball, and pelletfiring
air guns that expel a projectile through the force of air pressure,
or any other object or device reasonably capable of being mistaken for a
firearm. The term "toy gun" does not include any antique firearm as defined
in this chapter.
§ 333-2. Sale prohibited.
No retail mercantile establishment located in the Township of Freehold
shall sell, attempt to sell or offer for sale a toy gun to minors.
§ 333-3. Exceptions.
An employee of a retail mercantile establishment who sells any toy gun to
a minor commits a violation of this chapter, except that the establishment
by a preponderance of the evidence of all of the following facts by a person
making the sale shall constitute an affirmative defense to any prosecution
therefor: a) that the purchaser falsely represented his/her age by producing
a driver's license bearing a photograph of the licensee, or by producing a
photographic identification card issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-29.3, or
by producing a similar card purporting to be a valid identification card
indicating that he/she was 18 years of age or older; and b) that the
appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary prudent person
would believe him to be 18 years or age or older; and c) that the sale was
made in good faith relying upon the indicators of age listed in a) and b)
above.
§ 333-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or retail mercantile establishment violating any of the provisions
of this chapter, upon conviction or plea of guilty, shall be subject to penalties
in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-3 of the Township Code.
§ 332-11 TOY GUNS § 333-4
333:1087
Chapter 336
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Right to farm — See Ch. 265.
Shade trees — See Ch. 400.
§ 333-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 333-4
333:1088
ARTICLE I
Shade Tree Planting and Care
[Adopted 12-12-1962 (§§ 2-21.5 to 2-21.7 of the Revised General
Ordinances), as amended through Ord. No. O-81-24]
§ 336-1. Responsibility for costs.
Except as hereinafter provided, the initial cost of all trees planted by the
Shade Tree Commission, the cost of planting same, the cost of items used
for their protection and the cost of removal of any tree or part thereof,
dangerous to public safety, shall, if the Commission so determines, be a
charge upon the real estate in front of which the tree shall have been
planted or removed. The cost, if it is so determined that it is to be paid by
the owner, shall, unless paid directly to the Commission, be certified to the
Collector of Taxes and shall thereupon be a lien upon the real estate and
shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner and collected
in the same manner as other taxes against the property. The provisions of
this article shall not apply to a planting to replace a tree planted by the
Commission or a planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other
educational demonstration.
§ 336-2. Responsibility for tree trimming; failure to comply.
[Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
The owner of real estate in front of which a tree or trees have been planted
shall trim the branches from any such trees overhanging in the streets and
highways so that the light from streetlights is not obstructed and so that
there shall be a clear height of 15 feet above the surface of the street and
10 feet above any sidewalk. Failure or refusal to trim any tree as set forth
in this section following written notice by the Shade Tree Commission shall
entitle the Commission to perform the work, the cost of which shall be
certified to the Collector of Taxes, and shall thereupon be a lien upon the
real estate and shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner
and collected in the same manner as other taxes against the property.
§ 336-3. Notice and hearing. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-10]
In every case where the owner will be charged with the cost of planting
any shade tree, the Shade Tree Commission shall give notice of the meeting
at which it is proposed to consider the planting by publishing the notice
at least once, not less than 45 days before the meeting, in a newspaper
circulating in the Township, or by personal service of a copy of the notice
upon the closest owner or owners to which the tree is to be planted at least
10 days before the meeting. The notice shall specify the street or portions
thereof on which the planting is proposed and require all persons who may
object to present their objections in writing at the office of the Commission
at or before the meeting. Before final action is taken, all objections so
filed shall be considered. The Commission shall give reasonable notice
of its intention to remove or cause the removal of a tree or part of a
§ 336-1 TOY GUNS § 336-3
333:1089
tree dangerous to public safety, unless public safety requires immediate
removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
§ 336-4. Consent of Commission required for work near trees.
No statute giving any person, state, county or municipal board, body or
official power or authority to lay sidewalk along or to open, construct, curb
or pave any street, or to do any similar act, shall be construed to permit or
authorize any interference with or injury to a highway shade tree without
the consent of the Shade Tree Commission within whose jurisdiction the
tree is located. In all cases, the Commission shall reasonably cooperate with
the person, board, body or official for the general public good.
§ 336-5. Powers of other boards and authorities.
Nothing in this article shall be held to take away or diminish any of the
powers or authority of any county park commission over the trees or
shrubbery in any county park or parkway within its jurisdiction, or to give
any other commission or board any power or authority with respect to such
trees or shrubbery.
§ 336-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-5
333:1090
ARTICLE II
Tree Preservation
[Adopted by Ord. No. O-87-10 (§ 6-16 of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 336-6. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tree Preservation
Ordinance of the Township of Freehold."
§ 336-7. Intent and purpose.
§ 336-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS DAYS — Monday through Friday, except holidays.
DISEASED TREE — A tree which is irretrievably diseased or infested with
insects such that no available treatment can cure the disease or infestation.
FORESTER — The Township employee holding the position of Supervisor of
Trees.
A. The intent of this article is, through the preservation and protection of
trees to aid in the stabilization of soil by the prevention of erosion and
sedimentation; reduce stormwater runoff and the costs associated
therewith and replenish groundwater supplies; aid in the removal of
carbon dioxide and generation of oxygen in the atmosphere; provide a
buffer and screen against noise pollution; provide protection against
severe weather; aid in the control of drainage and restoration of
denuded soil subsequent to construction or grading; provide a haven
for birds which in turn assist in the control of insects; provide a haven
for wildlife; protect and increase property values; conserve and
enhance the Township's physical and aesthetic environment; and
generally protect and enhance the quality of life and the general
welfare of the Township and its residents.
B. The purpose of the provisions relating to heritage/historic trees within
this article is to require the preservation of those trees which are
identified as mature (fully developed) trees of a specific size and species
and those trees involved in documented historic events. Permission to
remove such trees from any property, other than a modified home site
as hereinafter defined, within the Township, except in the most
compelling and extraordinary circumstances, shall be prohibited.
Removal shall take place only after a thorough investigation and
recommendation by a New Jersey board-licensed tree expert and the
agreement of the Township Forester. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-10; 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-13]
§ 336-6 TOY GUNS § 336-8
333:1091
HERITAGE TREE — Any tree by reason of its diameter measured 4 1/2 feet
above the ground (dbh) on the uphill side to be a mature tree of significant
size. The Township Forester shall prepare and maintain the Standards for
Determining Heritage Trees, for individual tree species. These standards
shall set forth the size requirement for determining a heritage tree.
HISTORIC TREE — One which is associated with a documented historic
event, i.e., Freehold officials met with the Native Americans under a specific
tree in 1790.
HOME SITE — The area within 100 feet of a single-family residential
dwelling foundation, except areas within 25 feet of the right-of-way
edge.[Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
ISA TREE APPRAISAL — An appraisal based on standards set forth in the
latest edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal ("ISA method") published by
the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.[Added 5-20-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-6; amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
MODIFIED HOME SITE — The area within 50 feet of a single-family
residential dwelling foundation, except areas within 25 feet of the right-ofway
edge.[Added 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-13]
OWNER — Any person as defined herein having title to or lawful possession
of any lot, plot or parcel of land within the Township of Freehold.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, company, corporation,
agency or combination thereof.
RELATED OWNERSHIP — In relation to the ownership of real property:
TRACT — The entire area of property involved in the site plan, subdivision,
or tree removal permit application, whether or not it consists of separate
lots and/or blocks, or title is held in one or more different persons or
entities.
TREE — Any woody perennial plants having a four-inch diameter at breast
height ("dbh") or greater, measured at a height of four feet six inches above
the ground. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
TREE DELINEATION AREA — That area of the tract consisting of the
tree disturbance area plus 100 feet in all directions on the tract from the
tree disturbance area, excluding any areas of wetlands, as defined by New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, conservation areas already dedicated and accepted or other
areas where restrictions already in effect would prohibit tree disturbance.
Owned by husband and/or wife of the owner of an adjacent parcel of
real property.
A.
Owned by a person or entity which has 10% or more interest in the
entity owning the adjacent parcel of real property.
B.
Within the last five years, the owner of a parcel of real property has
conveyed title to an adjacent parcel of real property to a relative within
the third degree of lineal or collateral consanguinity.
C.
§ 336-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-8
333:1092
TREE DISTURBANCE AREA — Those areas of the tract where disturbance
or removal of trees shall occur, or within 100 feet of an area where tree
disturbance or removal shall occur. The tree disturbance area of a tract
shall be separated from the tree preservation area by map delineations.
TREE PRESERVATION AREA (NONDISTURBANCE AREA) — All those areas
of the tract being outside the tree disturbance area.
§ 336-9. Acts prohibited without a tree removal permit. [Amended
6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
Unless excepted under § 336-13 hereof, the following acts are prohibited
except upon issuance of a tree removal permit as hereinafter provided:
§ 336-10. Application procedure for tree removal.
A. No person shall injure, girdle, remove, or destroy any tree or cause or
allow same to be done.
B. No person shall undertake any action which results, or has the
substantial likelihood to result, in the destruction or substantial harm to
any tree, or cause or allow same to be done.
A. Fees.
(1) Any person desiring to undertake any action prohibited by § 336-9
above shall file a written application for a tree removal permit with
the Township Clerk, together with prepayment of application fee
calculated as provided in § 150-31 (fees). [Amended 6-29-2010
by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(2) No prepayment need be made of that portion of the fee for trees
which it is claimed must be removed because they are diseased,
dead or pose a significant danger to public health and/or safety. The
removal of such trees does not require payment of any fee,
provided that the Forester finds in fact that such trees should be
removed because they are diseased, dead or pose a significant
danger to public health and/or safety.
B. The written application shall include the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant and status of legal entity.
(2) Status of application with respect to the land.
(3) Written consent of the owner of the land, if applicant is not the
owner.
(4) Name and address of person preparing any map, drawing or
diagram submitted with application.
(5) Location of the property, including a street number and address
and lot numbers as shown on the Official Tax Map of the Township.
§ 336-8 TOY GUNS § 336-10
333:1093
(6) Diagram of the parcel of land, specifically designating the area or
areas of proposed tree removal and the proposed use of such area.
(7) Location of all proposed structures and driveways on the site.
(8) Location of all heritage/historic trees shown on a sketch or plan
and identification of size and species specifically highlighting the
location of each heritage/historic tree with canopy spread shown to
scale and the condition rating of the tree. [Amended 6-29-2010
by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(9) Designation of all diseased trees.
(10) Designation of any trees posing significant danger to public health
and/or safety.
(11) Any proposed grade changes that might adversely affect or
endanger any trees on the site and specifications of how to
maintain them.
(12) Designation of trees to be removed and trees to be maintained.
(13) Purpose of tree removal (construction, street or roadway, driveway,
recreation area, patio, parking lot, etc.).
(14) All materials to be planted with an indication of size, species and
methods of planting.
(15) Such other information as may be required by an official
application form adopted by resolution of the Township Committee
and which, if so adopted, shall be provided to the applicant by the
Township Clerk.
C. The Township Clerk shall maintain a register of all tree removal permit
applications, past and present, by lot and block designation.
D. The Township Clerk shall, within two days of the receipt of a completed
written application and correct application fee, refer said application,
together with a copy of any previous applications for removal of trees
from said tract of land, to the Township Forester for consideration as
detailed below.
E. The Forester may, in addition, require the applicant to supply any of the
following documentation:
(1) A site plan specifying the methods to be used to preserve all
remaining trees and their root systems and the means of providing
water and nutrients to their root system.
(2) A topographical survey of the land if development or construction
will result in change in elevation of more than five feet or if the
parcel of land is more than two acres in area.
§ 336-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-10
333:1094
(3) An appraisal of the heritage or historic tree using the most recent
ISA method. [Added 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
F. Upon referral of an application from the Township Clerk, the Forester
shall examine the premises referred to in the application, inspect the
trees referred to therein, and the physical conditions of said lands and
the vicinity thereof.
G. In determining whether or not a permit should be granted, the Forester
may consider some or all of the following:
(1) The condition of the tree or trees with respect to disease, insect
attack, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed
structures and interference with utility services.
(2) The necessity of removing the tree or trees in order to construct
the proposed improvements to allow reasonable economic use of
the property.
(3) The effect of the removal on erosion, soil moisture retention and
flow of surface waters.
(4) The number and density of trees in the area and the effect of tree
removal on property values of the neighborhood and other existing
vegetation.
(5) Whether any tree in question is a tree worthy of preservation.
(6) Impact upon the urban and natural environment, including:
(a) Whether tree removal would substantially alter the water table
or affect the stabilization of ground- and surface water.
(b) Whether tree removal would affect water quality and aquifer
recharge by reducing the natural assimilation of nutrients,
chemical pollutants, heavy metals and other substances from
ground- and surface waters during the movement of water
towards an aquifer or natural stream.
(c) Whether tree removal would have an adverse impact upon
existing biological and ecological systems.
(d) Whether tree removal would affect noise pollution by
increasing source noise levels to such a degree that a public
nuisance may be anticipated or a violation of Chapter 217,
Noise, will occur.
(e) Whether tree removal will affect air movement by significantly
reducing the ability of existing vegetation to reduce wind
velocities.
(f) Whether tree removal will affect air quality by significantly
affecting the natural cleansing of the atmosphere by
vegetation.
§ 336-10 TOY GUNS § 336-10
333:1095
(g) Whether tree removal will affect wildlife habitat by
significantly reducing the habitat available for wildlife
existence and reproduction or causing the emigration of
wildlife from adjacent or associated ecosystems.
(7) The ease with which the applicant can alter or revise the proposed
development or improvement to accommodate existing trees.
(8) The economic hardship that would be imposed upon the applicant
were the permit denied.
(9) The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely
developed or densely populated areas.
(10) The need for visual screening in transition zones or relief from
glare, blight, commercial or industrial ugliness or any other visual
affront.
(11) Whether the continued presence of the tree or trees is likely to
cause danger to a person or property.
(12) Whether the topography of the area in which the tree is located is
of such a nature to be damaging or injurious to trees.
(13) Whether the removal of the trees is for the purpose of thinning a
heavily wooded area where some trees will remain.
(14) A specific finding as to which of the trees slated for removal are
diseased, dead or pose a significant danger to public health and/or
safety and are therefore exempt from the fee requirements set
forth in § 336-10A.
(15) Removal of heritage/historic trees. [Amended 7-22-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-18]
(a) Except when located on a modified home site, it is presumed
that heritage/historic trees should only be removed in the most
compelling and extraordinary circumstances. Removals can be
done only after a thorough investigation by a New Jersey
board-licensed tree expert with a filing of a written report of
findings with recommendations and the agreement of the
Township Forester. The loss of lot yield, building area or
profitability of development layout shall be deemed neither
compelling nor extraordinary. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-10; 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-13]
(b) Compelling and extraordinary circumstances may be found if
all of the following factors exist:
[1] The lot(s) containing the heritage/historic tree(s) has
existing realty improvements; and
§ 336-10 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-10
333:1096
[2] Some or all of the realty improvements are in a state of
significant disrepair and/are derelict as to condition; and
[3] The lot(s) owner/applicant proposes costly improvements
to the lot(s) which would:
[a] Correct all disrepair and derelict conditions; and
[b] Construct or reconstruct realty improvements which
will transform the property into one having a positive
impact on the neighborhood and the public good.
[4] Removal of one or more heritage/historic trees is
reasonably necessary to accomplish the action described
in Subsection G(15)(b)[3] above; and
[5] The owner agrees to pay a fee for the value of the tree or
trees to be removed, based on a certified ISA tree
appraisal method performed by a New Jersey boardlicensed
tree expert for each heritage/historic tree
necessary to be removed, such payment to be deposited
into the Reserve for Shade Tree account to be utilized by
the Township for the planting, preservation and
maintenance of trees within the Township. [Amended
6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
H. After visiting the site and considering the relevant conditions of the
foregoing section, the Forester shall grant or deny the application by
setting forth in writing his relevant observations and the reasons for the
issuance or refusal to issue the tree removal permit. Said action shall be
taken by the Forester within 30 days from the date of receipt of a
completed written application, correct application fee and receipt of
any additional information which the Forester may require pursuant to
§ 336-10E hereof.
I. A copy of application and the Forester's written decision to grant or
deny the application shall be forwarded to the Township Clerk and to
the Township's Shade Tree Commission.
J. The Forester is empowered to prepare and require the use of such
application and submittal forms, checklists, and decision forms
consistent with this article and which are not inconsistent with such
forms, if any, which may be adopted by the Township Committee.
K. By making application pursuant to this article, the applicant has implied
consent to the Forester, members of the Shade Tree Commission,
Township officials and other consultants hired by the Township entering
upon and performing such inspections and testing as may be necessary
to make a determination as required. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-10]
§ 336-10 TOY GUNS § 336-11
333:1097
§ 336-11. Appeal procedure for heritage/historic tree
determinations.
A. Those who may take appeal. As to all determinations of the Forester
relating to heritage/historic trees, made pursuant to § 336-10G(15), the
applicant may appeal the Forester's denial of the application for a tree
removal permit.
B. Time and manner in which to appeal. [Amended 8-26-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-18; 7-27-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-25]
(1) A written appeal of the Forester's decision must be filed with the
Township Clerk, the Shade Tree Commission ("Commission") and
the Forester within 180 calendar days from the date of the
Forester's decision. An appeal from § 336-10G(15)(a) or (b) shall be
perfected by submitting each of the following:
(a) Written notice of appeal setting forth each of the following:
[1] Lot(s) and block(s) designation of the subject property as it
appears on the Official Tax Map of the Township.
[2] Name, address and telephone number of subject property
owner.
[3] Name, address and telephone number of other parties
interested in the property, i.e. prospective tenants, etc.
(2) In addition to the written notice of appeal, the appellant shall
submit each of the following:
(a) A plan depicting the proposed use of the subject property.
(b) The plan as described in Subsection B(2)(a) above, except that
it shall include by separate colored symbols the location of
each heritage/historic tree, superimposed upon the plan which
would include tree trunk and canopy-spread measurements in
scale. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(c) A plan which would allow for the utilization of the subject
property for a permitted use in the zone within which it is
located which results in the minimum number of heritage/
historic trees being removed.
(d) A tree appraisal utilizing the latest ISA method, performed by a
New Jersey board-licensed tree expert, setting forth an
appraisal value for each historic/heritage tree proposed to be
removed. The appraisal must set forth individual appraisal
data and a value for each such tree, keyed to the tree symbols
set forth on the plan described in Subsection B(2)(b) above.
[Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(e) A copy of the Forester's determination being appealed.
§ 336-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-11
333:1098
C. Appeal tribunal. The Commission shall hold a hearing and decide the
appeal de novo. The Commission shall consider the written decision of
the Forester, additional evidence which the Forester may present, the
reports of the appellant's experts, the testimony of the appellant's
experts, the testimony or other evidence desired to be submitted by the
appellant. The Commission shall have the right, if it deems it necessary,
to employ an outside expert or experts to review the matter and present
evidence and opinions on the appeal. The Commission shall also have
the right to visit the site and vicinity to assist it in deciding the appeal.
The rules of evidence shall not apply to the appeal hearing, but due
process and a reasonable opportunity to be heard should be accorded to
all interested parties.
D. Fee on appeal. The appellant shall, at the time of filing the appeal,
submit an appeal fee plus an escrow amount as provided in Chapter
150, Fees, to the Township Clerk. The escrow amount shall be used by
the Township to offset direct expenses of the appeal, including cost of
stenographer, attorney and any outside experts employed by the
Commission for the appeal. In the event the initial escrow amount shall
be exhausted, the escrow shall be replenished within five business days
after notification to the appellant from the Commission or the Township
Clerk. Any balance of the escrow amount shall be refunded to the
appellant.
E. Time and form of decision. The Commission shall, within two weeks of
the date upon which a complete appeal application has been received,
set an initial date for the hearing. The initial hearing date shall be set
for not more than 45 days from the date upon which a complete
application of appeal was received unless the next regularly scheduled
meeting is later, in which case the hearing shall be set for that meeting.
If more than one date is required for the appeal, the Commission shall
schedule successive hearing dates as expeditiously as possible, giving
consideration to other business and demands upon its time which must
be accommodated. Within 60 days of the conclusion of the hearing(s),
the Commission shall render a decision, orally or in writing. The
Commission may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Forester.
The Commission's decision may be rendered orally or by written
resolution setting forth findings and reasons therefor. If the
Commission's decision is initially rendered orally, a written resolution
of memorialization setting forth findings and reasons must be adopted
within 45 days from the date of the oral decision. Only those members
of the Commission voting in favor of the oral decision may vote on the
resolution of memorialization. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-10]
F. Mitigation requirements. In the event the Commission's decision on
appeal shall modify or reverse the decision of the Forester, any
heritage/historic trees which shall be allowed to be removed as a result
of the Commission's decision shall be subject to the mitigation
requirements which shall be detailed in the written decision of the
§ 336-11 TOY GUNS § 336-11
333:1099
§ 336-12. Appeal procedure for all other determinations.
As to all determinations of the Forester, other than those relating to
heritage/historic trees made pursuant to § 336-10G(15), the applicant may
appeal the Forester's denial of the application for a tree removal permit.
Any resident of the Township may appeal the Forester's issuance of a tree
removal permit.
§ 336-13. Exceptions from requirement to secure tree removal
permit or for abbreviated procedures. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-10; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-14; 4-23-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-13]
The following exceptions from securing a tree removal permit or for
abbreviated procedures shall apply, unless under Subsection A, B or C
below a heritage/historic tree will be removed or damaged, in which case
securing a removal permit shall be required as to the heritage/historic
tree(s) only:
Commission. Representative mitigation techniques which may be
required include but are not limited to one or more of the following,
depending upon the particular circumstances as revealed during the
hearing process: [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(1) A monetary contribution for each removed heritage/historic tree to
be paid to the Township and used for purposes of maintaining
existing trees under the jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission
or for other purposes under the jurisdiction of the Commission. The
Commission shall use its expertise in arriving at the amount of the
contribution. The ISA method of appraisal shall serve as the basis
for determining the value of each tree. The Commission shall
consider, but is not bound by, the appraisal submitted pursuant to
Subsection B(2)(d) above; and/or
(2) Planting a minimum of five new trees, preferably the same type as
the heritage/historic tree being removed, if available, nursery
quality shade trees of no less than three to 3 1/2 inches in caliper or
evergreens at eight feet to 10 feet of height, on the subject
property or other designated property within the Township, for
each heritage/historic tree removed.
A. This article shall not apply to normal operations in commercial orchards
or tree nurseries as carried out by the owners or their employees.
B. Any public utility company may prune trees to obtain normal line
clearance for overhead utility wires.
C. This article shall not apply to standard selective forestry silvericultural
practices which will benefit both the owner and the intent of this article,
such as pruning and trimming to enhance growth. Any such activity,
§ 336-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-13
333:1100
§ 336-14. Other prohibited acts.
The following actions are prohibited and shall be a violation of this article:
§ 336-15. Safety barrier.
In order to protect trees located on areas of the tract which are tree
preservation areas, the Forester may, if warranted in his opinion, require
however, which entails injury to or destruction of trees shall require an
application and permit as provided for herein.
D. This article shall not apply to any tree located on a home site or on a
modified home site.
E. Except as otherwise noted in § 336-18, the provisions of § 336-10 of this
article shall not apply to those activities recognized in § 336-18 in
conformance with the Farmland Assessment Act (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq.).
F. Except as otherwise noted in § 336-19, the provisions of § 336-10 of this
article shall not apply to the circumstance recognized and described in
§ 336-19.
A. Willful injury or disfigurement of any tree growing within the Township.
B. No person shall:
(1) Attach any sign, notice or other object to any tree or fasten any
wires, cables, nails or screws to any tree in a manner that could
prove harmful to the tree.
(2) Pour any material on any tree or on nearby ground which would be
harmful to the tree.
(3) Cause or encourage any unnecessary fire or burning near or
around any tree.
(4) Construct a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk or
otherwise fill up the ground within 15 feet of any tree so as to cut
off air, light or water from the roots. [Amended 6-29-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-10]
(5) Place building material or equipment around any tree so as to
cause injury thereto. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-10]
(6) Alter the existing grade by removing any soil within 15 feet of the
tree trunk. [Added 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(7) Change the existing drainage patterns (contour lines) around the
perimeter of a tree’s dripline, which causes the movement of
siltation or water into the dripline of the tree canopy. [Added
6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
§ 336-13 TOY GUNS § 336-15
333:1101
the erection and maintenance of temporary fencing or similar barrier along
the border of the tree disturbance area or at such other location which in
his opinion will help to protect against intrusion into the tree preservation
area. In exercising his judgment hereunder the Forester may consider the
following:
§ 336-16. Nonliability of Township.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the
Township or upon any of its officers or employees nor to relieve the owner
and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs
upon private property or under his control in a safe condition.
§ 336-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties prescribed in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. In a prosecution under this article, each tree removed,
damaged or destroyed will constitute a separate offense.
§ 336-18. Farming activities.
Tree removal in furtherance of farming shall be controlled hereunder. If an
applicant intends to harvest woodland or intends to clear trees to establish
a farm, this article shall apply, providing the activity shall qualify under the
Farmland Assessment Act.
A. Size and configuration of the tree disturbance area.
B. Size and number of pieces of construction equipment to be used.
C. Size of project.
D. Any past intrusions into the tree preservation area.
E. Lack of other demarcation to distinguish tree disturbance area from
tree preservation area.
F. Other factors deemed relevant by the Forester.
A. Tree harvesting. If an applicant intends to harvest trees and have such
activity result in the subject property's qualifying for farmland
assessment under the Farmland Assessment Act, the following
procedures shall apply:
(1) The applicant shall file a copy of the following with the Township
Forester:
(a) Forest management plan prepared for the state.
(b) Farmland assessment application.
§ 336-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-18
333:1102
(2) The Township Engineer or Forester shall inspect the property and
compare it with the forest management plan. If the Township
Forester notes any substantial inconsistencies, he/she shall
immediately contact the State Forester assigned to the matter and
request the State Forester to review the property and the plan as
soon as possible. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(3) The Township Engineer or Forester shall periodically, thereafter,
inspect the property to determine that the forest management plan
is being adhered to. If the plan is not being followed, the Township
Engineer or Forester shall: [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-10]
(a) Immediately notify the State Forester for such action as he/she
deems needed.
(b) Notify the Township Tax Assessor that the plan is not being
followed and request that action be taken to disqualify the
property under the Farmland Assessment Act.
(c) Serve notice on the applicant, and the property owner, if
different from the applicant, that he/she should immediately
cease the activity because it no longer qualifies under this
article as an exemption to the tree removal permit procedure
and that before any further tree removal is engaged in, the
provisions of § 336-10 must be complied with.
(d) Issue summons under § 336-15.
B. Establishment of farm. If an applicant intends to remove trees in order
to establish a farm and have the subject property qualify for farmland
assessment under the Farmland Assessment Act, the following
procedures shall apply:
(1) The owner shall notify the Township Clerk in writing of such
intention and shall supply the following:
(a) Written information required by § 336-10B(1) through (6).
(b) A survey or map of the total property with the area of tree
removal depicted with reasonable accuracy.
(c) A statement under oath that the applicant is not pursuing the
tree removal hereunder to avoid the other sections of this
article and that if the application is granted, the property
would not be the subject of a subdivision or site plan
application for 10 years after the farming activity is
commenced.
(d) An application fee in the amount provided for in Chapter 150,
Fees.
§ 336-18 TOY GUNS § 336-18
333:1103
§ 336-19. Establishing a home site.
An abbreviated procedure shall apply to tree removal for purposes of
constructing a single-family dwelling on a lot.
(2) The Township Clerk shall follow the procedures of § 336-10C and
D.
(3) The Township Forester shall inspect the site and may require the
applicant, owner and/or farmer to accompany him.
(4) The Township Forester shall issue a tree removal permit hereunder
if:
(a) The Township Forester is satisfied that the application is made
in good faith and with the intention to establish a farm which
will qualify for farmland assessment under the Farmland
Assessment Act.
(b) The record owner of the property executes a restriction in
recordable form that the property shall not be the subject of a
subdivision or site plan application for a period of 10 years
after the farming activity is commenced.
(5) If the Township Forester concludes that the application is not made
in good faith and with the intention to establish a farm which would
qualify the property for farmland assessment under the Farmland
Assessment Act, the Township Forester shall deny the permit and
notify the applicant and owner in writing, with a copy to the
Township Clerk, of the specific findings upon which the
determination is made and of the fact that the applicant may appeal
such determination within 10 days pursuant to § 336-11.
A. To qualify under this article:
(1) The applicant must intend to construct a single-family dwelling for
which the applicant has received building permits from the
Township Construction Code Official; and [Amended 6-29-2010
by Ord. No. O-10-10]
(2) The dwelling shall be intended to be constructed on a lot:
(a) Which is one acre or less or which is not more than two times
the minimum lot area requirement of the zone in which it is
located; and
(b) Which has not been the subject of a subdivision approval
within the last three years; and [Amended 6-28-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-14]
(c) Which is not in common or related ownership with an adjacent
parcel of real property.
§ 336-18 FREEHOLD CODE § 336-19
333:1104
§ 336-20. Heritage/historic tree data collection. [Amended
6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10]
For the purpose of establishing a database on heritage/historic trees, their
size and location within Freehold Township, any property owner filing
farmland assessment under woodland management shall have the New
Jersey Approved Consulting Forester identify heritage/historic trees
encountered during his/her annual inspection. These trees with diameter,
species and location information shall be shown on the submitted scaled
map and included with the annual filing of the "WD-1" form prior to August
1 to the Township Tax Assessor.
B. If Subsection A is applicable, the applicant shall contact the Township
Forester and supply in written form the information required by
§ 336-10B(1) through (6). The Forester shall ascertain additional
information sufficient to establish that this article is applicable and the
abbreviated procedure of this article is appropriate. Upon doing so, the
Forester may require the applicant to supply a survey, copy of house
plans and proposed placement of the dwelling, any accessory buildings,
lawn or landscape area and driveway proposed. The Forester may
further require that the applicant mark the trees to be removed. If, after
a review of the foregoing information, and any other information the
Forester may reasonably require, including inspection of the property,
the Forester is satisfied that the trees to be removed are not in excess of
that required to establish the dwelling and related areas, a permit for
tree removal may issue and a copy forwarded to the Township Clerk. If
not so satisfied, the Forester may require the procedure established by
§ 336-10 be followed. In such case, the Township Forester shall notify
the applicant in writing, with a copy to the Township Clerk, of the
denial, the specific findings upon which the denial is made and of the
fact that the applicant may either submit under § 336-10, or appeal the
Township Forester's determination under § 336-11.
§ 336-19 TOY GUNS § 336-20
333:1105
Chapter 341
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 11.
Parking lots and drives — See Ch. 228.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 347.
§ 341-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPERTY — Any real property within the Township which is not a street
or highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by other than human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to
transport persons or property or pull machinery, including, but not by way
of limitation, an automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and
wagon.
§ 341-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon a vehicle within the Township and no person shall
leave a vehicle at any place within the Township for such time and under
such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to be
abandoned.
§ 341-3. Leaving of nonoperating vehicles on street.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on a street or highway within the Township.
§ 341-4. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles.
No person in charge or control of property within the Township, whether
as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles to remain
on the property longer than 30 days, and no person shall leave such vehicles
on any property within the Township for a period of time longer than 30
days. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner, when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise;
§ 336-20 FREEHOLD CODE § 341-4
341:1106
or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the Township.
§ 341-5. Removal and impoundment of vehicles.
§ 341-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 346
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 224. Regulation of motor vehicles on Townshipowned
property — See Ch. 346, Art. I.
§ 346-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled otherwise than
by muscular power which are used primarily for recreational purposes,
including, but not limited to, motorized bicycles, mopeds, all-terrain
vehicles, go-carts, motorized dirt bikes and dune buggies.
§ 346-2. Prohibited conduct.
A. The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated
by him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any
place within the Township which appears to be present in violation of
this chapter. Such a vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed
or disposed of in accordance with applicable statutes. The Chief of
Police, or any member of the Police Department acting for him, shall
notify the registered and legal owner in writing by personal service or
by certified mail, at the last known address of the owner, of the removal
of the vehicle, the reason for the removal, and the location of the
vehicle. The vehicle shall be retained and impounded until the owner or
his authorized agent pays the cost of such taking, removal and storage.
B. All removal and impoundment of vehicles under this chapter shall be
done in conformance with the Chapter 327, Towing.
A. No person shall use, operate, drive or ride in or upon or permit the use,
operation, driving or riding of a recreational motor vehicle upon any
private property or lot within the Township except:
§ 341-4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 346-2
346:1107
Chapter 347
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 11. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 341.
§ 347-1. Definitions.143
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any of the following but need not necessarily limited
to those vehicles as herein set forth: motorcycles, motor scooters, motor
bicycles, dune buggies, trail bikes, mini-bikes, racing scooters, and any
other vehicle designed for transportation of the driver, passengers or
products and propelled by an internal combustion engine or other type of
engine, either licensed or unlicensed.
§ 347-2. Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, permit or suffer to be used
or operated or to operate licensed or unlicensed motor vehicles upon any
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where people
(1) The lot is more than four acres in area;
(2) All operation of the recreational vehicle is confined to an area at
least:
(a) One hundred feet from a public street or roadway; and
(b) Fifty feet from all adjacent lot lines.
(3) Operation of the recreational vehicle occurs between 9:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.,
Saturday and Sunday.
B. No person owning or having custody of a recreational motor vehicle as
defined herein, whether registered or unregistered, shall allow the
vehicle to be operated in areas prohibited herein by a minor.
C. Operation of a recreational motor vehicle by a person unable to
ambulate without assistance from another person, a cane, crutches,
walker, wheelchair or other similar device shall not be deemed a
violation of this section when such recreational vehicle is being used for
ambulatory assistance.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 346-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 347-2
347:1108
congregate or walk or upon any public property whatsoever or upon any
private property, except driveways, without the permission of the owner of
such property, except for use upon dedicated roads and streets. No person
owning or having custody of a motor vehicle as defined herein, whether
licensed or unlicensed, shall allow the vehicle to be operated in areas
prohibited herein by a driver not holding a driver's privilege as approved by
the State of New Jersey or any other state.
§ 347-3. Exceptions.
§ 347-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 351
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
Wells — See Ch. 394.
§ 351-1. Findings.
The governing body finds that in order to assure the public health, safety
and welfare it shall continue to operate, maintain, and, when and where
deemed necessary, construct and/or acquire additions to its water supply
facilities.
§ 351-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — Any duly authorized representative of the owner.
COST — Includes labor, material, transportation, expenses, equipment,
supervision, engineering and all and every necessary overhead expense.
A. It shall not be unlawful for any public employee or other party with an
appropriate permit to operate motor vehicles in such location for the
purpose of maintaining, repairing, or doing work upon lands for the
public good.
B. This article shall not be applicable to any recognized organization
which has obtained permission from the Township Committee to use
such lands for the sole purpose of holding organized and supervised
rallies, races or meets.
§ 347-2 WATER § 351-2
351:1109
CUSTOMER — Any owner, agent or occupant who is responsible for the
payment of fees specified.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES — All of the property, organization or
operation of the water supply system and sewage disposal system and every
part thereof collectively or separately, functioning under the direction of the
Township Committee. 144
EMERGENCY WATER SERVICE — Temporary water service provided by
the Township Department of Public Utilities as agreed to by contract or
otherwise, to an adjacent municipality or public utility located within an
adjacent municipality for the health, safety and welfare of the residents
located therein, in the event a water emergency is formally declared by
the Mayor or, in his/her absence or disability, the Deputy Mayor of such
adjacent municipality and further provided that such water emergency is
verified by Freehold Township's Health Officer or in the absence of the
Health Officer, the Township Administrator. Such emergency water service
shall be provided only for such length of time as is necessary to meet the
declared emergency and shall be terminated upon declaration of Freehold
Township's Health Officer, or in the absence of the Health Officer, the
Township Administrator, that the emergency has abated or that continued
providing of water will cause an emergency condition to develop within
Freehold Township.
EQUIVALENT UNIT (EU) — The unit which uses an average daily flow of
249 gallons of water. Said flow shall be adjusted annually. 145
EXTENSION — The extension of a water main along a street, avenue or
highway. An extension shall not include the water service connection.
LIEN — The charges of any nature levied by the Township arising out of any
charge resulting from installation, service or distribution of water which are
declared to be a lien against the property served by virtue of the statute in
such case made and provided.
MAINS — All pipes, including valves, valve boxes, fittings and
appurtenances, other than service connections, conveying water to or
distributing water from the Township.
OWNER — The applicant, consumer, person or company holding record
title to any part of the premises supplied. In the event multiple commercial
premises are served by a common water meter, the person or entity holding
title to the specific portion of the premises where the water meter is
physically located shall be deemed the owner for purposes of this chapter.
In the event a multiple residential project, wherein units are individually
owned, is served by other than an individual water meter for each individual
residential unit, i.e., served by one or more common water meters, the
person or entity holding title to the specific portion of the premises where
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 351-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-2
351:1110
the water is actually used or consumed shall be deemed the owner for
purposes of this chapter.
PRIVATE HYDRANT — A fire hydrant located upon private property and
privately owned.
PRIVATE MAIN — A main running through private property or in a private
street to serve more than one home or other buildings or properties.
PUBLIC HYDRANT — Fire hydrant under the control of the municipality
located on a right-of-way of the municipality or municipal property.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER — A person who is the owner of residential
property which receives utility services.
SERVICE CONNECTIONS — Service pipe or service line connections,
including corporations, shall mean a pipe connected to a main and
extending to privately owned property or premises for supplying water
service.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person retained by the Township Committee as
the qualified licensed Superintendent of Utilities and who shall be charged
with the responsibility and authorized to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.
WATER SERVICE CONNECTION — The pipe serving a premises from the
main to the meter, including the meter.
§ 351-3. Control of mains and appurtenances; liability for rents and
charges; billing.
A. The water mains and appurtenances, service pipes from main to
curbline, corporation stops, curb stops and boxes of the Department
shall be under the control of the Township Committee and its
authorized agents and employees, provided that such facilities are
located within the public right-of-way or within easements or other
property interests held in the name of the Township and all other
persons are forbidden to disturb, tamper with, injure, change, obstruct
access to or interfere with water mains and appurtenances, service
pipes from main to curbline, corporation stops, curb stops and boxes in
any way which are located in public rights-of-way or other property of
the Township.
B. Any person receiving a supply of water for any purpose from the water
system operated by the Township shall be subject to rules and
regulations as set forth in this chapter.
C. The owner of any house, building or lot shall be liable for the payment
of the service charge or rent for the use of water and for all fees and
other charges in connection with the installation, repair and testing of
any water meter, water service, connections, appliances or parts and
renewals thereof furnished or made by the Department of Public
Utilities in or upon the house, building or lot until paid or satisfied. In
the event multiple commercial premises are served by a common water
§ 351-2 WATER § 351-3
351:1111
§ 351-4. Application for service; tapping of mains; excavating and
backfilling.
meter, the owner of the premises where the meter is physically located
shall be primarily responsible for the entire payment. Those
commercial owners and/or occupants who have had the beneficial use
of water service supplied through a common meter shall be secondarily
responsible for a fraction of the total payment which fraction shall
have a numerator of one and a denominator equaling the total number
of premises served from the common meter. In the event a multiple
residential project, wherein units are individually owned, is served by
other than an individual water meter for each individual residential
unit, i.e., served by one or more common water meters, the person or
entity holding title to the specific portion of the premises where the
water is actually used or consumed shall be responsible for a fraction
of the total payment which fraction shall have a numerator of one
and a denominator equaling the total number of units served from the
common meter.
D. Payment for the use and consumption of water and for all other fees and
charges incurred shall be paid to the Township Tax Collector.146
E. All bills for the furnishing of water by the Department of Public Utilities
shall be based on a cyclical schedule of quarterly billings. Billings shall
be staggered for various areas of the Township and adjusted
periodically to accommodate growth areas. Special readings for final
bills may be arranged through the Department of Public Utilities. In the
event the special reading is requested for an individually owned
multiple residential dwelling unit which is within a development project
serviced by one or more common meters, special readings for a final bill
cannot be arranged. In such case, the regular quarterly bill will be
rendered to and shall be the responsibility of the owner of record as of
the bill date. The purchaser of such a unit shall be responsible for
establishing an escrow fund at the time of settlement of title to the unit
out of which the purchaser may be reimbursed for such amount of the
quarterly bill which represents the seller's responsibility. The Township
shall not assume any responsibility for the establishment of the escrow
fund or for the allocation of liability between the buyer and the seller.
F. Unless the applicant for water service specifies otherwise, all bills and
notices shall be mailed or delivered to the premises where water
service is supplied. If the applicant so desires, the Department of Public
Utilities will mail bills and notices to the business or home address of
the owner, customer or his agent. Bills and notices shall be mailed
through ordinary United States mail service and if not received, the
consumer shall obtain them from the Superintendent of the Department
of Public Utilities or an agent or employee. Failure to receive bills or
notices shall not excuse nonpayment of water bills.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 351-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-4
351:1112
A. Dwellings and commercial and industrial structures.
(1) The owner of every building or structure hereafter to be
constructed which may be occupied or used by human beings
including but not limited to dwellings and commercial and
industrial structures located or to be located on a street or road
along the line of a water supply system owned or operated by the
Township and available to said building or structure where the
front building line of the building or structure is within 100 feet of
the road or street in which the water line is contained shall, within
90 days after service of notice to connect is given by the Township
Engineer, be connected with and use the services and facilities of
the Township water system to the exclusion of any other systems or
methods for the consumption of water, except that alternate
methods of supply may be used for nonconsumption purposes. The
provisions of this subsection shall apply to existing buildings or
structures when and if the existing system or method of supplying
water for human consumption to the building or structure has been
declared a health hazard by the Board of Health. Failure to comply
with the aforesaid regulations shall be punishable by the provisions
contained in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of
the Township of Freehold.
(2) All other applications for the use of water or for a service
connection shall be made on forms provided by the Department of
Public Utilities, by the owner of the premises or his duly authorized
agent. The fee shall be payable in advance.
B. Persons desiring the use of water for building construction shall make
application according to the provisions as herein provided. Under no
circumstances shall water for building construction be taken from the
fire hydrant of the Township. A flat rate, depending upon the type and
size of the building, will be made for water used in building
construction, unless the Department of Public Utilities shall require the
water to be metered. The minimum flat rate charge for a building as
provided in Chapter 150, Fees, will be payable in advance. In excess of
minimum usage, a rate established by the utility rate structure will be
billed in excess of 1,000 gallons. The Township Committee reserves the
right to regulate the purpose for which the water may be used during
construction and may, at its option, require the water to be metered, in
which event meters shall be rented from the Department of Public
Utilities and charged for at regular rental rates for meters.
Construction water shall be billed at a rate as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees. For this purpose, single-story commercial, industrial, professional
or school buildings shall be equivalent to four dwelling units. Buildings
over one story shall be equivalent to six dwelling units.147
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 351-4 WATER § 351-4
351:1113
§ 351-5. Installation of service connections and lines.
C. The tapping of mains for existing residential homes from the main to
the curb, the curb stop and the curb box shall be furnished and installed
by the Department of Public Utilities or its agent for a service
connection fee as set forth in Chapter 150, Fees. For taps over one inch
in size, connections shall be permitted at the expense of the applicant if
the applicant authorizes a qualified contractor that has been approved
by the Department of Public Utilities. A permit shall be obtained before
any construction begins. Such permit shall be issued by the Department
of Public Utilities upon submission of the application form and payment
of an inspection fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees.148
D. No street openings shall be made except upon the consent of the
Department of Public Utilities, subject to such terms as it and the
Township Committee may impose, and upon obtaining a Township road
opening permit from the Engineering Department.
E. The Township shall perform or have performed all excavating and
backfilling of trenches for service connection and service lines, the cost
of which is included in the connection fee.
A. Installation of service lines from curb stop or repair work shall be
performed by a plumber duly qualified to perform such work at the
expense of the applicant. All service connection pipe shall be installed
at least four feet below the surface. No rigid connection to any other
water distribution system shall be made.
B. The service connection shall, as far as practical, be installed at right
angles to the main and in a straight line to the meter. There shall be no
attachment from which water may be drawn between the main and the
meter.
C. Service pipe shall be installed only through the property of the
applicant, unless the applicant shall enjoy an easement or right-of-way
for that purpose, duly recorded.
D. Water pipe shall not be installed in the same excavation or trench with
sewer pipe unless the same shall be separated vertically by at least two
feet above the sewer.
E. All service connection pipe from the main to the curb stop shall consist
of Type K copper tubing and shall be installed and maintained by the
Township; from the curb stop to the dwelling shall be maintained by the
owner. The copper tubing shall be no less than one inch in size for all
domestic lines and of such larger size as shall be designed by the
Department of Public Utilities for commercial and industrial buildings
and multiple residences.
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 351-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-5
351:1114
§ 351-6. Metering and water service charges.
F. The completed line shall remain open until inspected and approved by
the Department of Public Utilities or its representative. At least 24
hours' notice shall be given the Department of Public Utilities for the
purpose of inspecting and approving the work.
G. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the service line
from the curb to the meter or interior of the building and shall keep the
same in good repair and protect it from damage due to frost or other
causes. All leaks in the service lines shall be reported promptly to the
Department of Public Utilities and repaired by the owner. The owner
shall be liable for water escaping from leaks at a charge estimated by
the Department of Public Utilities based upon the estimated quantity of
water escaping. If repairs are not made the Department of Public
Utilities may shut off the water and refuse to turn it on again until the
line is put in serviceable condition.
H. No person except an employee of the Department of Public Utilities
shall turn water on or off at the curb stop.
I. No service connection shall be permitted to serve two or more buildings
or structures from a single tap except upon a special permit granted by
the Department of Public Utilities, and if granted, a separate and
distinct curb stop and box shall be provided for each building or
structure.
A. All service lines shall be installed in such manner that a meter and yoke
may be installed at the point of entry to the premises. Valves shall be
installed on both sides of the meter yoke and shall be consistent with
Township codes. The Township will provide the meter and yoke, the cost
thereof to be borne by the owner. The meter, yoke, and service line
which shall be installed in the house and upon the property of any
customer shall be considered for all purposes the subject of a voluntary
bailment. The Township shall be the bailor, and the owner shall be the
bailee. In no circumstance shall the charge per unit be less than the
minimum charge for a five-eighths-inch single-service water meter.149
B. The Department of Public Utilities may refuse to supply water to
premises wherein the plumbing work has not been done in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health or where an
applicant has not supplied a space or area acceptable to the
Department of Public Utilities for the installation of the water meter
and appurtenances.
C. The rates to be charged to any owner for the consumption of metered
water by any consumers of the Township water system shall be in
accordance with Chapter 150, Fees. In the case of individually owned
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 351-5 WATER § 351-6
351:1115
multiple residential dwelling units contained within a development
project which is serviced by one or more common water meters, the
rates to be charged for each unit shall be based on the average unit
consumption when applied to the schedule of rates in Chapter 150
for a five-eighths-inch single-service water meter. The average unit
consumption is determined by dividing the total consumption recorded
on all common water meters within the development project by the
total units within the development project. In no circumstances shall
the charge per unit be less than the minimum charge for a five-eighthsinch
single-service water meter as set forth on the schedule of rates in
Chapter 150.
D. The following quarterly rates shall be charged for fire protection:
[Amended 8-23-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-23]
(1) See Chapter 150, Fees, for cost per quarter based on size of
connection.
(2) Fire hydrants.
(a) Private fire hydrants: See Chapter 150, Fees.
(b) Fire hydrants owned and operated by the Township, but
located outside the Township and serving units located outside
the Township: 110% of the rate set forth in Subsection D(2)(a)
above, divided equally among the number of units outside the
Township which are serviced by the hydrant(s).
(3) Metered fire lines or combined fire and domestic lines: no
additional charge for hydrants.
(4) Combined fire lines and domestic water supply: flat rate service for
each fire line entering the premises.
(5) Fire line only: quarterly charge for fire protection based on the size
of connection made to the Township's water main. No charge for
additional fire connections.
(6) The Township reserves the right to require double checks or meters
on fire lines if necessary. All maintenance work on fire lines will be
done by the persons receiving the benefit under the supervision of
the Department of Public Utilities.
(7) The rates provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be charged to any of
the customers of the Township water system for the purchase of
water meters.
(8) Meters larger than two inches in size that are not installed by the
Township will be provided at cost plus a handling charge of 20%.
Meters three inches and above shall be supplied and installed by
the applicant requesting service. The meter supplied and installed
shall be in accordance with the Township's specifications. The cost
of the meter and its installation shall be borne by the applicant. The
§ 351-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-6
351:1116
§ 351-7. Free access to premises for inspection.
The Department of Public Utilities shall have access at all reasonable hours
to premises connected to the water distribution system for the purpose
of reading and installing the meter and of inspecting and maintaining
equipment. The hours between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. shall be reasonable
for this purpose.
§ 351-8. Service.
meter shall be repaired and maintained by the applicant under the
terms and conditions established by the Township. Annual meter
testing is to be arranged for by the applicant, and the test must be
certified by a qualified testing firm. A copy of the certification is to
be accessible to the Township at all reasonable times for reading
and inspection.
E. Whenever practical the Department of Public Utilities will require a
separate meter for each living accommodation or usage in multiple
service buildings. If separate meter service is not practical, all units
may be serviced by one meter of proper size, and the property owner
shall be billed for all water used in multiple units. Where there are
multiple units, the minimum rate for multiple units shall be the
minimum rate for a five-eighths-inch single-service meter multiplied by
the number of units. No reduction in the number of units will be
recognized for nonoccupancy, unless nonoccupancy exists for a full
quarter and written notice is given the Department of Public Utilities
before the quarter begins. In the event any unoccupied unit commences
to be supplied with water or any new units are served with water
through the meter, the Department of Public Utilities shall forthwith be
notified, and the owner shall be liable for charges in the same manner
as if notice had been given.
F. Water rents; interconnects. Emergency water service may be provided
through authorized interconnections at a rate set forth in Chapter 150,
Fees.
G. The rates to be charged for metered water to a unit located outside of
the Township shall be 110% of the rates set forth in Chapter 150, Fees.
A. In the case of prolonged scarcity of water from any cause, the
Department of Public Utilities shall have the right, upon public notice,
to have the use of water suspended or restricted for lawn or garden
sprinkling, swimming pool filling, air-conditioning purposes and car
washing. Regardless of the emergency provisions set forth, the
sprinkling of lawns with water shall be performed and accomplished on
alternate days through the Township. All properties with odd-number
addresses or box numbers shall water only on the odd days of the
month. All properties with even addresses or box numbers shall water
only on the even days of the month. All property owners shall be
permitted to water on the 31st day of any month.
§ 351-6 WATER § 351-8
351:1117
B. Water service may be discontinued upon notice as shall be required by
N.J.S.A. 40A:31-12 for any of the following reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any properties or purposes other than
those permitted in this article or described in the application.
(2) For willful waste of water through improper, defective or imperfect
pipes, fixtures or otherwise.
(3) For failure to maintain, in good order, connections, service lines or
fixtures owned by the consumer.
(4) For molesting or tampering with any service pipe, meter, curb stop
or seal or any other appliances of the Department of Public
Utilities.
(5) For refusal of access at reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting
or for installing, reading, maintaining fixtures, pipes and meters.
(6) For nonpayment of bills, rents, charges or fees or of penalties
imposed or for any other reason causing or tending to cause a loss
to the Department of Public Utilities.
(7) For failure to decrease or limit the use of water when requested by
the Department of Public Utilities.
(8) For violation of the regulations of the Township relating to the use
and distribution of water.
(9) For misrepresentation in the application for water service
respecting the property to be served or the fixtures to be supplied
or the use to be made of the water.
(10) When the premises shall become vacant, the owner shall remain
liable for all charges for buildings.
C. The Department of Public Utilities reserves the right to shut off water
service without notice in case of technical defects or other unavoidable
cause or for the purpose of making necessary repairs, connections or
other alterations to the water distribution system.
D. In no case shall water be turned on again until defects have been
remedied and all bills due and/or charges, penalties and fees imposed
have been paid. The owner of the premises shall also be liable for any
loss sustained by the Department of Public Utilities as a result of such
defect. A fee, by cash or certified check, in the amount provided for in
Chapter 150, Fees, shall be paid to cover the cost of the reconnections,
except that reconnections to be completed after regular working hours
shall require a fee as provided in Chapter 150.
E. Should the occupant of the premises turn on the water or suffer or
cause it to be turned on after it has been shut off at the curb by the
Department of Public Utilities, it shall be shut off again, the curb stop
§ 351-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-8
351:1118
shall be sealed and for the expense of shutting off the curb stop and
turning it on again, a fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be
paid.
F. Neither the Department of Public Utilities nor the Township shall be
held liable for any damage which may be claimed due to the failure of
any restriction of the water supplied or from low or high pressure or
damage due to water quality.
G. The Department of Public Utilities and the Township reserve the right
to add to or modify the rules and regulations governing the water
distribution system at any time.
H. Owners of any vacant buildings or buildings that are about to be
vacated shall give at least five days' notice to the Department of Public
Utilities so that water may be shut off. Owners will be responsible for
the water charges until notice is given.
I. A new application for water service shall be filed upon the change of
ownership of the property described in the original application, and the
Department of Public Utilities may discontinue water service until the
new application has been filed and approved.
J. Hoses shall not be used unless the water is metered or, in the case of
flat rate service, a silltap has been installed and is subject to the flat
rate charge.
K. When requested by the owner or his agent, the Department of Public
Utilities shall discontinue service to property either temporarily or
permanently. A turnoff charge to be paid by cash or certified check, in
the amount provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be made when their
service is restored, except that reconnections to be completed after
regular working hours shall require a fee as provided in Chapter 150. In
no event shall water be turned on until all water charges have been
paid. Emergency shutoff will be made at any hour upon request without
charge at the curb stop.
L. No adjustments of water charges due to failure of the Department of
Public Utilities to discontinue or restore water service as requested by
an owner shall be made unless the request for discontinuance or
restoration is in writing and duly filed with the Department of Public
Utilities.
M. When turning on the water supply as requested and the house or
property is vacant, the Department of Public Utilities will endeavor to
ascertain if water is running on the inside of the building. If such is
found to be the case, the water will be left shut off at the curb stop. The
jurisdiction and responsibility of the Department of Public Utilities ends
at the curb stop. The Department of Public Utilities will in no case be
liable for damage occasioned by water running from open or faulty
fixtures or from broken or damaged pipes beyond the Department of
Public Utilities' curb stop.
§ 351-8 WATER § 351-8
351:1119
§ 351-9. Extensions.
N. Where connections are abandoned, the owner of the premises or
applicant shall pay for having same shut off and plugged at the curb
stop or corporation stop, at the option of the Department of Public
Utilities, before a new connection will be installed to the premises.
O. Where persons making improvements, etc., necessitating excavations
in streets where water mains and service connections are laid,
requiring water mains and service connections to be cut and refitted,
lowered or raised, etc., they shall make written request to the
Department of Public Utilities to make changes and shall furnish a
satisfactory guaranty to the Department of Public Utilities insuring the
payment of all costs incurred by the Department of Public Utilities in
making the changes.
P. The Department of Public Utilities shall not be liable for any damages
resulting from the bursting or breaking of any main or service pipe.
Q. In the event that the Department of Public Utilities is required to repair
any meter pipes or appurtenances affecting the water service of any
consumer of the system the owner, agent and customer so affected shall
be required to pay a rate equal to the established hourly rate of a public
works repairer.
R. Any consumer requesting a meter reading for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not the meter is accurately functioning shall
pay a charge of for the testing as provided in Chapter 150, Fees. The
charge shall be retained by the Department of Public Utilities if the test
discloses that the meter is accurate. In the event that the test discloses
that the meter is inaccurate, the fee shall be refunded to the consumer.
A. All mains shall be installed within the boundaries of public roads or
streets, or where streets and roads have not yet been accepted by the
Township within the boundaries of roads and streets laid out in
compliance with all ordinances of the Township.
B. The installation of water mains in any street, lane, road, etc., by the
Township or by others shall not imply Township ownership or
acceptance of the streets, lanes, roads, etc., unless and until they
otherwise comply with Township requirements for acceptance,
ownership and maintenance.
C. The cost of installation of water mains and fire hydrants in any existing
street, lane, road, etc., may be assessed in whole or in part against
property owners including real estate developments benefiting by the
extension.
D. All water mains, hydrants and associated facilities such as booster
pumps, pressure tanks, service lines, curb stops, curb boxes and valves,
as required by the Township master water plan or by the Department of
Public Utilities on new or proposed streets shall be installed and paid
§ 351-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-9
351:1120
for by the real estate developers or builders and ownership shall be
transferred to the Township when the installation meets with the
approval of the Department of Public Utilities and the Township
Committee. Prior to acceptance it shall be necessary for the real estate
developer or builder extending the water system to submit to the
Department of Public Utilities a detailed map indicating the location of
the extended facilities including all surface controls as well as the depth
of the subsurface lines and controls by acceptable engineering detailed
drawings.
E. The Department of Public Utilities shall specify the type, size and
location of all mains, hydrants, booster stations, pressure tanks, etc., on
all new extensions and the entire system is subject to inspection and
approval by the Department of Public Utilities and is to be tested under
the Department of Public Utilities' supervision before backfilling.
F. If an existing main adjoins a property in a real estate development and
is of sufficient capacity for the additional amount of water required for
the development, the charges for connecting the existing main to the
mains of the development shall be set by the Township Committee. If
the capacity of the existing main is not adequate to supply the
additional amount of water to be used in the development, the
developer shall be responsible for the installation of a suitable main and
other necessary equipment which may be installed only after review
and approval of the extension by the Township Committee in
communication with the officials of the Department of Public Utilities.
Any extension of a new main shall not be undertaken unless and until
the developer responsible for the same shall have entered into an
agreement with the Township which shall include the terms and
conditions relative to the method and cost of installation and other
matters incidental to the extension. Any agreement shall be required to
include a provision requiring the developer to pay to the Township the
appropriate connection fee pursuant to Chapter 150, Fees, for each
service connection to be made by the developer from the extended
main.
G. Installation of new water mains in major subdivision tracts developed
for residential, industrial, commercial and research use shall in all
cases conform to the Township's master water plan and requirements of
Chapter 190, Land Use.
H. Limited main extension other than in major subdivision developments
or as part of the Township extension program, may be made on the
basis of individual application and in accordance with the Township's
water main extension agreement between the applicant and the
Township. In such case, however, the applicant to be served shall pay
the entire cost of the extension. The extension shall not be authorized
until the plans and method of installation as well as the location is
submitted to the Township Committee for approval. The submission of
the planned extension for approval to the Township Committee shall
contain within the specifications submitted a detailed map prepared by
§ 351-9 WATER § 351-9
351:1121
§ 351-10. Public fire hydrants.
a licensed professional engineer indicating the location of the main
extension and the appurtenances. Any limited main extensions shall
be subject to all of the rules, regulations and requirements of the
provisions of this section relating to extension to or changes in existing
mains in the Township.
A. No person shall take water from any fire hydrant or hose plug except
for the use of a recognized fire company, and no fire hydrant shall be
used for sprinkling the street, flushing sewers or gutters or for any
other purpose without authorization of the Department of Public
Utilities.
B. The Chief of the fire company and his assistant officers are authorized
to use the public fire hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires and
with due care after notice to the Department of Public Utilities, to a
reasonable extent to use water for the purposes of drills, tests and
washing fire equipment, but all uses shall be under the supervision and
direction of the Chief or his assistant. In no event shall an
inexperienced or an incompetent person be permitted to manipulate, or
control in any way, any fire hydrant.
C. The location of a fire hydrant may upon written request be changed
with the approval of the Department of Public Utilities, and the
estimated cost of making the change shall be paid for by the applicant
in advance. No hydrant will be moved which will increase existing
insurance rates.
D. The location and setting of new fire hydrants shall be made in
conformity with the requirements and recommendations of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters.
E. No person shall in any manner obstruct or prevent free access to or
tamper with or injure or damage by causing or permitting a vehicle to
come in contact with any fire hydrant, or place or store temporarily or
otherwise any object, material, snow, debris or structure of any kind
within a distance of 10 feet from any fire hydrant. Any obstruction,
when discovered, may be removed at once by the Department at the
expense of the person responsible for the obstruction, and he shall be
liable to a fine as provided. Repair or damage of hydrant shall be
charged to the person responsible.
F. Public fire hydrants shall be maintained by the Department of Public
Utilities but all expenses for the maintenance or repairs resulting from
the negligence or fault of the employees of the Township, members of
the Fire Department or other persons, excluding the Department of
Public Utilities or its employees, shall be paid by the Township or those
responsible. Private fire hydrants supplied with water by the Township
shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the Township as provided in
Chapter 150, Fees.
§ 351-9 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-10
351:1122
§ 351-11. Private fire hydrants.
§ 351-12. Thawing.
No company or person shall undertake the thawing of water service pipes or
mains by the use of electric current without authorization and supervision
of the Department of Public Utilities. The services of a Department of Public
Utilities inspector shall be paid for at the rate provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, by the company or individual to whose work he is assigned.
§ 351-13. Rules for installation and maintenance of service line.
G. The Department of Public Utilities shall not be liable for a deficiency or
failure in the supply of water for the control or suppression of fires from
any cause.
A. When in the judgment of the Department of Public Utilities it is
practical, private fire service connections may be allowed for hydrants,
hose connections or sprinkler systems on private property for which a
flat rate or meter rate, at the option of the Department of Public
Utilities, will be charged subject to special contract and special rules
and regulations governing the service as may be determined by the
Department of Public Utilities and Township Committee.
B. All private fire hydrants shall be installed at the sole cost of the
applicant, subject to approval of the type, size and installation by the
Department of Public Utilities.
C. All private fire hydrants shall be subject to use by the Fire Department
for the control and suppression of fires whether on the property of the
applicant or not. When such use is made for protection of property
other than that of the owner of the property whereon the private fire
hydrant is located no charge shall be made for the water used as
estimated by the Department of Public Utilities.
D. All private fire hydrants and all facilities installed shall be maintained
by the persons receiving the benefit under the supervision of the
Department of Public Utilities.
A. Any person doing any plumbing work in connection with the installation
and maintenance of a service line shall report, within five days, to the
Department of Public Utilities all violations of this chapter and of the
rules and regulations of the Department of Public Utilities which come
to his knowledge or attention.
B. Any person doing any plumbing work shall indemnify and save harmless
the Township and the Department of Public Utilities from all accidents
and damage resulting from his work whether the work is done by him
personally or under his direction.
C. Where high-pressure steam boilers or boiler-feed pumps are connected
directly with the service connection depending upon the pressure in the
§ 351-10 WATER § 351-13
351:1123
§ 351-14. Improper use of water on Township properties.
Any bailee entrusted with the care of any property of the Township who
fails to maintain same in good order or tampers or molests same or, with
intent to defraud, takes, receives, retains, or appropriates to his own use or
the use of another any property or water without payment for same which
belongs to the Township shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
§ 351-15. Collections; interest and penalties on delinquent
accounts; liens.
mains for supplying the boilers or pumps, without intervening tank
or receptacle, a reduced pressure zone backflow preventor shall be
placed in the feed pipe in addition to the controlling valve. Neither the
Township nor the Department of Public Utilities shall be responsible for
any accidents or damage resulting from any direct connection from any
cause whatever.
D. Any person doing any plumbing work may turn on the water after the
connection is completed to test out his work but shall leave the curb
stop closed when he has finished the work, unless specifically
authorized to leave it turned on by the Department of Public Utilities.
E. Any persons making changes in piping, fixtures and facilities subject to
flat rate charges, shall notify the Department of Public Utilities.
A. Bills for water consumption in any quarterly period or fraction of a
quarterly period or for any other charges shall be due and payable on
the date of the billing.
B. If any bill or part rendered for water usage or for any other charges in
connection therewith is not paid before the 31st day following the bill
date, the bill shall be considered delinquent and subject to interest from
the bill date until such time as the bill is paid in full.
C. Unpaid charges and rentals for connections with and use of the water
system shall be liens upon the premises connected until paid, and the
Township shall have the same remedies for the collection thereof with
interests, costs and penalties, as it has by law for collection of taxes
upon real estate.
D. In addition to the lien provided for in Subsection C, in the event of
unpaid charges and rentals, the Township may terminate service to the
customer. For customers located outside of the Township, the Township
shall have the right of termination of service if either the water charge
pursuant to § 351-6G or the hydrant charge pursuant to § 351-6D(2), or
both, are unpaid for 31 days beyond the payment due date.
E. The Township may combine billing for water consumption with billing
for sewer service under § 270-10C of Chapter 270, Sewers, and render
one statement detailing both water and sewer charges.
§ 351-13 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-16
351:1124
§ 351-16. Residential customer dispute.
A. At any time before the date of termination of service for nonpayment of
the amount shown on a bill, a notice of rejection or a notice of
termination, a residential customer may dispute the correctness of all
or part of the amount shown in accordance with the provisions of this
section. A residential customer shall not be entitled to dispute the
correctness of all or part of the amount, if all or part of the amount was
the subject of a previous dispute under this section.
B. The procedure for residential customer dispute shall be as follows:
(1) Before the date of termination, the residential customer shall notify
the Department of Public Utilities orally or in writing that he
disputes all or part of the amount shown on the bill, stating as
completely as possible the basis for the dispute. Oral notice shall
delay termination for 10 days pending receipt of written notice.
(2) If the Department of Public Utilities determines that the present
dispute is untimely or was previously disputed, the Department of
Public Utilities shall mail to the customer a notice stating such
determination. The Department of Public Utilities shall then
proceed as if the customer had not notified the Department of the
present dispute.
(3) If the Department determines that the present dispute is not
untimely or invalid, it shall, within 10 days following receipt of the
customer's notice arrange an informal meeting between the
residential customer and an official of the Department.
(4) Based on the Department's records, the customer's allegations and
all other relevant materials available to the official, the official shall
resolve the dispute attempting to do so in a manner satisfactory to
both parties.
(5) Within five days of the completion of the meeting, the official shall
mail to the customer a copy of his decision.
(6) If the decision is unsatisfactory to the customer, the customer
within five days of his receipt of the official's decision may request,
in writing, a formal hearing before the Township Administrator or
his designee.
(7) The formal hearing before the Township Administrator shall be
held within 10 days of the Department of Public Utilities' receipt of
the customer's written request.
(8) At the hearing, the Department of Public Utilities and the customer
shall be entitled to present all evidence that is, in the
Administrator's view, relevant and material to the dispute and to
examine and cross-examine witnesses.
§ 351-16 WATER § 351-16
351:1125
§ 351-17. Limitations on termination of service.
Any termination of service for any reason whatsoever shall be limited in the
following manner:
(9) Based on the record established at the hearing, the Administrator,
within five days of the completion of the hearing, shall issue his
written decision formally resolving the dispute. His decision shall
be final and binding on both the Department and the residential
customer.
C. Utilization of this dispute procedure shall not relieve the residential
customer of his obligation to timely and completely pay all other
undisputed utility charges and/or installment and surcharges and the
undisputed portion of the amount which is the subject of the present
dispute.
D. Until the date of the Township Administrator's or the Department of
Public Utilities official's decision, whichever is later, the Department of
Public Utilities shall not terminate the utility service of this residential
customer and shall not issue a notice of termination to him solely for
nonpayment of the disputed amount. If it is determined that the
customer must pay some or all of the disputed amount, the Department
of Public Utilities shall promptly mail to or personally serve upon the
customer a notice of termination which shall contain the following:
(1) The amount to be paid;
(2) The date of the notice of termination;
(3) The date of termination which shall be at least 15 days after the
date of the notice of termination;
(4) Notice that unless the Department receives complete payment of
the amount shown prior to the date of termination, utility service
shall be terminated.
A. The Department of Public Utilities shall terminate service for
nonpayment of utility charges and/or installments or surcharges only
during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday.
No termination shall be performed on a legal holiday or on the day
before a legal holiday.
B. No termination shall be permitted on a day when the low temperature
within the previous 24 hours was below 32° F. If service to a residential
customer has been terminated and not reinstated by 5:00 p.m. on the
day of termination when the low temperature within the previous 24
hours was below 32° F., the Department of Public Utilities shall notify
the Police Department on the day of the termination of the following:
(1) The name of the residential customer.
§ 351-16 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-17
351:1126
§ 351-18. Required backflow protection installations.
The following regulations to assure backflow protection are required:
(2) The address and location of the residence no longer receiving
utility service.
(3) The possible threat to the health and life of all persons residing at
the residence.
A. All applications must be accompanied with drawings prior to approvals.
B. The installation of fire lines requires application through the
Department of Public Utilities prior to construction.
C. For uses with minor to intermediate backflow hazard, including but not
limited to retail stores and shops, motels, hotels, schools, office
complexes, fire lines (city water systems only), etc., a factory assembled
double check value must be installed.
D. Any existing and proposed residential wells which will be used for
outside purposes only must be disconnected from the Township water
system, and all pumps, tanks and piping must be located outside the
building or dwelling. In addition, a factory assembled dual double check
value must be installed.150
E. For uses with major backflow hazard, including but not limited to
chemical plants, sewage pumping stations, restaurants, beauty parlors,
industrial waste treatment plants, commercial laundries, car washes,
manufacturing plants, drug and pharmaceutical plants, dry cleaners,
gasoline stations, auto repair shops, office complexes with x-ray and
laboratory facilities or uses, etc., a reduced pressure zone backflow
preventor must be installed.
F. The following fire protection systems shall require the installation of a
reduced pressure zone backflow preventor:
(1) Antifreeze type.
(2) Dry type.
(3) Auxiliary water supply within 1,700 feet of fire connection.
G. All systems with backflow protection must install expansion tanks on
hot water tanks and boilers.
H. All lawn sprinkler systems must be equipped with a pressure vacuum
breaker assembly.
I. Backflow prevention devices shall not be installed in pits or similar
potentially submerged locations.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 351-17 WATER § 351-18
351:1127
§ 351-19. Use of hydrants by developers.151
Hydrant meter usage shall be at the discretion of the Utility
Superintendent.
J. In all instances where buildings are served by municipal water for fire
protection, a detector type (U.S. gallons) factory assembled double
check valve must be installed.
K. All backflow protection device installations shall be tested by a
technician approved by the Utilities Superintendent and state certified
to test backflow devices.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
LONG-TERM USE — A period of time greater than three months.
SHORT-TERM USE — A period of time not longer than three months.
B. Application requirement. Any developer of new construction within the
Township shall apply to the Township Utilities Department for either
short-term or long-term hydrant use in connection with a development
project.
C. Short-term use.
(1) The developer or representative may apply to the Township
Utilities Department for short-term hydrant use.
(2) A fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be charged for shortterm
use of the hydrant. An additional charge shall be billed to the
developer at the end of use.
(3) A hydrant meter and backflow preventor shall be supplied by the
Utilities Department (three-fourths-inch only). If a larger size
meter is required as determined by the Utilities Department or as
requested by the applicant, the hydrant meter and backflow
preventor must be supplied by the applicant. The required
backflow protection installation regulations set forth in § 351-18
shall be applicable to this Subsection C(3). If a hydrant meter and
backflow preventor are supplied by the Utilities Department, they
shall be promptly returned to the Utilities Department by the
applicant at the end of the use period. A fee will be charged, as
provided in Chapter 150, Fees, if the meter and backflow preventor
are not returned promptly at the end of the use.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 351-18 FREEHOLD CODE § 351-19
351:1128
§ 351-20. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 355
(4) The hydrant to be used will be designated by the Utilities
Department representative. Proper and safe operation of the water
hydrant shall be the responsibility of the developer. Opening and
closing the hydrant as necessary shall only be conducted with
hydrant wrenches. Any damage to the hydrant as determined by
the Township Utilities Department shall be repaired by the
developer. In the event repairs are not effectuated, the Township
reserves the right to charge the developer the appropriate cost for
repair as set forth herein.
D. Long-term use.
(1) The developer or representative may apply to the Township
Utilities Department for long-term hydrant use.
(2) A fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, shall be charged for longterm
use of the hydrant. An additional charge shall be billed
quarterly to the developer.
(3) The developer shall supply the hydrant meter and backflow
preventor. The required back flow protection installation
regulations set forth in § 351-18 shall be applicable to this
Subsection D.
(4) The hydrant to be used will be designated by the Utilities
Department representative. Proper and safe operation of the water
hydrant shall be the responsibility of the developer. Opening and
closing the hydrant as necessary shall only be conducted with
hydrant wrenches. Any damage to the hydrant as determined by
the Township Utilities Department shall be repaired by the
developer. In the event repairs are not effectuated, the Township
reserves the right to charge the developer the appropriate cost for
repair as set forth herein.
E. Hydrant meter specifications. The hydrant meter shall mount to the
two-and-one-half-inch nozzle side barrel only. A factory assembled
R.P.Z. backflow preventor shall be used in all installations. A meter,
allowing for readings in terms of 1,000 gallons, shall be attached to the
hydrant. A backflow preventor and shutoff valve must be supplied on
the influent and effluent side of the assembly. (See attached drawing as
Exhibit A.)152
152. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 351-19 WATER § 351-20
351:1129
WATER RESOURCES PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental impact statements — See Ch.
142.
Floodplains and watercourses — See Ch. 166.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
282.
Soil removal and soil fill — See Ch. 286.
Water — See Ch. 351.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 385.
Wells — See Ch. 394.
§ 355-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Water Resources Protection Ordinance
of the Township of Freehold."
§ 355-2. Objective and policy.
The objective of this chapter is to permit development or construction
upon lands with delicate hydrology subject to these regulations and to limit
mound systems with ejector pumps as a means of septic disposal upon such
lands. Such activity in those areas could result in substantial impairment
to the water resources of the Township and the region, cause pollution
from septic wastes and/or create consequential difficulties to structures
constructed thereon. To minimize losses and damages, the Township's
policy shall be to permit construction and development as well as related
activities in those areas of the Township referred to, provided the water
table is not such as to disqualify such activity pursuant to the standards and
regulations of this chapter.
§ 355-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUIFER (AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA) — A water-bearing stratum used
as the source of water supply.
CONSEQUENTIAL DIFFICULTIES — Such likely and foreseeable changes
or occurrences in, upon or under the land and/or to the hydrologic condition
of the site which would create or cause a situation sufficient to sustain a
violation of the terms and conditions upon which a certificate of occupancy
for a structure and its appurtenances would be issued.
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, alteration, repair or renovation of any
building or structure and the excavation, filling and grading of lots in
connection therewith.
§ 351-20 FREEHOLD CODE § 355-3
351:1130
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — Land which consists of any soil type
designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained and alluvial soils in the
Soil Conservation Service surveys and/or which contains Atlantic white
cedar swamps, hardwood swamps, pitchpine, lowlands, open bogs, ponds or
spungs.
ON-TRACT WASTE DISPOSAL — Both conventional and nonconventional
systems as defined and referred to in Chapter 385, Sewage Disposal
Systems, of this Code.
OPEN BOG — A site with the following characteristics: seasonal high-water
table at or above the surface with large amounts of organic matter, low
fertility and extreme water acidity and where the ecological community is
made up of sphagnum moss, cranberry cover, sheep laurel, ferns and the
like.
PERCOLATION — On-tract measurement of the horizontal and vertical
movement of water generally expressed in minutes to the inch in a wet soil.
In the case where the percolation rate tends to fall in the lower end of the
range, i.e., five minutes or less, the potential impact of the proposed use will
be analyzed with stricter scrutiny.
POLLUTION — The condition of water resulting from the introduction of
substances of a kind and in quantities rendering it detrimental or potentially
dangerous to the public health or unfit for public use.
SEASONAL HIGH-WATER TABLE — The highest level below which the soil
is seasonally saturated with water as measured by any means acceptable to
the Township Board of Health.
SEWERAGE FACILITIES — Equipment used for and in connection with
treatment and/or transportation of sewage, including pipelines which
transport wastewater across watershed ridge lines.
SPUNG — A shrub thicket with a seasonal high-water table at or near the
surface.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — Those species or subspecies
of wildlife indigenous to New Jersey which are threatened or endangered as
determined by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:25-11.1 et seq., as amended to date.
§ 355-4. Application for development or construction.
A. Any application for development or construction upon lands which are
the subject of this chapter shall be made to the Planning Board.
§ 355-3 WATER § 355-4
351:1131
B. Initially, the Health Officer shall advise the Planning Board if the site or
any portion of it is subject to this chapter. Accordingly, the original
application shall be submitted with hydrologic data for every fifth lot
proposed for development, which information shall be obtained on
proposed lots in as precise a mathematical sequence as possible. If the
applicant proposes development on fewer than five lots, hydrologic data
will be submitted on the site as a whole.
C. If and in the event the initial determination of the Health Officer
demonstrates conditions on proposed lots which violate the standards
of this chapter, the applicant continuing to seek approval shall revise
the development plat to show no development on those lots or in those
areas affected and/or shall resubmit the application with data on each
and every proposed lot.
D. When acting upon such application, the Planning Board shall grant
approval only when and if it determines that the development or
construction:
(1) Shall not result in substantial:
(a) Impairment to the water resources of the area;
(b) Pollution from septic wastes;
(c) Consequential difficulties to the structures sought to be
constructed; and
(d) Endangerment of essential wildlife habitat; and
(2) Is consonant with the provisions of Chapter 190, Land Use, and
Chapter 142, Environmental Impact Statements, of this Code.
E. In making its decision, the Planning Board shall consider:
(1) The impact on water quality;
(2) The influence on the hydrologic drainage of the area;
(3) Suitability of the site for septic systems; and
(4) Any other information and data deemed to be pertinent and which
is relevant to the determination pursuant to the policy of this
chapter.
F. The applicant shall have the burden of proof as well as the
responsibility to provide the Planning Board and the Environmental
Commission with the data necessary to achieve approval. The Planning
Board may consult with the Environmental Commission, the Township
Health Officer, the Board of Health, and such other state, county and
municipal officials and agencies as it shall determine necessary to assist
in making determinations pursuant to this chapter.
§ 355-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 355-5
351:1132
§ 355-5. Standards.
Each application shall be reviewed upon its own merit and a determination
shall be made following analysis of the data as well as an on-site inspection.
Applications for development and construction on sites or parts of sites
falling into the following categories shall be approved only in accordance
with § 355-4 of this chapter.
A. Standard Number 1. Sites or parts of sites which are dependent upon
on-tract waste disposal (septic systems) and have a seasonal high-water
table less than five feet below existing grade level.
(1) Areas with seasonal high-water tables as referred to above have
severe limitations for the use of on-site disposal systems regardless
of the amount of fill and/or use of other tract enhancement
methods. Land areas in Freehold Township with seasonal highwater
tables less than five feet below the land surface are not
usually suitable for septic tank operation. Proposed alternative
systems and technologies are normally insufficient to avoid future
consequential difficulties.
B. Standard Number 2. Sites or parts of sites which are dependent upon
on-site waste disposal where percolation tests conducted in accordance
with Township procedures indicate a percolation rate of less than five
minutes to the inch.
(1) Many of the soils within Freehold Township have a low potential for
treatment and renewal of septic system effluents containing
nitrogen and phosphates. Under these conditions, too fast a
percolation rate can be as severe as a percolation rate which is too
slow. The rapid percolation rate increases the susceptibility of
groundwater to contamination. In order to maintain the quality of
the valuable groundwater, service water resources and aquifer
recharge areas of the Township of Freehold, a strict standard
regarding percolation rate is necessary.
C. Standard Number 3. Sites or parts of sites the development of which
will require a new sewerage or water facility which will result in the
alteration of the hydrologic balance.
(1) The intent of this standard is to control the depletion of
groundwater reservoirs and recharge areas within each watershed
within Freehold.
D. Standard Number 4. Sites or parts of sites which are determined to
contain habitats which are essential to the survival of animals identified
as "threatened" or "endangered" by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(1) Classification of the habitat referred to above shall be made by the
Freehold Township Environmental Commission in conjunction with
§ 355-5 WATER § 355-5
351:1133
§ 355-6. State regulations; administration. [Amended 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-26]
The regulations herein are intended to complement the Standards for the
Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems as
promulgated by the Division of Water Resources, New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection, N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.1 et seq., as
amended to date. The Planning Board shall be the sole forum for application
made hereunder and may apply its general jurisdiction thereto.
the Monmouth County Environmental Commission and/or the New
Jersey Rare and Endangered Species Commission.
E. Standard Number 5. Sites or part of sites located on or within 300 feet
of freshwater wetlands.
(1) Bogs, swamp forests, spung, white cedar swamps, and other
freshwater wetlands play a significant role in the maintenance of
environmental quality. These areas serve to retard runoff, purify
water, provide for groundwater recharge, and provide an important
habitat for many plants and animals, including rare, threatened
and endangered species. Alteration of these sites often results in
substantial impairment of their many natural resources, therefore,
construction and development shall not be permitted directly on
the portion of the site which falls into this category; provided,
however, that public bridges, roadways, trails and utility
transmission lines and distribution facilities shall be permitted in
wetlands, provided that:
(a) There is no feasible alternative route on site for the facility that
does not involve development in a wetland;
(b) The public need cannot be met by existing facilities or
modification thereof;
(c) The facility will not result in a significant adverse impact which
would result in an irreversible effect on the ecological integrity
of the wetland and its biotic components; and
(d) The proposed project complies with federal and state
regulations pertaining to floodplains and watercourses
(Chapter 166, Floodplains and Watercourses, of this Code).
(2) Additionally, to ensure that development on adjacent land areas
does not affect the integrity of freshwater wetlands, a buffer zone
of not more than 300 feet may be required for the purpose of
providing protection of the actual wetlands. Development may
occur within the buffer zone, provided the applicant has
demonstrated that the proposed development will not result in a
significant adverse impact on the wetland.
§ 355-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 355-7
351:1134
§ 355-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 361
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 355-7 WATER § 355-7
351:1135

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted as § BH:1-2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 361-1. Violations and penalties.
§ 361-2. Collection of fees and penalties. [Amended 5-9-2013 by
Ord. No. BH-13-01]
A. Maximum penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any
chapter adopted by the Board of Health of the Township shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500
for each offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the
Township or before another judicial officer having authority under the
laws of the State of New Jersey. The Court shall have the power to
impose the other and additional penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77
and 26:3-78.
B. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in
which a violation of any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
Board of Health exists shall constitute a separate violation.
A. As part of the statutory duties under New Jersey law, the Township
Board of Health must conduct certain plan reviews, inspections and
reinspections of facilities used by the public. In order to establish a
uniform set of fees, accessible in one location, a Schedule of Inspection
Fees is hereby adopted and incorporated in § 150-52F of the Freehold
Township Code.
B. All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter
adopted by the Board of Health shall be paid to the Treasurer of the
Township.
§ 361-1 WATER § 361-2
351:1137

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 3-9-2006 by Ord. No. BH-01-06]
§ 361-3. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the Board of Health ordinances of the
Township of Freehold of a general and permanent nature adopted by the
Board of Health of the Township of Freehold, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.,
and consisting of Chapters 361 through 394, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Township of Freehold,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 361-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1972 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 361-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 361-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Secretary of the Board of Health of the Township of
Freehold, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in
the office of the Secretary of the Township, to be made available to persons
desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 361-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to Part III of the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board
of Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into Part III of such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township
of Freehold" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 361-3 WATER § 361-8
351:1139
§ 361-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Freehold or the Secretary of the Board
of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be
published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Township. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the
office of the Clerk or Secretary for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 361-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk or Secretary to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 361-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
to be set by the governing body. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 361-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Freehold to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 361-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of Part III of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or
a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall
not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
§ 361-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 361-13
351:1140
§ 361-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 361-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 361-15. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 361-14 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to Ord. No. O-02-01.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 361-13 WATER § 361-15
351:1141
§ 361-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for Board of Health employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below in
Schedule A are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective
date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to
the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the
Code.)153
153. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 361-16B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 361, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article II.
During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions
will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 3-9-2006 by Ord.
No. BH-01-06." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on
file in the Township offices.
§ 361-15 FREEHOLD CODE § 361-16
351:1142
Chapter 364
ADMINISTRATION
§ 364-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Board of Health of the Township of Freehold" and is herein referred
to as the "code."
§ 364-2. President of Board of Health.
There shall be a President of the Board of Health who shall preside at all
its meetings. The President shall be appointed by the Board of Health from
among its members for a term of one year. 154
§ 364-3. Executive Officer.
There shall be an Executive Officer of the Board of Health who shall be
responsible to the Board of Health. The Executive Officer shall hold the
necessary license. He shall be appointed by the Board of Health for a term
of one year. The Executive Officer shall, subject to the superior authority
of the Board, be the general agent of the Board for the enforcement of its
ordinances and the sanitary laws of the State of New Jersey.155
§ 364-4. Employment of additional personnel.
The Board may employ such other personnel as it may deem necessary,
including technicians, inspectors and others necessary to carry out the
powers vested in the Board by law and by this Code. All such personnel
shall, where required, be appropriately licensed.
§ 364-5. Emergency powers of Executive Officer.
Whenever the Executive Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers without having
to resort to legal proceedings and without the necessity of giving notice
or holding any hearing which would otherwise be required under any
provisions of this Code:
A. Power to prevent the sale of food. The Executive Officer may prohibit
the importation into the Township or sale of any food, drink or other
item intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected
of being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
154. Editor's Note: Original Sec. BH:2-3, Secretary of the Board of Health, and Sec. BH:2-4,
Registrar of Vital Statistics, which previously followed this section, were repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. II).
155. Editor's Note: Original Sec. BH:2-6, Plumbing Inspector, which previously followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. II).
§ 361-16 ADMINISTRATION § 364-5
364:1143
§ 364-6. Right of entry.
§ 364-7. Abatement of nuisances.
B. Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Executive Officer
may order the seizure and destruction of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption which is unwholesome or dangerous
or likely to cause sickness or injury to the persons who consume it.
A. Inspection of premises. The Board of Health, its agents and employees
shall have the right to inspect any premises in the Township if they have
reason to believe that any provision of Part III, Board of Health
Legislation, of the Code of the Township of Freehold is being violated,
or as part of a regular program of inspection.156
B. Search warrant. If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses to
permit entry for the purpose of inspection, the Board of Health may
apply to the Municipal Judge for a search warrant. The application shall
be based upon an affidavit setting forth that the inspection is part of a
regular program of inspection or that conditions and circumstances
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or unsanitary
or unhealthy condition exists on the premises. If the Judge is satisfied as
to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of the
premises.
A. Notice to abate nuisance.157
(1) Whenever anything is declared by Part III, Board of Health
Legislation, of the Code of the Township of Freehold to be a
nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any
premises within the Township, notice shall be given to the owner or
person in control of the premises to remove or abate it within the
time specified not less than five days from the date of service in the
notice.
(2) Whenever anything is declared by Part III, Board of Health
Legislation, of the Code of the Township of Freehold to be a
nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any
public property, highway or other public premises or place, notice
shall be given to the person in charge to remove or abate the same
within the time specified. If that person fails to comply with the
notice within the time specified, the Board of Health or its agents
or employees may remove or abate such nuisance or condition in
the manner provided for a like condition existing on a private
premises or place.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
§ 364-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 364-7
364:1144
§ 364-8. Power to make rules and regulations.158
The Board of Health may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which
interpret or amplify any provision of Part III, Board of Health Legislation,
of the Code of the Township of Freehold or for the purpose of making
the provisions of Part III, Board of Health Legislation, of the Code of
the Township of Freehold more effective. No regulation, however, shall be
inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of said Part III, and no
regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater
than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any
provision of said Part III.
B. Abatement by Executive Officer. If the owner or person in control of the
premises, upon being notified as provided by Subsection A, does not
comply with the notice within the time specified and fails to remove or
abate the nuisance or condition, the Board of Health or its agents or
employees may proceed to abate the nuisance or condition or may
cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means
as shall be deemed proper.
C. Recovery of costs.
(1) Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the Township as a
result of the Board of Health, its agents or employees abating or
removing or causing to be abated or removed any nuisance or
unsanitary or unhealthy condition, such costs and expense may be
recovered in the following manner:
(a) In all cases where practical and permitted by law, such costs
shall be certified to the tax assessment authority and shall be a
part of the taxes next assessed against the premises upon
which the nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition was
located.
(b) Where it is impossible or impractical to proceed under
Subsection C(1)(a), the cost or expense shall be recovered in
an action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction, the
action shall be instituted by the Board of Health in the name of
the Township or ex rel the State of New Jersey.
(2) Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in
addition to and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties for
the violation of this section.
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
§ 364-7 ADMINISTRATION § 364-8
364:1145
Chapter 368
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 79.
§ 364-8 FREEHOLD CODE § 364-8
364:1146
ARTICLE I
Inoculation of Cats
[Adopted by Ord. No. BH-01-91 (Ch. BH-XI of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 368-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAT — Any member of the feline species, male or female.
OWNER — Includes the person or persons owning, controlling, keeping or
harboring a cat.
RUN AT LARGE — Applies to any cat off and not on the premises of the
owner.
STRAY CAT — A cat having no known owner, custodian or identification.
§ 368-2. Compulsory inoculation.
A. All cats over the age of six months must receive a rabies inoculation.
The owner must retain appropriate documentation from the inoculating
veterinarian or rabies clinic indicating that the cat in question has
received said inoculation. Such documentation must be made available
to any agent or employee of the Township of Freehold charged with the
responsibility of controlling or regulating animals upon request by said
agent or employee. Any cat which has not been inoculated or is not
exempt from inoculation pursuant to the terms of this article is subject
to confiscation by agents and employees of the Township of Freehold.
Any cat confiscated shall be impounded and can only be reclaimed by
the owner after the owner renders payment of all fees attendant upon
the confiscation and impoundment of said animal together with
payment for the inoculation required by this article.
B. The inoculation required by this article shall be performed by a duly
licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey, or by such other
persons as may be permitted to inoculate animals pursuant to the laws
of the State of New Jersey. The vaccination used must be of the type
approved by the United States government agency responsible for
licensing manufacturers of veterinary biologicals. Each cat shall be
inoculated against rabies annually unless the veterinarian's certificate
required by this article indicates a longer period of effectiveness for the
inoculation.
C. Exemptions to the rabies inoculation requirement:
(1) A cat which has not attained the age of six months;
(2) Any cat which the Department of Health, upon presentation of a
veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of an infirmity or
§ 368-1 ADMINISTRATION § 368-2
364:1147
§ 368-3. Impounding of cats; redemption; maintenance charge;
disposal of impounded cats.
§ 368-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 361, Article I,
General Penalty.
other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of
such cat shall be deemed inadvisable; or
(3) Cats in veterinary hospitals, kennels, pet shops, pounds or shelters,
cats in transit or cats brought into the Township temporarily for the
sole purpose of showing in cat shows or exhibitions.
A. Any cat seized and impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article
will be retained at the animal pound for seven days from the date of
seizure. If, after the seven-day period specified in this article, the
animal is unclaimed, the Animal Control Officer or any person
designated by him may cause the cat so impounded to be destroyed or
disposed of in the manner provided for by the New Jersey Animal
Control Act, Title 8, Chapter 23, Subchapter 23, Rules and Regulations
Governing the Sanitary Conduct and Operation of Kennels, Pet Shops,
Shelters and Pounds.
B. The owner or any person having lawful rights to any impounded cat
shall be entitled to redeem said cat upon furnishing satisfactory
evidence of such ownership to the Animal Control Officer. Any cat so
redeemed must receive a rabies inoculation, or, in the alternative, the
person claiming the animal must submit proof that the animal has
received a rabies inoculation.
C. Any person redeeming any cat seized pursuant to the terms of this
article shall pay a redemption fee of $25 to the Township of Freehold
and shall be responsible for all charges levied by the pound.
§ 368-2 FREEHOLD CODE § 368-4
364:1148
ARTICLE II
Licensing of Cats
[Adopted 6-14-2007 by Ord. No. BH-07-03]
§ 368-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAT — Any domestic or feral cat, neutered, spayed or otherwise.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a cat or permitting a cat to
remain on premises under his or her control.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, means and includes
every person having a right of property in the cat and every person who has
a cat in his or her keeping.
RUN-AT-LARGE — Applies to any cat off and not on the premises of the
owner.
STRAY CAT — A cat having no known owner, custodian or identification.
§ 368-6. Licensing provisions.
A. License, when required. Licenses shall be required for the following
cats of licensing age:
(1) Any cat owned or kept within the Township on the first day of
March of any year; [Amended 10-8-2009 by Ord. No.
BH-09-01]
(2) Any unlicensed cat acquired by any person during the course of any
year and kept within the Township for more than 10 days after
acquisition;
(3) Any cat attaining licensing age during the course of the year;
(4) Any licensed cat brought into the Township by any person and kept
within the Township for more than 10 days shall be registered with
the Township. No additional licensing shall be required;
(5) Any cat licensed by another state brought into the Township by any
person and kept within the Township for more than 90 days.
B. Application for license. Each application for license under this article
shall give the following information:
(1) The general description of the cat sought to be licensed, including
breed, sex, age, color and marking, and whether the cat is of longor
short-haired variety;
§ 368-5 ADMINISTRATION § 368-6
364:1149
(2) Name, street, and post office address and telephone number of the
owner of and a person who shall keep or harbor the cat;
(3) A certificate of duly licensed veterinarian which shall provide
evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, or any other agency
exercising jurisdiction thereof, or has been certified exempt as
provided by the regulations of the New Jersey State Department of
Health or other agency which exercises jurisdiction. Such
certificate shall be in accordance with all state regulations,
providing for duration of immunity, interval of inoculation,
certificate of vaccination or certificate of exemption. In the event
such certificate is not presented to the Health Officer, a license will
not be issued. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order the
applications are received.
C. Application for license, when made. Applications for licenses for cats
which are required to be licensed by the provisions of this article shall
be made before the 1st day of March of each calendar year. In all other
cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10 days of the
date upon which the cat in question first becomes subject to the
provisions of this article.
D. License record. The information on all applications under this article
and the registration number issued to each licensed cat shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Health Officer.
E. Fees. The person applying for a license shall pay a fee of $11 for each
cat. The same fee shall be charged for the annual renewal of each
license. Each person registering a cat of reproductive age which has
not had its reproductive capacity permanently altered through
sterilization shall be required to pay an additional fee of $19. In the
event the state legislature establishes a fee for registration tags for
cats, the same shall be charged accordingly. [Amended 3-8-2012 by
Ord. No. BH-12-01]
F. Expiration date. Each cat license and registration tag shall expire on
the last day of April of the calendar year following the calendar year in
which it was issued.
G. Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any cat
licensed under any kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound license issued by
the Township.
H. Disposition of fees. License fees and other moneys collected or received
under the provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the Township
Treasurer within 48 hours after collection or receipt and shall be placed
in a special account separate from any of the other accounts of the
§ 368-6 FREEHOLD CODE § 368-6
364:1150
§ 368-7. Impounding of certain cats.
Township and shall be used for the following purposes: Collecting,
keeping and disposing of animals liable to seizure pursuant to Township
ordinance; local prevention and control of rabies; providing anti-rabies
treatment under the direction of the local Board of Health for any
persons known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; all other
purposes prescribed by the Statutes of New Jersey governing the
subject; and for administering the provision of this article and that
article regarding licensing of dogs.159 Any unexpended balance
remaining in the special account shall be retained therein until the
end of the third fiscal year following and may be used for any of
the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of each fiscal year
thereafter there shall be transferred from the special account to the
general fund of the Township any amount then in the account which is
in excess of the total amount being paid into the special account during
the last two fiscal years next proceeding.
A. Causes for impounding. The Animal Control Officer shall take into
custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, any of the following cats:
(1) Any licensed cat running at large in violation of the provisions of
this article.
(2) Any cat off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring the cat which the Animal Control Officer or his agent has
reason to believe is a stray cat.
(3) Any female cat in season off the premises of the owner of or the
person keeping or harboring the cat.
B. Access to the premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered
to perform any duty under this article is authorized to enter upon any
premises to seize for impounding any cat which he or she may lawfully
seize and impound when the officer is in immediate pursuit of the cat,
except on the premises of the owner of the cat if the owner is present
and forbids same. If any cat to be impounded or seized wears a
registration tag, collar or harness showing the name and address of any
person or the owner of or the person keeping or harboring the cat is
known, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately serve upon the
person whose address is given on the collar, or on the person owning,
keeping or harboring the cat, a notice in writing stating that the cat has
been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not
claimed within seven days after service of the notice. A notice under
this subsection may be served either by delivering it to the person to
whom it is served, or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known
place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by forwarding it
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 79, Animals, Art. I, of this Code.
§ 368-6 ADMINISTRATION § 368-7
364:1151
§ 368-8. Regulations.
No persons shall own, keep or harbor a cat in the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this article and the following regulations:
§ 368-9. Cat bites.
Where a person has been bitten by a cat, the individual or his or her parent
or guardian if he or she is a minor, shall immediately notify the police. When
the owner or the keeper of the cat is notified by the police that the cat has
bitten any individual or individuals, the owner or keeper of the cat must
comply with the following procedures:
by mail in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his or her usual
or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
C. Administrative and impound fees.
(1) When any cat is seized by the Animal Control Officer, the owner
shall be liable to the Township for an administrative fee of $50.
(2) When any seized cat is not promptly claimed by its owner and the
Animal Control Officer has turned the cat over for impoundment,
the owner shall be liable to the Township for reimbursement of the
impoundment fee charged to the Township, plus a ten-dollar
processing fee.
(3) In the event the Township is required to initiate any action to
recover any of the fees in this article, all expenses of collection,
including reasonable attorney's fees, shall be the responsibility of
the owner.
A. Disturbing the peace. No person shall own, keep or harbor or maintain
any cat which habitually cries between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. or causes such other disturbance as to create a nuisance.
B. Running-at-large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any cat shall
permit it to run at large upon the public streets or any public park,
public building or any public place within the Township.
C. Property damage. No person owning, keeping or harboring a cat shall
permit it to do any injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery,
flowers, grounds or property, person or other animal.
A. Have the cat examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours;
B. Have the cat kept within quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel
for a period of 10 days;
C. At the end of 10 days, have the cat reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the cat's state of health forwarded to the Board of
Health.
§ 368-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 368-10
364:1152
§ 368-10. Animal Control Officer.
The Animal Control Officer appointed pursuant to § 79-12 or other person
duly serving as the Township's animal control officer may impound
unlicensed cats running at large in violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 368-11. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions
of this article shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $100 for a first
offense and, for a subsequent offense, a fine of not more than $500.
B. In the event the person violating these provisions is under the age of 18,
the parents, (joint and severally) or parent with whom the minor resides
shall be liable for the penalty provisions.
§ 368-10 ADMINISTRATION § 368-11
364:1153
Chapter 373
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 373-1. Applicability of state standards. [Added 3-9-2006 by Ord.
No. BH-01-06]
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. pertaining to retail food
establishments and food and beverage vending machines shall be enforced
in the Township of Freehold.
§ 373-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 361, Article I, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Township of Freehold.160
§ 373-3. Fees. [Amended 11-10-2005 by Ord. No. BH-01-05]
§ 373-4. Suspension or revocation of food handler's license.
A. The following fees shall be submitted to the Township of Freehold for
inspections and issuance of food handlers' licenses:
(1) Temporary food establishments (to be open less than seven days):
$25.
(2) One to 50 seats or less than 3,000 square feet: $100.
(3) Fifty-one to 200 seats or 3,000 square feet to 10,000 square feet:
$200.
(4) Two hundred one seats or more than 10,000 square feet: $300.
B. Late fees. Every licensed personnel who fails to complete his/her
renewal application as of January 31 of the licensing year shall be
assessed a late fee equaling 50% of the license fee. The late fees are set
forth as follows:
(1) One to 50 seats: $50 late fee.
(2) Fifty-one to 200 seats: $100 late fee.
(3) Two hundred plus seats: $150 late fee.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this municipality for
the violation by the licensee of any provision of this chapter or Chapter
12 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code or whenever it shall appear
160. Editor's Note: Original Sec. BH:6-1, Establishment of code, Sec. BH:6-2, Title, and Sec.
BH:6-3, Public record, which previously preceded this section, were repealed 3-9-2006 by
Ord. No. BH-01-06.
§ 368-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 373-4
364:1154
§ 373-5. Food handler's license required; training; regulations.
that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person,
firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is conducted in a
disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law of the United
States, the State of New Jersey, or any ordinance of this municipality, or
that the purpose for which the license has been issued is being used for
a purpose foreign to that for which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior
to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending
such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to
the person to be notified, or by depositing the same in the United States
Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such
person to be notified at the business address appearing upon said
license. At the hearing before the Board of Health, the person
aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be
heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by the Board of
Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Board of Health
concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it
may revoke or suspend the license held by the licensee.
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the Township
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board
of Health, and all fees and fines are paid in full.
A. Requirement. Any person or entity owning and/or operating a retail
food establishment as defined in the New Jersey State Sanitary Code
must secure a food handler's license from the Township Board of
Health.161 [Amended 3-9-2006 by Ord. No. BH-01-06]
B. Food service training. No retail food establishment shall be issued a
food handler's license unless it is in compliance with this § 373-5.
C. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BASIC FOOD SERVICE TRAINING — A minimum five-hour general
course of instruction for personnel in retail food establishments which
includes instruction in proper sanitation, personal hygiene, equipment
storage and handling, food preparation and handling, food microbiology
and temperature control, vermin control, garbage storage and disposal
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
§ 373-4 ADMINISTRATION § 373-5
364:1155
and other health-related subjects. Said course of instruction shall be
approved by the Board of Health.162
D. Participation in basic course required. The owner and/or manager of a
retail food establishment, and/or any full-time employee who shall be
the designated representative of either, applying for a retail food
establishment license must register for and successfully complete a
basic food service training course approved by the Board of Health
("certified personnel"). The person or persons chosen to attend the
training must be in a position to manage the proper operation of the
food establishment.163
(1) For these retail food establishments where there are over five or
more employees working on the premises, in any capacity, and any
given time, this course must be completed within one year of
adoption of this section.
(2) For all retail food establishments, this course must be completed
within two years of adoption of this section.
E. Presence of certified personnel.
(1) There shall be a certified personnel on a premises at all times
during food preparation. During other times when food preparation
is not taking place, there shall be a certified personnel available to
the retail food establishment during its hours of operation and
anytime during an emergency.
(2) Certified personnel shall be required to share and pass training and
information on to all employees of that establishment.
F. Continuing education. Every certified personnel, in order to continue to
enjoy that status under this section, shall be required to be recertified
by successfully completing at least two hours of additional/refresher
basic food service training no less frequently than every three years.
G. Posting of certification. Every food establishment shall cause to be
posted, in a prominent location for patrons, the certification of each
certified personnel.
H. Exemption.
(1) Any owner and/or manager or full-time employee of a retail food
establishment producing evidence of completion of a similar or
more comprehensive food handler's course shall be reviewed for
acceptance and exemption by the Board of Health.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
§ 373-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 373-5
364:1156
Chapter 380
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Noise — See Ch. 217.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 232.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 245.
Solid waste — See Ch. 290.
§ 380-1. Adoption of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the
code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the inclusion
of the text.
§ 380-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 380-3. Public record.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Township Clerk and for the use and examination of the public.
§ 380-4. Enforcing officials.
The code is amended in Section 1.1 to read as follows:
1.1. "Enforcing officials" shall mean and include regular and special
patrolmen and superior officers of the Police Department, the Building
Inspector or Building Official, the Plumbing Inspector of the Township, the
Executive Officer or any other official authorized by the Board of Health to
enforce this code and chapter.
(2) Retail food establishments where there is no food preparation, or
personal food contact, shall be exempted from this section.
§ 373-5 ADMINISTRATION § 380-5
364:1157
§ 380-5. Specific conditions declared a public health nuisance.
[Added 2-8-2018 by Ord. No. BH-18-1164]
The following conditions/situations/acts are determined to be a public
health nuisance and violative of the Public Health Nuisance Code:
§ 380-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 361, Article I, General Penalty.
Chapter 385
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
§ 385-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems; the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean the systems; and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a
part of it without inclusion of the text.
§ 385-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Standards for (Construction of) Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems" of New Jersey (1990), N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1
et seq. as supplemented and amended from time to time.
§ 385-3. Public record.
Three copies of the code have been placed on file in the offices of the Board
of Health and the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 385-4. Permits.
A. Maintaining, harboring or allowing six or more cats on any property.
A. Permit required. No person shall locate, construct or alter any
individual sewage disposal system until a permit for the location,
164. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 380-5, Violations and penalties, as
§ 380-6.
§ 380-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 385-4
385:1158
§ 385-5. Operation of new system.
§ 385-6. Emptying of septic system; continued certificate of
occupancy.
construction or alteration of the sewage disposal system shall have
been issued by the Board of Health.
B. Issuance of permit. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an
application is accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer
licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey stating that
the design of the individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in
compliance with the code.165
A. Certificate required. New individual disposal systems shall not be
placed in operation, nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions
thereto be sold or occupied, which must rely on such a system for
sewage disposal, until the Board of Health shall have issued a
certificate indicating that the disposal system has been located and
constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the
requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificate shall
not be required for alterations to an existing individual sewage disposal
system.
B. Issuance of certificate. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate
if an engineer licensed to practice professional engineering in New
Jersey submits a statement in writing signed by him to the Board of
Health that the disposal system has been located and constructed in
accordance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of
the code.
A. Emptying or cleaning of septic tank. No person shall engage in the
business of emptying or cleaning septic tanks, cesspools, privies or any
place used for the reception or storage of human excrement who does
not have a license to engage in such business issued by the New Jersey
Public Utilities Commission.
B. Proof that system has been pumped. Prior to the issuance of a
continued certificate of occupancy, the owner, at the time the certificate
is applied for, shall provide written proof to the Board of Health that the
septic system has been pumped out. For purposes of this provision,
written proof may be provided that the septic system has been pumped
out within the previous three years of the date of application for a
continued certificate of occupancy. If no such proof is provided, the
Health Officer shall recommend the rejection of the application for a
continued certificate of occupancy for the premises at which the septic
system is located.
165. Editor's Note: Original Sec. BH:8-4.3, Validity of permit, which previously followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
§ 385-4 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 385-7
385:1159
§ 385-7. Hearing on denial of license or permit.
In the event a license or permit or certification required by this chapter
is denied by the Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before
the Board within 15 days after request is made by the applicant; and, upon
the hearing, the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous
determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the hearing.
§ 385-8. Violations of code; stop order.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy the violation, and thereafter the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and, after issuance of such
order and the service of a copy upon the person connected with or working
in and about the erection or installation of the disposal system, or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done except as aforesaid.
§ 385-9. Fees and charges.166
The following fees and charges shall be established:
§ 385-10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 361, Article I, General Penalty.
Chapter 387
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 107.
A. For the filing of an application and plans and issuance of a permit to
locate, construct or alter an individual sewage disposal system: $350.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II).
§ 385-7 FREEHOLD CODE § 385-10
385:1160
ARTICLE I
Smoking in Parks and Recreational Facilities
[Adopted 10-8-2015 by Ord. No. BH-15-02]
§ 387-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the general public pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 by prohibiting smoking in
certain areas of the Township.
§ 387-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — All public parks,
playgrounds, and ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the Township of
Freehold, and all property owned or leased by the Township of Freehold
upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted
and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including all areas
adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to, any parking area,
driveway or lane.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from any electronic smoking
device.
§ 387-3. Smoking prohibited in public places; signs.
§ 387-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township,
the Township Health Officer, the Township Fire Official, the Township Code
Enforcement Officer, any Township Recreation Department employee and/
or any Township Recreation Commissioner.
A. Smoking is hereby prohibited in all municipal parks and recreational
facilities owned, leased or rented by the Township.
B. Notice of the prohibitions contained in this article shall be
conspicuously posted by signs stating "No Smoking" and shall reference
the applicable Code provisions.
C. "No Smoking" signs or the international no-smoking symbol shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by
this article. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall
indicate that violators are subject to fine. It shall not be a defense to a
charge under this article that the accused did not see such signs.
§ 387-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 387-5
385:1161
§ 387-5. Removal or defacing of signs or symbols.
No person shall remove or deface any no-smoking sign or symbol from any
areas to which this article applies, except in the performance of his/her
official duties as a Township employee or official.
§ 387-6. Violation and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250, and/or community service of
not more than 90 days, and/or by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days in the Monmouth County Jail, or any combination of fine, community
service and imprisonment, as determined in the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge.
§ 387-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 387-6
385:1162
Chapter 389
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115. Swimming pools — See Ch. 305.
§ 389-1. Applicability of state standards. [Added 3-9-2006 by Ord.
No. BH-01-06]
The provisions of State Sanitary Code Chapter IX, Public Recreational
Bathing, (N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq.) shall be enforced in the Township of
Freehold.
§ 389-2. Permit required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool until
a permit therefor shall have been issued by the Board of Health.167
§ 389-3. Permit fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ 389-4. Expiration of permit; renewal. [Amended 7-12-2008by
BH-08-01]
Permits issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually on
April 30 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall be submitted
together with the required fee prior to May 1 of each year.
§ 389-5. Denial and suspension of permits.
A. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a swimming pool:
$200.
B. For the issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool: $150.
C. For the issuance or renewal of a permit to operate a swimming pool:
$500. [Amended 3-9-2006 by Ord. No. BH-01-06]
A. Permits required by this chapter or code may be denied or suspended
by the Board of Health for failure to comply with this chapter or code.
B. The Board of Health shall afford the person whose permit to locate and
construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an
opportunity to be heard in public hearing; and following this to be
167. Editor's Note: Original Sec. BH:4-1, Code established, Sec. BH:4-2, Title of code, and Sec.
BH:4-3, Public record, which previously preceded this section, were repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 361, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. II).
§ 387-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 389-5
385:1163
§ 389-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 361, Article I, General Penalty.
Chapter 394
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 351.
Water resources protection — See Ch. 355.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 385.
informed of the Board's decision. [Amended 3-9-2006 by Ord. No.
BH-01-06]
§ 389-5 FREEHOLD CODE § 389-6
394:1164
ARTICLE I
Collection of Water Samples
§ 394-1. Purpose.
Before final certification and operation of a new well, other than an exempt
well as defined in § 394-2, and before the certification of an existing well
for the purpose of obtaining a continued certificate of occupancy (for rent,
transfer, or sale of a property), the person owning the lot upon which a
well is located shall have a sample of the well water collected and analyzed
by a laboratory certified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection. Tests shall be performed to determine the presence and amount
of individual hazardous contaminants and substances set forth in § 394-3
of this chapter. The water sample shall be taken as close to the pumping
well as possible. In no case shall treatment equipment be installed on a
new well prior to the first sampling. The results of said laboratory analysis
shall be forwarded directly by the laboratory to the Freehold Area Health
Department.
§ 394-2. Exemptions.
The following nonpotable water supply wells shall be exempt from the
sampling and analysis requirements:
§ 394-3. Parameters. [Amended 2-8-2007 by Ord. No. BH-07-0]
§ 394-4. Resamples.
In the event that the laboratory analysis of a water sample collected from
a well reveals that the presence of any of the hazardous contaminants or
substances identified in § 394-3 of this chapter in an amount exceeding
the maximum contaminant levels set forth or incorporated in this chapter
for the same, the Freehold Area Health Department must be notified prior
A. Any nonpotable well, the pumps and lines of which do not enter a
building, crawl space or garage and are directly connected to a
sprinkler system manifold;
B. Geothermal groundwater heat pump wells that are constructed and
installed as totally enclosed systems and are incapable of being used as
a potable water supply;
C. Fire protection wells as defined in the State Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq., which are incapable of being used as
potable water supply.
A. Test parameters shall be consistent with those specified in the New
Jersey Private Well Testing Act, N.J.A.C. 7:9E.
B. All water samples shall be collected, tested and analyzed in accordance
with criteria and procedures established by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection in N.J.A.C. 7:18-2.1 et seq.
§ 394-1 WELLS § 394-4
394:1165
to resampling the well for the purpose of determining corrective and
resampling procedures. The Health Department may also require a second
confirmation sample to be taken for a contaminant after a specified number
of days, not to exceed two weeks.
§ 394-5. Submission of sample results. [Amended 2-8-2007 by Ord.
No. BH-07-01]
The laboratory collecting the sample and performing the water analysis
required under §§ 394-3 and 394-4 of this chapter shall submit the results
of its analysis directly to the Freehold Area Health Department with the
following information:
§ 394-6. Restrictions.
A. The block and lot number and municipality of the property upon which
the well is located and the reason for the sample (i.e., new construction
or resale);
B. The name and mailing address of all persons owning the property upon
which the well is located;
C. The laboratory employee or the laboratory's authorized representative
who physically collected the sample from the well;
D. The date and time that the well sample was collected;
E. The specific point of collection of the water sample;
F. The date and time the sample was analyzed by the laboratory;
G. The type, size and purpose of the treatment unit, if installed.
A. No real property nor any interest in the same shall be granted a
continued certificate of occupancy which utilizes a well for its potable
water supply until: [Amended 2-8-2007 by Ord. No. BH-07-01]
(1) The well water has been sampled and analyzed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this chapter; and
(2) The Freehold Area Health Department has certified that the
laboratory analysis of the water sample collected from said well
does not disclose the presence of any of the hazardous
contaminants or substances set forth in § 394-3 of this chapter in
an amount which exceeds the maximum contaminant level
established under the Act, the Regulations or this chapter for the
same.
B. The granting of a certificate of compliance for a new well or a continued
certificate of occupancy for sale, transfer or rent shall be valid for a
period of one year.
§ 394-4 FREEHOLD CODE § 394-6
394:1166
§ 394-7. Right of entry.
The Freehold Area Health Department shall have access and entry to any
property upon which there is located a well or individual sewage disposal
system for the purpose of inspecting and/or testing the same.
§ 394-8. Closure of wells.
The Freehold Area Health Department may order any well which is
determined to be polluted or detrimental to the public health closed until
and unless the water is made potable.
§ 394-9. Permit required. [Added 2-8-2007 by Ord. No. BH-07-01]
No person shall drill, construct, install or redesignate the use of any well
until a permit shall have been issued by the Board of Health
§ 394-10. Fees. [Added 2-8-2007 by Ord. No. BH-07-01168]
The fee for the filing of an application and plans and issuance of a permit to
drill, construct, install or redesignate the use of any well shall be $50.
§ 394-11. Violations and penalties.
C. If there is a subsequent sale of the property or need for a continued
certificate of occupancy needed within one year of the original
certificate, the transferor need not obtain a new certification.
A. In addition to any other liability or penalty imposed by law, any person
violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as
stated in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. [Amended 5-23-2006
by Ord. No. O-06-16]
B. Each and every day in which a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter exists shall constitute a separate offense.
168. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 394-9 as § 394-11.
§ 394-6 WELLS § 394-11
394:1167
Chapter 395
QUARANTINE AND ISOLATION STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 34. Public health nuisances — See Ch. 380.
§ 395-1. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services, it is deemed advisable and in the best interests
of residents in safeguarding the public health and welfare to adopt model
rules for the quarantine and isolation of certain persons evidencing
symptoms of contagious diseases under specific circumstances as provided
in detail in the model rules referenced in § 395-2 hereafter.
§ 395-2. Title of model rules.
The model rules established and hereby adopted by this chapter are
described and commonly known as "Quarantine and Isolation — Model
Rules for Local Boards of Health," New Jersey Administrative Code (NJAC)
8:57-1.11, Appendix B.
§ 395-3. Copies of model rules.
The model rules adopted hereby are available as NJAC 8:57-1.11, Appendix
B, as well as, free of charge, through the Freehold Township Board of
Health.
§ 395-4. Violations and Penalties.
See model rules Section 1.10 (c) and (d).
Part IV: Shade Tree Commission Legislation
Chapter 399
GENERAL PROVISIONS, SHADE TREE COMMISSION
Chapter 400
SHADE TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 10, Art. I. Trees — See Ch. 336.
§ 394-11 FREEHOLD CODE § 395-4
394:1168
§ 400-1. Purpose.
This chapter contains Shade Tree Commission rules and regulations for
the planting, control, protection and improvement of shade trees upon
highways and public places in the Township of Freehold and providing
penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 400-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, jointstock
company, limited liability company, public utility and/or the agents of
any of the same.
PLANT CONSTRUCTION — As applied to public utilities, means
appurtenances and devices, including poles, wires, cables, subsurface
conduits, pipes and other requisite facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY — The same definition as contained in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13
and shall include any person franchised by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners of New Jersey to supply electrical, gas, water, sewage,
communicative (telephone), cable TV (and any other overhead wire)
services.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of Freehold
Township and its duly authorized representatives.
STREET —
TREE — Any tree or woody plant and any shrub, both annual and perennial,
located in any street.
§ 400-3. Required permits.
No person shall do to any tree on a street, without first having obtained a
permit from the Shade Tree Commission, any of the following acts:
A. Any public, Township-accepted and maintained highway;
Any Township-accepted and maintained park, and building grounds and
parkways as may be assigned to the Shade Tree Commission.
B.
A. Cut, prune (except when tree is located on property owned by a person
or entity doing or causing said pruning to be done), climb with spikes,
break, damage, remove or kill;
B. Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root;
C. Spray with any chemicals or substances that can injure a tree;
[Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-9]
§ 395-4 WELLS § 400-3
394:1169
§ 400-4. Required permits for all public utilities.
D. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall prevent any agency of government from affixing, in
a manner approved by the Shade Tree Commission, public notices upon
a tree in connection with the administration of governmental affairs;
E. Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree;
F. Create a hazard to any tree by the placement of building materials on
property on which a tree is located, or upon any property adjacent to
property upon which a tree is located;
G. Create conditions deleterious to the health of any tree by the placement
or distribution of chemicals, including salt;
H. Maintain a stationary fire or device which vaporizes noxious fumes
deleterious to the health of any tree;
I. Remove soil, either for trenching or otherwise, that will affect any tree;
J. Construct new sidewalks, driveways, retaining walls, or similar
structures, with any material whatsoever within 15 feet of any tree;
[Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-9]
K. Plant any tree.
A. A public utility shall first obtain a permit from the Shade Tree
Commission for the trimming or removal of any tree or other vegetation
located on any street, Township right-of-way or other Township
property.
B. The Shade Tree Commission may grant to a public utility a blanket
permit for the installation and the maintenance of subsurface and
aboveground plant construction.
C. A public utility may, during periods of emergency, and without first
obtaining a permit from the Shade Tree Commission:
(1) Install temporary attachments to any tree; and
(2) Make subsurface emergency repairs.
D. All tree work done while trimming around utility lines in and along
Township rights-of-way shall be by target pruning. All trimming is to be
conducted with consideration for the health of any tree while allowing
for proper utility line clearance. Any improper work will void the issued
permit. Any work performed under permit from the Shade Tree
Commission shall be performed in accordance with current
recommendations and approved standards of the National Arborist
Association, American National Standards Institute ("ANSI"), ANSIZ133.1
& 300A, and all currently accepted pruning standards for shade
§ 400-3 FREEHOLD CODE § 400-4
394:1170
§ 400-5. Public utility performance standard.
Every public utility shall insure that wires and conduits are fastened and
maintained in such manner as shall prevent damage to trees, including
damage by reason of leakage of gas or other substances injurious to trees.
§ 400-6. Violations and penalties; replacement assessment.
§ 400-7. Consent conceding limited jurisdiction to county.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:37-11a, the Commission hereby consents to the
Monmouth County Shade Tree Commission exercising jurisdiction in any
circumstance involving a public utility or cable television company under
which this Commission is prevented from seeking a monetary penalty under
§ 400-6A or from imposing an assessment under § 400-6B.
trees recognized by the New Jersey Board of Tree Experts. [Amended
6-29-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-9]
A. Except as provided in Subsection C below, any person who violates any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty
for each such offense. Each day that a violation of this chapter shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-16; 10-4-2006 by Ord. No. ST-06-01]
B. Except as provided in Subsection C below, in addition to the monetary
penalty provided in Subsection A above, the Commission may require a
person who removes or otherwise destroys a tree in violation of Chapter
336, Article II, Tree Preservation, of the Township Code, or in violation
of this chapter, to pay a replacement assessment to the Township, such
assessment to be determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-12b.
C. Any public utility or cable television company that clears, moves, cuts,
or destroys any trees, shrubs or plants for the purpose of erecting,
installing, moving, removing, altering or maintaining any structures or
fixtures, necessary for the supply of electric light, heat or power,
communication or cable television services upon any lands in which it
has acquired an easement or right-of-way, shall not be subject to any
penalty imposed by the Commission pursuant to Subsection A or B
above. This subsection shall not exempt any public utility or cable
television company from any penalty or replacement assessment
imposed for negligent actions, or for actions not taken within its
easement or right-of-way.
D. For purposes of this section, if a public utility or cable television
company takes action violative of any provision of this chapter or of
Chapter 336, Article II, Tree Preservation, of the Township Code, it
shall be deemed to create a rebuttable presumption of negligence.
§ 400-4 WELLS § 400-7
394:1171
Appendix
Chapter A410
USE OF TOWNSHIP ROADS BY COMMUNICATIONS
COMPANY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Telecommunications licensing — See Ch. 319.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A411.
§ A410-1. Permission and consent granted.169
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Verizon
(the "company"), it successors and assigns, to install, operate, inspect,
maintain, repair, replace and remove its communications facilities and other
transmission or process equipment, including underground facilities, such
as conduits, manholes, cables, wires, and all other facilities appurtenant
thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as cables, wires, antennas, poles,
posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable termination and distribution cabinets
and all other facilities appurtenant thereto, in, through, upon, along, over,
under and across all of the various public streets and ways, which include
roads, avenues, rights-of-way, sidewalks, highways, bridges, waterways,
and other public places, and parts thereof, throughout their entire length,
and to effect the necessary street openings and lateral connections to
curb poles, property lines and other facilities in the Township of Freehold
(the "Township") for said company's local and through lines and other
communications facilities in connection with the transaction of its business.
In the event that any public street or way where the company has facilities
is vacated by the Township, the Township agrees to reserve unto said
company the rights granted the company by the present ordinance.
§ A410-2. Location of poles, posts, pedestals and related
equipment.170
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities shall be located
and placed back of the curblines where shown on the official map(s) of
the Township; the poles and posts, however, shall be located a minimum
distance of six feet from the face of such curbline or edge of pavement, or at
the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets,
or other facilities of the company, its successors and assigns.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 400-7 FREEHOLD CODE § A410-3
A410:1172
§ A410-3. Underground conduits.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said
public streets and ways, and with the exception of lateral branches to curb
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining, and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A410-4. Notice of intent to work; permits required.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Township, through its designated representative,
of its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such
street opening or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall
be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A410-5. Indemnification of Township.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm, or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Township,
except that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Township, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A410-6. Curblines.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
§ A410-3 USE OF TOWNSHIP ROADS BY § A410-6
A410:1173
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed
by the Township, the company shall change the location of its aboveground
facilities covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so
that the same shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline so
long as the Township has acted in accordance with applicable law and
with reasonable care in establishing the new curbline and providing notice
thereof.
§ A410-7. Use of facilities by other companies.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Township may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
the company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A410-8. Use of poles by Township.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles
so long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Township during the pendency of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Township, which use shall
be limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required
for one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire
alarm signal control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no
other uses or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for
circuits for the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor
for wires, conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of
transmitting any signal to a private, commercial or residential location,
and which is normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided,
further, that no such use or attachment by the Township shall interfere
with the plant or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs
or expenses incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be
paid by the Township. It shall be the obligation of the Township to attach
its wires to the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or
manholes of the company, provided that, before proceeding with said work,
either by itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform
such work, the Township shall give the company 30 days' prior notice in
writing. All such work shall be performed under the supervision of said
company. The Township will indemnify and save harmless the company
from and against all claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner
in connection with the Township's wires or facilities or their installation,
maintenance, operation or removal, or the Township's use or enjoyment of
the company's plant or facilities provided under this section.
§ A410-6 FREEHOLD CODE § A410-9
A410:1174
§ A410-9. Rights of county or state.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County
of Monmouth or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have
such rights and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and
limitations of use as apply herein to the Township; provided, however, that
satisfactory prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the
Township and the company for the full protection of the respective interest
of each.
§ A410-10. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOWNSHIP — Includes any form of municipality or government into which
the Township or any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed,
annexed, or merged.
§ A410-11. Applicability.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment, and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired, or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors, or assigns within the Township. This ordinance shall cancel
and supersede all prior consent ordinances between the Township and the
company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A410-12. Maintenance of property and service.
The company shall maintain its property within the Township and shall
comply with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper
service at just and reasonable rates, and safeguard the public interest in
continuous and uninterrupted service within the Township.
§ A410-13. Severability.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
not affect any other provision of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall be
construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provision(s) had never been
contained herein.
§ A410-14. Expense of publication of ordinance; effective date.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required
in connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its
first reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for
said advertising from the publisher. Following passage of this ordinance,
§ A410-9 USE OF TOWNSHIP ROADS BY § A410-14
A410:1175
the Township Clerk shall provide the company with written notice thereof
by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any
subsequent amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the company and approval by the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners.
Chapter A411
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Cable TV Advisory
Committee — See Ch. 10, Art. IX.
Telecommunications licensing — See Ch. 319.
Use of Township roads by communications
company — See Ch. A410.
§ A411-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
COMPANY — Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc. ("Cablevision"), the grantee of
rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
§ A410-14 FREEHOLD CODE § A411-1
A410:1176
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
TOWNSHIP — The governing body of the Township of Freehold, in the
County of Monmouth, and the State of New Jersey.
§ A411-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent and that Cablevision's operating
and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A411-3. Grant of authority.
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Township of a cable television system and for the provision of any
communication service over such system as may be authorized by federal
or state regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant to said
consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A411-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A411-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16 and applicable state and federal rules
and regulations. The company shall also petition the Board for approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein and until such a time that a decision is made by
the Township and the Board relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ A411-1 USE OF TOWNSHIP ROADS BY § A411-6
A410:1177
§ A411-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A411-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to a residentially zoned area without the application
of line extension policy at tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard
installation.
§ A411-8. Extension of service.
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right-of-way outside its
service area to those residences within the franchise territory which are
located in areas that have a residential density of 25 homes per mile or
greater, or areas with less than 25 homes per mile where residents agree
to share the costs of such extension in accordance with the line extension
formula as provided by the company in its application for municipal consent.
§ A411-9. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Township, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable
television reception services in the Township. In the event applicable law
hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected but does not fix
the amount thereof, the Township and Cablevision shall negotiate in good
faith with respect to the amount thereof.
§ A411-10. Free service.
A. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide, free of charge, one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to
all state or locally accredited public schools and all municipal public
libraries, as well as municipal buildings located within the Township
and used for governmental purposes, as listed in Exhibit A attached.171
B. Upon written request from the municipality, Cablevision shall provide,
without charge, basic cable modem service to state and local accredited
elementary and secondary schools and municipal public libraries in the
municipality as follows: one standard installation per school or library
campus, one cable modem per installation, and cable modem service for
the term of this agreement for each installation, subject to the terms,
conditions and use policies of the provider of the cable modem service
as those policies may exist from time to time.
171. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ A411-6 FREEHOLD CODE § A411-10
A410:1178
§ A411-11. Construction/system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Township:
§ A411-12. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A411-13. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain, during the entire term of this
consent, a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
C. Upon written request from the municipality, Cablevision shall provide,
without charge, basic cable modem service to the Township Municipal
Building: one standard installation, one cable modem, and cable modem
service for the term of this agreement, subject to the terms, conditions
and use policies of the provider of the cable modem service as those
policies may exist from time to time.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Township, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or the performance of other work. The expense of any such
temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
§ A411-10 USE OF TOWNSHIP ROADS BY § A411-13
A410:1179
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A411-14. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A411-15. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect, at its sole cost,
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person and
$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident or
occurrence stemming from or arising out of the company's exercise of its
rights hereunder.
§ A411-16. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A411-17. Rates.
A. The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject
to regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
10% off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of cable television
reception service to any person 62 years of age or older who subscribes
to the company's cable television service, subject to the following:
(1) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age;
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled Program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21;
(3) The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service and shall not apply to any additional
§ A411-13 FREEHOLD CODE § A411-17
A410:1180
§ A411-18. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Township pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
Township or any other person during an emergency if, for any reason,
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A411-19. Equitable terms.
service, features, or equipment offered by the company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services; and
(4) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or perchannel
a-la-carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
C. In the event that Cablevision shall be required to increase the franchise
fee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48-5A-30(d), then at such time as the
new fee is instituted, Cablevision shall no longer be obligated to
maintain or offer the senior discount specified in § A411-17B above.
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Township's regulatory authority within the
Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Township lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which create the
unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good
faith appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the Township agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Township acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, that the Township shall be under no
obligation to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the
Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Township shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Township's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
§ A411-17 USE OF TOWNSHIP ROADS BY § A411-19
A410:1181
§ A411-20. Removal of Facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense, and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A411-21. Public, educational, and governmental access.
the instant consent, the Township agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of
competitive disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent.
B. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use, and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Township's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
C. Cablevision shall continue to provide and maintain the access return
line at One Municipal Plaza for use by the Township in the production of
noncommercial educational and governmental access programming on
the cable system. Based on need, Cablevision shall provide the
Township with one additional channel for PEG access purposes upon
120 days' advance written notice from the Township. The need for
providing the additional channel shall be conditioned upon usage
according to the following formula: anytime the existing designated
PEG access channel is in continuous use with the cable-casting of
locally produced programming (excluding programming of solely
character-generated messages or programming that is repetitive)
during at least 50% of the time between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
during any consecutive ten-week period, the Township shall have the
right to request that an additional channel be designated for PEG
access; provided, however, that if the usage ratio of the additional
designated channel should at any time fall below 15% (based on the
usage formula herein), use of the additional designated channel shall
revert back to Cablevision.
§ A411-19 FREEHOLD CODE § A411-21
A410:1182
§ A411-22. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance, or to the extent
that they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A411-23. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.
D. In consideration for the rights granted in this ordinance, the company
shall provide the Township with an initial grant in the amount of
$12,000. Such amount shall be paid to the Township within 60 days
following the receipt of a certified copy of the adoption of this consent
ordinance and its acceptance by the company, or within 30 days of the
grant of the certificate from the Board, whichever comes first. In
addition, beginning in the second year of the municipal consent and
annually thereafter through the ten-year term of the franchise,
Cablevision shall, upon written request, pay a grant to the Township in
the amount of $3,000 in each of the following years of the term of the
ordinance (the "annual grant"). The annual grant may be used by the
Township for any cable- and/or other telecommunications-related
purpose as the Township, in its discretion, may deem appropriate.
Cablevision shall not be obligated to make any additional payments
beyond year 10 of the franchise. The annual grant shall be payable to
the Township within 60 days from receipt of the Township's written
request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, should Cablevision apply for a
system-wide certification or otherwise convert its municipal consent to
a system-wide certification in accordance with applicable law, it shall be
relieved of any payments due and owing after the date of such
conversion or award of a system-wide franchise.
E. All PEG access support provided by Cablevision shall be for the
exclusive use of the company's customers in the municipality.
§ A411-21 USE OF TOWNSHIP ROADS BY § A411-23
A410:1183
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-05-33 Traffic amendment Not approved by
DOT
O-05-34 Bond NCM
O-05-35 Bond NCM
BH-01-05 11-10-2005 Food establishments
amendment
Ch. 373
O-05-36 11-29-2005 Noise amendment Ch. 217
O-05-37 11-29-2005 Registration of contractors
repealer
Ch. 123, reference
only
O-05-38 11-29-2005 Commercial solicitation Repealed by Ord.
No. O-13-7
O-05-39 11-29-2005 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-05-40 12-27-2005 Salaries NCM
O-05-41 12-27-2005 Bond NCM
O-05-42 12-27-2005 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-05-43 12-27-2005 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-05-44 12-27-2005 Traffic amendment Pending DOT
approval
O-05-45 12-27-2005 Sex offender residency
amendment
Ch. 273
O-05-46 12-27-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-05-47 12-27-2005 Lake Topanemus
Commission amendment
Ch. 10, Art. VI
O-05-48 12-27-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. III
§ A411-23 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1184
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-06-1 Traffic amendment See Ord. No.
O-06-30
O-06-2 Utility easement vacation NCM
O-06-3 Street vacation NCM
O-06-4 2-28-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-5 2-28-2006 Littering amendment Ch. 203
O-06-6 2-28-2006 Animal control Ch. 79, Art. II
O-06-7 2-28-2006 Sewers: prohibited
connections to public sewer
system
Ch. 270, Art. IV
O-06-8 2-28-2006 Property maintenance:
removal of grass, weeds,
brush and other debris
amendment
Ch. 245, Art. I
O-06-9 2-28-2006 Criminal history
background checks
Ch. 126
O-06-10 2-28-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-11 Exceed budget cap NCM
O-06-12 Street vacation NCM
BH-01-06 3-9-2006 Board of Health general
provisions: adoption of
Code by Board of Health
Ch. 361, Art. II
O-06-13 3-28-2006 Sex offender residency
amendment
Ch. 273
O-06-14 Salaries NCM
O-06-15 5-23-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-06-16 5-23-2006 Penalties amendment Chs. 1; 11; 190;
394; 400
O-06-17 5-23-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-18 5-23-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-19 5-23-2006 Lake Topanemus
Commission amendment
Ch. 10, Art. VI
O-06-20 Bond NCM
O-06-21 Bond NCM
O-06-22 Bond NCM
O-06-23 5-23-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-24 5-23-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1185
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-06-25 6-27-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-26 Revaluation of property NCM
O-06-27 7-13-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-28 Bond NCM
O-06-29 7-25-2006 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-06-30 7-25-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-06-31 Bond NCM
O-06-32 9-19-2006 Fire Department:
incentives for volunteer
emergency service
members amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. O-08-9
O-06-33 9-19-2006 Sidewalk construction and
removal amendment
Ch. 300, Art. II
O-06-34 9-19-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-35 9-19-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
ST-06-1 10-4-2006 Shade trees amendment Ch. 400
O-06-36 10-24-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-37 10-24-2006 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-06-38 10-24-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-06-39 10-24-2006 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 232
O-06-40 Bond NCM
O-06-41 11-28-2006 Coin-operated amusement
games amendment; land
use amendment
Chs. 75, Art. II; 190
O-06-42 11-28-2006 Refuse receptacles
amendment
Ch. 290, Art. I
O-06-43 Bond NCM
O-06-44 Salaries NCM
O-06-45 12-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-06-46 12-19-2006 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 67
O-06-47 12-19-2006 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 232
BH-07-01 2-8-2007 Wells amendment Ch. 394, Art. I
O-07-1 2-27-2007 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-07-2 2-27-2007 Payroll: Third-party payroll
disbursement
Ch. 43, Art. II
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1186
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-07-3 2-27-2007 Boards, committees and
commissions: Lake
Topanemus Commission
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. VI
O-07-4 Exceed budget cap NCM
O-07-5 3-27-2007 Taxation: Hotel and motel
occupancy tax
Ch. 311, Art. II
O-07-6 3-27-2007 Recreational vehicles Ch. 346
O-07-7 3-27-2007 Township property;
prohibited vehicles;
Ch. 332
O-07-8 4-24-2007 Commercial solicitation
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. O-13-7
O-07-9 4-24-2007 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-07-10 4-24-2007 Toy guns Ch. 333
O-07-11 5-27-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
Registration of beer kegs
before sale
Ch. 71, Art. III
O-07-12 Street sign NCM
O-07-13 5-22-2007 Administration of
government: Affordable
Housing Liaison
Ch. 2, Art. XX
O-07-14 Bond NCM
O-07-15 Bond NCM
BH-07-02 6-14-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 150
BH-07-03 6-14-2007 Animals: licensing of cats Ch. 368, Art. II
O-07-16 6-26-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-07-17 7-24-2007` Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-07-18 7-24-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-07-19 7-10-2007 Bond NCM
O-07-20 7-10-2007 General licensing
requirements amendment;
commercial solicitation
amendment; taxicabs
amendment
Chs. 195, Art. I;
288; 315
O-07-21 7-24-2007 Salaries NCM
O-07-22 9-25-2007 Bond NCM
O-07-23 9-11-2007 Joint property purchase NCM
O-07-24 9-25-2007 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1187
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-07-25 9-25-2007 Nomenclature change; land
use amendment
Chs. 127; 150; 162;
186; 190; 217; 232
O-07-26 9-25-2007 Dogs amendment Ch. 79, Art. I
O-07-27 9-25-2007 Salaries NCM
O-07-28 10-23-2007 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 315
O-07-29 11-20-2007 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-07-30 Not adopted
O-07-31 10-9-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 71, Art. I
O-07-32 11-20-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-07-33 12-18-2007 Salaries NCM
O-07-34 12-18-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-07-35 12-18-2007 Historical Committee
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. X
O-07-36 12-18-2007 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-07-37 12-18-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
registration of beer kegs
before sale repealer
Ch. 71, Art. III
(footnote only)
O-08-1 2-26-2008 Street vacation NCM
O-08-2 2-26-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-08-3 4-8-2008 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-08-4 4-8-2008 Administrative NCM
O-08-5 5-20-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-08-6 5-20-2008 Tree preservation
amendment
Ch. 336, Art. II
O-08-7 5-20-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-08-8 5-20-2008 Sports Code of Conduct
amendment
Ch. 295
O-08-9 5-20-2008 Fire Department:
incentives for volunteer
emergency service
members repealer
Ch. 26, Art. II
(footnote only)
O-08-10 5-20-2008 Board of Assistance
repealer
Ch. 10, Art. IV
(footnote only)
O-08-11 6-17-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-08-12 6-17-2008 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1188
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BH-08-01 7-12-2008 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 389
O-08-13 7-29-2008 Exceed budget NCM
O-08-14 7-29-2008 Bond NCM
O-08-15 7-29-2008 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-08-16 7-29-2008 Bond NCM
O-08-17 7-29-2008 Boards, committees and
commissions: Youth
Guidance Council
Ch. 10, Art. XIII
O-08-18 7-29-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-08-19 Repealing sex offender
ordinance
Not adopted
O-08-20 8-26-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-08-21 8-26-2008 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 182
O-08-22 9-23-2008 Salaries NCM
O-08-23 9-23-2008 Salaries NCM
O-08-24 Land use amendment Not adopted
O-08-25 10-21-2008 Boards, committees and
commissions: Shade Tree
Commission amendment
Ch. 10, Art. I
O-08-26 10-21-2008 Salaries NCM
O-08-27 11-25-2008 Drug-Free School Zone
Map amendment; Drug-
Free Public Property Zones
amendment
Ch. 134, Arts. I and
II
O-08-28 11-25-2008 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-08-29 11-12-2008 Bond NCM
O-08-30 12-16-2008 Salaries NCM
O-08-31 12-16-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-08-32 12-16-2008 Fees amendment;
municipal parking lots and
drives amendment
Chs. 150; 228, Art. I
O-08-33 12-16-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-08-34 12-16-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-1 2-24-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-09-2 3-17-2009 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1189
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-09-3 3-17-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-4 3-17-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-5 Not adopted
O-09-6 3-17-2009 Traffic signal NCM
O-09-7 Void
O-09-8 3-17-2009 Adoption of Code
amendment
Ch. I, Art. III
O-09-9 3-30-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-10 4-28-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-11 4-28-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-09-12 4-28-2009 Cable television franchise Ch. A411
O-09-13 5-26-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-09-14 5-26-2009 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-09-15 5-26-2009 Conveyance of easement NCM
O-09-16 5-26-2009 Bond NCM
O-09-17 5-26-2009 Bond NCM
O-09-18 5-26-2009 Township-owned property:
regulation for use of
certain parks
Ch. 332, Art. II
O-09-19 6-23-2009 Easement agreement NCM
O-09-20 6-23-2009 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-09-21 7-14-2009 Bond NCM
O-09-22 8-25-2009 Flood damage prevention
and watercourses
Ch. 166
O-09-23 8-25-2009 Property maintenance:
removal of grass, weeds,
brush and other debris
amendment
Ch. 245, Art. I
O-09-24 8-25-2009 Solid waste: refuse
containers/dumpsters
Ch. 290, Art. III
O-09-25 8-25-2009 Sewers: private storm
drain inlet retrofitting
Ch. 270, Art. V
BH-09-01 10-8-2009 Licensing of cats
amendment
Ch. 368, Art. II
O-09-26 10-13-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-27 10-27-2009 Refunding bond NCM
O-09-28 9-29-2009 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1190
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-09-29 10-27-2009 Salaries NCM
O-09-30 10-27-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 232
O-09-31 10-27-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-32 12-8-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-33 12-8-2009 Salaries NCM
O-09-34 12-22-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-35 12-22-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-09-36 12-22-2009 Manufactured/mobile
homes amendment
Chs. 79; 92; 111;
115; 150; 166; 182;
213; 261
O-09-37 12-22-2009 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-09-38 12-22-2009 Salaries NCM
O-09-39 12-22-2009 Games of chance and
bingo: licensing
Ch. 171, Art. II
O-09-40 12-22-2009 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-09-41 12-22-2009 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-10-1 2-16-2010 Boards, committees and
commissions: Human
Relations Council
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. XII
O-10-2
2-16-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-10-3 2-16-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-10-4 3-23-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 315
O-10-5 4-13-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-10-6 4-27-2010 Towing amendment Ch. 327
O-10-7 4-27-2010 Municipal parking lots and
drives amendment; public
and quasi-public parking
lots
Ch. 228, Arts. I
(footnote only) and
II
O-10-8 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-10-9 6-29-2010 Shade trees amendment Ch. 400
O-10-10 6-29-2010 Shade tree planting and
care amendment; tree
preservation amendment
Ch. 336, Arts. I and
II
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1191
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-10-11 6-29-2010 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-10-12 7-27-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 315
O-10-13 7-27-2010 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-10-14 7-27-2010 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-10-15 Not adopted
O-10-16 7-27-2010 Easement NCM
O-10-17 8-10-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-10-18 8-31-2010 Annual license fees: annual
license fees for facilities
authorized to conduct
amusement games with
prizes or awards.
Ch. 75, Art. III
O-10-19 8-31-2010 Amusements: amusement
games with prizes or
awards
Ch. 75, Art. III
O-10-20 8-31-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-10-21 9-28-2010 Bond NCM
O-10-22 9-28-2010 Bond NCM
O-10-23 9-28-2010 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 278
O-10-24 9-28-2010 Salaries NCM
O-10-25 10-26-2010 Municipal Alliance to
Prevent Substance Abuse
Committee amendment
Ch. 10, Art. XI
O-10-26 11-23-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-10-27 11-23-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-10-28 11-9-2010 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-10-29 11-23-2010 Donation of land NCM
O-10-30 12-21-2010 Salaries NCM
O-10-31 12-21-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-11-1 2-22-2011 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-11-2 2-22-2011 Recycling amendment Ch. 253
O-11-3 2-22-2011 Numbering of buildings
amendment; fees
amendment; land use
amendment
Chs. 92; 150; 190
O-11-4 2-22-2011 Land use amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1192
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-11-5 3-22-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-11-6 4-26-2011 Joint purchase of
development easement
Not adopted
O-11-7 4-26-2011 Salaries NCM
O-11-8 4-26-2011 Joint purchase of
development easement
NCM
O-11-9 4-26-2011 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 79, Art. I
O-11-10 4-26-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-11-11 5-24-2011 Salaries NCM
O-11-12 5-24-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-11-13 6-28-2011 Salaries NCM
O-11-14 6-28-2011 Tree preservation
amendment
Ch. 336, Art. II
O-11-15 7-26-2011 Leasing of capital
equipment
NCM
O-11-16 7-26-2011 Leasing of capital
equipment
NCM
O-11-17 7-26-2011 Bond guaranty NCM
O-11-18 7-26-2011 Bond guaranty NCM
O-11-19 7-26-2011 Purchase development
easement
NCM
O-11-20 8-23-2011 Bond NCM
O-11-21 8-23-2011 Bond NCM
O-11-22 8-23-2011 Salaries NCM
O-11-23 8-23-2011 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-11-24 9-27-2011 Amusement games with
prizes or awards
amendment
Ch. 75, Art. III
O-11-25 10-25-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-11-26 10-25-2011 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-11-27 11-29-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-11-28 11-29-2011 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-11-29 11-29-2011 Salaries NCM
O-11-30 12-27-2011 Salaries NCM
O-11-31 12-27-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-11-32 12-27-2011 Land use amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1193
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-12-1 1-31-2012 Salaries NCM
O-12-2 1-31-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-12-3 Land use Not adopted
BH-12-01 3-8-2012 Fees amendment; animals:
licensing of cats
amendment
Chs. 150; 368, Art.
II
O-12-4 3-27-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-12-5 4-24-2012 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-12-6 4-24-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-12-7 5-22-2012 Joint purchase of
development easement
NCM
O-12-8 5-22-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-12-9 5-22-2012 Public and quasi-public
parking lots amendment
Ch. 228, Art. II
O-12-10 5-22-2012 Bond NCM
O-12-11 5-22-2012 Sale of affordable housing
unit
NCM
O-12-12 6-26-2012 Bond NCM
O-12-13 6-26-2012 Bond NCM
O-12-14 6-26-2012 Emergency appropriation
for real property
assessment program
NCM
O-12-15 6-26-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-12-16 8-7-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-12-17 8-28-2012 Purchase of property NCM
O-12-18 8-28-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-12-19 10-2-2012 Bond NCM
O-12-20 10-2-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-12-21 11-20-2012 Licensing amendment Ch. 195, Arts. I and
II
O-12-22 12-18-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-12-23 12-18-2012 Historical Committee
repealer; land use
amendment
Chs. 10, Art. X
(footnote only); 190
O-12-24 12-18-2012 CPR/AED training Ch. 125
O-12-25 12-18-2012 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-12-26 12-18-2012 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1194
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-12-27 12-18-2012 Salaries NCM
O-12-28 12-18-2012 Fees amendment; rent
control amendment
Chs. 150; 261
O-12-29 12-18-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-13-1 1-29-2013 Salaries NCM
O-13-2 1-29-2013 Amusement games with
prizes or awards
amendment
Ch. 75, Art. III
O-13-3 1-29-2013 General licensing
requirements amendment
Ch. 195, Art. I
O-13-4 2-26-2013 CPR/AED training
amendment
Ch. 125
O-13-5 2-26-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-6 3-21-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-13-7 3-21-2013 Solicitation: commercial Ch. 288, Art. I
O-13-8 3-21-2013 Solicitation:
noncommercial
Ch. 288, Art. II
O-13-9 3-21-2013 Solicitation: "Do Not
Solicit" List
Ch. 288, Art. III
O-13-10 4-23-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-13-11 4-23-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-13-12 4-23-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-13-13 4-23-2013 Tree preservation
amendment
Ch. 336, Art. II
O-13-14 4-23-2013 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 232
O-13-15 4-23-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
BH-13-01 5-9-2013 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 361, Art. I
O-13-16 5-28-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-17 5-28-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-13-18 Not adopted
O-13-19 5-28-2013 Fees amendment; towing
amendment
Chs. 150; 327
O-13-20 6-25-2013 Returned checks
amendment
Ch. 101
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1195
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-13-21 6-25-2013 Eminent domain NCM
O-13-22 6-25-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-23 6-25-2013 Salaries NCM
O-13-24 7-9-2013 Lease of capital equipment NCM
O-13-25 7-9-2013 Lease of capital equipment NCM
O-13-26 7-9-2013 Guaranty to Freehold
Board of Education project
NCM
O-13-27 7-9-2013 Guaranty to Freehold
project
NCM
O-13-28 7-23-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-29 8-6-2013 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-13-30 9-24-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-31 9-24-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-32 11-12-2013 Fees amendment; land use
amendment
Chs. 150; 190
O-13-33 10-22-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-13-34 11-12-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-35 11-12-2013 Capital Improvement Fund
appropriation
NCM
O-13-36 12-17-2013 Salaries NCM
O-13-37 12-17-2013 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-13-38 12-17-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-13-39 12-17-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-13-40 12-17-2013 Amusement games with
prizes or awards
amendment
Ch. 75, Art. III
O-13-41 12-17-2013 Rent control amendment Ch. 261
O-14-1 2-25-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-14-2 2-25-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-3 4-22-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-14-4 4-22-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-5 5-27-2014 Bond NCM
O-14-6 5-27-2014 Bond NCM
O-14-7 5-27-20104 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1196
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-14-8 6-24-2014 Housing standards
amendment; property
maintenance: certificate of
occupancy for commercial
buildings amendment
Chs. 182; 245, Art.
III
O-14-9 7-29-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-10 7-29-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-11 7-29-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-14-12 9-9-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-13 10-28-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-14 10-28-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-15 12-9-2014 Salaries NCM
O-14-16 12-23-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-14-17 12-23-2014 Property maintenance:
care, maintenance, security
and upkeep of certain
residential properties
Ch. 245, Art. VI
O-14-18 12-23-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-19 12-23-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-20 12-23-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-14-21 12-23-2014 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-14-22 12-23-2014 Salaries NCM
O-15-1 1-27-2015 Salaries NCM
O-15-2 2-24-2015 Street vacation NCM
O-15-3 2-24-2015 Water/sewer capital project NCM
O-15-4 3-24-2015 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-15-5 3-24-2015 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-15-6 3-24-2015 Township-owned property:
prohibited uses
Ch. 332, Art. III
BH-15-01 4-9-2015 Quarantine and isolation
standards
Ch. 395
O-15-7 4-28-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-15-8 4-14-2015 Bond NCM
O-15-9 5-12-2015 Bond NCM
O-15-10 6-23-2015 Bond NCM
O-15-11 6-23-2015 Bond NCM
O-15-12 6-23-2015 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1197
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-15-13 7-21-2015 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 79, Art. I
O-15-14 8-4-2015 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 232
O-15-15 8-4-2015 Referendum on ballot NCM
O-15-16 8-4-2015 MCIA lease program NCM
O-15-17 8-4-2015 MCIA lease (Board of
Education)
NCM
BH-15-02 10-8-2015 Smoking in parks and
recreational facilities
Ch. 387, Art. I
O-15-18 10-27-2015 Exchange of easement NCM
O-15-19 11-24-2015 Vacation of sewer
easement; authorization for
sale of easement
NCM
O-15-20 11-10-2015 Salaries NCM
O-15-21 11-10-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
O-15-22 12-22-2015 Salaries NCM
O-15-23 12-22-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-15-24 12-22-2015 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-15-25 12-22-2015 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-15-26 12-22-2015 Consolidation of Board of
Adjustment with Planning
Board
Ch. 2; Ch. 10; Ch.
150; Ch. 190; Ch.
232; Ch. 286; Ch.
355
O-15-27 12-22-2015 Capital Improvement Fund NCM
O-16-1 2-23-2016 Personnel amendment Ch. 47
O-16-2 2-23-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-16-3 4-26-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-16-4 5-31-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-16-5 5-31-2016 General licensing
regulations amendment
Ch 195, Art. I
O-16-6 6-28-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-16-7 6-28-2016 Eminent domain NCM
O-16-8 Not adopted
O-16-9 7-26-2016 Water/sewer capital
improvement
NCM
O-16-10 8-9-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1198
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-16-11 8-9-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-16-12 7-26-2016 Bond NCM
O-16-13 7-26-2016 Eminent domain NCM
O-16-14 8-9-2016 Boards, committees and
commissions: Human
Relations Council
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. XII
O-16-15 11-1-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-16-16 12-20-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-16-17 12-20-2016 Salaries NCM
O-16-18 12-20-2016 Water/sewer capital
improvement
NCM
O-17-1 1-24-2017 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-17-2 2-21-2017 Fees amendment; rental
property registration
amendment
Ch. 150; Ch. 257
O-17-3 2-21-2017 PILOT agreement NCM
O-17-4 No left turn Tabled
O-17-5 4-25-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
O-17-6 6-27-2017 Bond NCM
O-17-7 6-27-2017 Capital Improvement Fund NCM
O-17-8 Not adopted
O-17-9 7-11-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-17-10 9-12-2017 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-17-11 9-12-2017 Capital equipment NCM
O-17-12 9-26-2017 Traffic amendment Ch. 11
O-17-13 10-24-2017 Sale of parcel NCM
O-17-14 10-24-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-17-15 12-19-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 150
O-17-16 12-19-2017 PILOT agreement
amendment
NCM
O-17-17 12-19-2017 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-17-18 12-19-2017 Land use amendment Ch. 190
O-17-19 12-19-2017 Salaries NCM
O-18-1 1-30-2018 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1199
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BH-18-1 2-8-2018 Public Health Nuisances
Amendment
Ch. 380
O-18-2 2-13-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-18-3 2-13-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-18-4 4-24-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
O-18-5 5-22-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 150
O-18-6 5-22-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-18-7 6-25-2018 Bond NCM
O-18-8 6-25-2018 Bond NCM
O-18-9 6-25-2018 Grant NCM
O-18-10 6-25-2018 Capital Improvement NCM
O-18-11 8-15-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-18-12 10-9-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-18-13 10-9-2018 Boards, Committees and
Commissions: Municipal
Alliance to Prevent
Substance Abuse
Committee Amendment
Ch. 10, Art. XI
O-18-14 10-23-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-18-15 11-20-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 150
O-18-16 12-18-2018 Salaries NCM
O-18-17 12-18-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 150
O-18-18 12-18-2018 Rent Control Amendment Ch. 261
O-18-19 12-18-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 150
O-19-1 1-29-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 150
O-19-2 1-29-2019 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-19-3 1-29-2019 Land Use Amendment Ch. 190
O-19-4 2-26-2019 Property Maintenance:
Property Maintenance
Code Amendment
Ch. 245, Art. II
O-19-5 3-26-2019 Capital Improvement NCM
O-19-6 4-29-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
O-19-7 5-28-2019 Rental Property
Registration Amendment
Ch. 257
O-19-8 5-28-2019 Telecommunications
Licensing Amendment
Ch. 319
O-19-9 6-25-2019 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FREEHOLD CODE § DL-1
DT:1200
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-19-10 6-25-2019 Bond NCM
O-19-11 6-25-2019 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
O-19-12 7-23-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 190 30
O-19-13 7-23-2019 Capital Improvement NCM 30
O-19-14 7-23-2019 Leasing Capital
Equipment
NCM 30
O-19-15 10-15-2019 Purchase of Parcel NCM 30
O-19-16 11-26-2019 Purchase of
Easement
NCM 30
O-19-17 12-17-2019 Salaries NCM 30
O-19-18 12-17-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 150 30
O-19-19 12-17-2019 Private Sale of
Vehicles
NCM 30
O-19-22 12-17-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 150 30
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1201