Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
§ 1-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this Code and in the interpretation and
application of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted,
except as the context may otherwise require, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Business Administrator duly appointed
pursuant to the Charter and Chapter 4, Administration of Government,
or any Assistant or Acting Administrator serving in place of the
Business Administrator pursuant to the Charter or this Code.
CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan F of Chapter 210 of the New Jersey
Laws of 1950, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented,
and any and all statutory provisions of the State of New Jersey as may
be lawfully applicable to the municipality.
CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed pursuant to the Charter
or Chapter 4, Administration of Government.
COUNCIL — The local legislative body of the municipality constituted
and elected pursuant to the Charter.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the municipal government
established or designated by or pursuant to Chapter 4, Administration
of Government, as a "department," and any agency or instrumentality
of the municipal government not allocated or signed within such
organizational unit.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Council, as constituted under the
Charter.
MONTH — A calendar month, unless otherwise specifically provided.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Florence in the County of
Burlington, State of New Jersey, and any corporate successor thereof.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter
adopted, so long as it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other entity, as well as an individual.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
B. Word usage. For the purposes of this Code and any other ordinances
which were heretofore or are hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Florence
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council
of the Township of Florence, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 140, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Florence,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-3. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Florence by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
(1) The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the
future tense includes the present.
(2) Whenever words of the masculine or feminine gender appear in any
provision of the Code or ordinances of the Township, unless the
sense of the sentence indicates otherwise, they shall be deemed to
refer to both male and female persons. This construction shall
apply to gender-indicative suffixes or prefixes, as well as to genderindicative
words.
(3) The singular number includes the plural; and the plural number
includes the singular.
(4) "Writing" and "written" include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication used in paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
C. Construction. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and, if the
last day is a Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
§ 1-1 FLORENCE CODE § 1-5
1:4
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Florence" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-7. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Florence, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Mayor
and Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation of
Code or ordinances. [Amended 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3;
2-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2]
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the
law of the Township of Florence to be misrepresented thereby.
B. Anyone violating this section or any part of the Code or any ordinance
of the Township of Florence shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or
more of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
C. Each day on which a violation of an ordinance exists shall be considered
to be a separate and distinct violation and subject to the imposition of a
separate penalty for each day of the violation, as the court may
determine.
D. Whenever a fine is to be imposed in an amount greater than $1,250 for
violations of housing or zoning codes, the owner shall be provided a
thirty-day period during which the owner shall be afforded the
opportunity to cure or abate the condition and shall be afforded the
opportunity for a hearing before the court for an independent
determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of
the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if the
court has determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed.
§ 1-10 FLORENCE CODE § 1-14
1:6
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to February 19, 1992.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance dealing with mercantile licenses.
N. Any ordinance dealing with noise.
O. Any ordinance concerning personnel policies.
P. Any ordinance regarding election districts of the Township.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-15B, the following sections are amended or added: §§ 4-2,
4-5A, 4-8, 4-9A, D and E, 4-13, 4-16A, 4-23, 4-24, 4-36A, 4-38B, 4-43B(1)(a), 4-48A, 4-52B,
4-56, 4-60A, 8-7, 12-2C, 12-8, 15-8, 15-9B, 15-10, 15-12A, 15-14, 15-24, 29-3, 35-3F,
35-5B, 36-9, 36-11, 39-5, 39-8, 39-13, 41-5, 41-7, 41-13A and B, 41-14, 41-19, 43-19A,
43-26, 53-9, 73-5, 79-7, 87-7, 91-3, 91-8F, 91-10B(1), 91-15E, 91-16C, 91-36B(10)(c),
91-69A, 91-70, 91-117, 91-152A, 91-162, 91-163, 91-276B, 91-280, 95-1, 95-13, 100-3,
104-3, 110-6, 112-2, 114-12, 114-26A, 116-12D(1), 116-19, 120-8, 122-8B, 122-14,
122-26D, 122-31A, 124-4, 126-1, 126-10, 131-11, 133-4B, 134-38F(7)(a) and (b), 134-47,
140-1, 140-28 and 140-38E. In addition, the following original sections are deleted: §§ 4-2,
4-14D(1)(b)[2], 4-29C, 29-4, 42-3, 64-4, 134-26B and Ch. 4, Arts. VII and XIX. A complete
description of these changes is in Ord. No. 1993-32, adopted 12-1-1993, on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-15 FLORENCE CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 2
FEES
§ 2-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be the consolidation of all municipal
fees charged, collected, and levied for services, permits, applications, and
documents. Any fee set forth in Chapter 2 shall prevail in the event of
any conflict with a fee set forth elsewhere in the Township Code. It is the
purpose of establishing Chapter 2 to add to it with a goal to consolidate all
fees into Chapter 2.
§ 2-2. Schedule A.
A current schedule of fees, "Schedule A," shall be created in order to
contain the current fees of the Township.
Schedule A
Item Fee
Vital records $25 for first certified copy, $2 for each
additional certified copy obtained at the
same time.
Recreation registration
[Amended 5-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-12]
No fee
Tennis Clinic Program [Added
5-15-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
$50 per person per period
Summer Camp [Added
5-15-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
$50 per person per week
Zoning permit $50 for residential uses
$100 for commercial uses
Electronic pet containment
zoning permits [Added
6-5-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-14]
No fee
Pet license (fee to be divided
between State of New Jersey
and the Township according to
law)
Altered dog $10 (effective 12-31-2010)
Non-altered dog $13 (effective 12-31-2010)
Cat $5
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:9
Schedule A
Item Fee
Late fee for dogs, post 1/31 $5
Late fee for cats, post 1/31 $2
Construction code plan
revisions
$50 per hour/per subcode
Note – not applicable to R-5 single-family
owner-occupied homes
Master Plan document $25
Housing element of Master Plan $25
Land Use Code Book $30
O.P.R.A. requests $0.10 per page
Copy fee $0.10 per page
Township Map (small) $2
Township Map (large) $5
Zoning Map $5
Flood Map letter $5
200 feet list, up to 40 names $10, plus $0.25 per additional name over
40
Yard sale permit $2
Boat ramp and designated
trailer parking area fees
[Added 9-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-262]
Florence Township resident
Daily permit $10
Annual permit $40
New Jersey nonresident
Daily permit $20
Annual permit $80
Out-of-state resident
Daily permit $50
Annual permit $500
Clothing bins (Chapter 101):
annual permit fee [Added
6-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-08]
$25 per bin
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect at 12:01 a.m. on January 1,
2013.
§ 2-2 FLORENCE CODE § 2-2
1:10
Schedule A
Item Fee
Property maintenance fees
[Added 4-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05; amended 6-25-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-15]
Landlord registration
certificate
$25
Landlord registration
certificate annual renewal
$25
Initial inspection and first
reinspection for a continued
certificate of occupancy for
resales
$60
Initial inspection and first
reinspection for a continued
certificate of occupancy for
rentals
$120
Second reinspection after
initial and first reinspection for
a continued certificate of
occupancy
$35
Third inspection after initial
and subsequent reinspection
for a continued certificate of
occupancy
$50
Fourth reinspection, and
subsequent reinspections, after
initial series to obtain a
continued certificate of
occupancy
$100
Inspection and reinspection
fees where the inspection is for
a property owned and occupied
by a senior citizen, at least 65
years of age
No fee
Landlord registration
certificate where the
application is for a property
owned and occupied by a
senior citizen, at least 65 years
of age residing in a unit of the
property and rents out the
remaining units
No fee
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:11
Schedule A
Item Fee
Administrative fee for
amending a continued
certificate of occupancy
$20
§ 2-3. Inspection fees. [Added 9-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11;
amended 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
Whenever the Township is called upon for an inspection of a lot by the
Township Engineer, for the issuance of a certificate of approval, certificate
of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, to determine
compliance with land use approvals, the fees, per lot inspected, shall be as
follows:
Type of Inspection
Fee
(per lot)
Buildings:
Grading plan, initial review $250
Grading plan, re-review $150
CO/TCO inspection/report $250
CO/TCO reinspection $150
In-ground swimming pools:
Grading plan and grading plan
updates
$125
Certificate of approval,
inspection and reinspection
$175
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 8.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 12.
Fire Department — See Ch. 15.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 18.
Police Department — See Ch. 22.
Purchasing — See Ch. 24.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 27.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 29.
§ 2-2 FLORENCE CODE § 2-3
1:12
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 4-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
(1972)" and is herein referred to as the "code."3
3. Editor's Note: Original § 4-2, Definitions and word usage, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1
1:13

ARTICLE II
Mayor
§ 4-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
The Mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the
municipality. He shall perform such duties and have such powers as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-40 and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43.
§ 4-3. Acting Mayor.
As provided by the Charter (Chapter 210, Section 3-12, of the Laws of 1950,
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-42), the Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator,
any other department head or the Township Clerk to act as Mayor whenever
the Mayor shall be prevented by absence from the municipality, disability or
other cause from attending to the duties of his office. During such time, the
person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all the rights, powers and
duties of the Mayor. Whenever the Mayor shall have been unable to attend
to the duties of his office for a period of 60 consecutive days, for any of the
above-stated reasons, an Acting Mayor shall be appointed by the Council,
who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor or the
then Acting Mayor.
§ 4-4. Authority to fill vacancies.
Whenever there is a vacancy in any office required by the Charter or
Code to be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council
and there is no holdover incumbent, the Mayor may temporarily fill such
vacancy (in the absence of any contrary provision in the Charter or
ordinances) by appointing an acting officer, including the designation of
himself as Acting Business Administrator in the event of a vacancy in that
office. Such appointee shall have all of the functions, powers and duties of
the office until it shall be filled permanently. Any such appointment shall
terminate not later than 30 days after the date of the appointment, unless
the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more extensions of such
period.
§ 4-5. Appointment and removal of department heads.
As provided by the Charter:
A. Each department shall be headed by a Director, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43, with the advice and
consent of the Council. Each department head shall serve during the
term of office of the Mayor appointing him and until the appointment
and qualification of his successor. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
B. The Mayor may, in his discretion, remove any department head after
notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a department
head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of his intention with the
§ 4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:15
Council, and such removal shall become effective on the 20th day after
the filing of such notice, unless the Council shall, prior thereto, have
adopted a resolution, by a two-thirds vote of the whole number of the
Council, disapproving the removal.
§ 4-5 FLORENCE CODE § 4-5
1:16
ARTICLE III
Council
§ 4-6. Legislative powers.
Pursuant to the Charter, the legislative power of the municipality will be
exercised by the Council.
§ 4-7. Election of officers; duties of President.
Pursuant to the Charter, the Council, at its first meeting after each election
for Councilmen, shall elect a President of the Council from among its
members to serve until the election and qualification of his successor. At
the same time, the Council may elect a Vice President of the Council to
serve until the election and qualification of his successor, who shall have
all of the functions, powers and duties of the President of the Council
whenever the President may be absent. In the absence of both the President
and Vice President of the Council, the Council shall elect a temporary
presiding officer, who shall have all of the functions, powers and duties of
the President during his absence. The President of the Council shall preside
at its meetings. He shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of
Council. He shall state every question coming before the Council, announce
the decisions of the Council and decide all questions of order subject to
appeal to the Council. He may vote on all questions, his name being called
last. He shall appoint all special committees of the Council and shall sign all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council during his presence.
§ 4-8. Responsibilities of Clerk. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
The Township Clerk shall keep a journal of Council proceedings and record
the minutes of every meeting and shall have such other functions, powers
and duties as are provided by the code.
§ 4-9. Meetings.
A. Regular meetings. The regular meetings of the Council will be held on
the first and third Wednesdays of each month at 8:00 p.m. [Amended
12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
B. Special meetings. As provided by the Charter, the Mayor may, and upon
written request from the majority of the members of the Council shall,
call a special meeting of the Council. In the call, he shall designate the
purpose of the special meeting, and no other business shall be
considered at such meeting. The call for a special meeting shall be filed
with the Township Clerk during regular business hours at least 48
hours before the time for which the meeting is called, and the Clerk
shall forthwith serve notice thereof upon each of the Councilmen by
leaving a copy of the call at their respective places of residence and/or
by telephone communication, if possible, at such place as each
Councilman, in writing, may designate. The Clerk shall also forthwith
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:17
§ 4-10. Agenda conference.
On the Wednesday preceding each regular meeting, the Council will hold
an agenda conference at 8:00 p.m. at the municipal building. All reports,
communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other
matters to be submitted to the Council shall be delivered to the Clerk,
whereupon the Clerk shall immediately furnish a copy thereof to each
member of the Council, the Mayor, the Business Administrator and the
Director of the Division of Law as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit.
§ 4-11. Conduct of meetings.
release copies of the call to the press and post at least one copy in a
prominent place near the entrance of the Clerk's office.
C. Location. All meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council
chambers in the municipal building, except that, in case of an
emergency making it impracticable to conduct the business of the
Council at such chambers with respect to the physical conditions of the
chambers or overcrowding due to the number of people desiring to
attend the meeting, the Council, upon such reasonable public notice as
the circumstances permit, may meet in or adjourn a meeting to any
other public building.
D. Meetings open to the public; executive session. All meetings of the
Council shall be open to the public. In order to prepare for meetings,
study matters before it and gather information, the Council may
convene as a committee of the whole and in informal conference, which
shall be open to the public, although public comment shall not be
permitted unless the President of Council invites comments. Such
conferences and meetings shall be designated as "executive sessions"
of the Council. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
E. Scheduling of special sessions and rescheduling of meetings that fall on
holidays are scheduled and advertised by the Council on a need basis.
[Added 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
A. Call to order. The President of the Council or, in his absence, the Vice
President shall take his chair precisely at the hour appointed for the
meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the absence
of the President and Vice President, the Clerk or his assistant shall call
the Council to order, whereupon the members of the Council present
shall elect a temporary Chairman, who shall forthwith assume the chair
and proceed with the meeting and who shall immediately relinquish the
chair upon conclusion of the particular business before the Council as
soon as the President or Vice President is present.
B. Roll call. As soon as a meeting is called to order, the Clerk or his Deputy
shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall
be entered in the minutes.
§ 4-9 FLORENCE CODE § 4-11
1:18
C. Quorum. The majority of all of the members elected for the Council
shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the
Council, but a lesser number may adjourn any meeting from time to
time.
D. Order of business. The business of the Council at each regular meeting
shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following
order: [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-4; 3-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-6]
(1) Call to order and flag salute.
(2) Sunshine statement and roll call.
(3) Approval of minutes of previous meeting(s).
(4) Financial correspondence.
(5) Regular correspondence and petitions.
(6) Approval of applications, permits and licenses.
(7) Public meeting.
(8) Introduction and adoption of resolutions and ordinances.
(9) Reports of officers, boards and committees.
(10) Reports of administration.
(a) Mayor.
(b) Administration.
[1] Administrator.4
[2] Assistant Municipal Administrator.
[3] Division of Law.
[4] Division of Engineering.
[5] Division of Water and Sewer Utilities.
(11) Unfinished business.
(12) New business.
(13) Report of local Board of Health.
(14) Miscellaneous.
(15) Adjournment.
4. Editor's Note: Original Subsection D(1)(b)[2], Deputy Administrator, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32.
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-11
1:19
E. Minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of the previous meeting is
requested by a member of the Council, such minutes may be approved
without a reading if the Clerk has previously furnished each member
with a copy thereof.
F. Rules of debate.
(1) The President or such other member of the Council as may be
presiding may move, second and debate from the chair, subject
only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on
all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and
privileges of the Councilmen by reason of his acting as the
presiding officer.
(2) Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon
recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the
question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous
language.
(3) A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when
speaking unless it is to call him to order or as herein otherwise
provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall
cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in
order, he shall be permitted to proceed.
(4) The Councilman moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution
shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
(5) A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Council may be
made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either
immediately during the same session or at a recessed or adjourned
session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing
side but may be seconded by any member and may be made at any
time and have precedence over all other motions or while a
member has the floor, and it shall be debatable. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent any member of the Council
from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a
subsequent meeting of the Council.
(6) A Councilman may request, through the presiding officer, the
privilege of having an abstract of his statement on any subject
under consideration by the Council entered in the minutes. If the
Council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the
minutes.
(7) The Clerk may be directed by the presiding officer, with consent of
the Council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on
any question coming regularly before the Council.
(8) A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided
without debate.
§ 4-11 FLORENCE CODE § 4-11
1:20
§ 4-12. Enforcement of decorum.
The President of the Council may request the Police Department to
designate a police officer to serve as Sergeant at Arms at Council meetings.
He shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer
for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at Council meetings, and
it shall be his duty to place any person under arrest who violates the order
and decorum of a meeting and to cause him to be prosecuted under the
provisions of this Code upon a complaint signed by the presiding officer.
§ 4-13. Silence recorded as affirmative vote; abstentions. [Amended
12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
Unless a member of the Council states, upon the call of the roll, that he is
abstaining, his silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. A member
of Council may abstain from voting on any matter. An abstention, for all
purposes, shall not be counted as an "aye" or "nay" vote nor as a vote either
for or against the particular matter in which the abstention is given. The
Council member abstaining from the vote shall be deemed to have taken a
strict neutral position on the matter.
§ 4-14. Standing committees.
There shall be no standing committee of the Council other than the
Committee of the Whole. The President of the Council shall be the presiding
officer of the Committee of the Whole, and the rules of proceeding in the
Council shall be observed in the Committee of the Whole as far as the same
may be applicable.
§ 4-15. Appointments.
(9) Any matter not covered by these rules shall be governed by
Roberts' Rules of Order, as revised.
A. Nominations submitted by the Mayor will be considered in the
Committee of the Whole at an agenda conference or executive session
and may be reported to the Council at a regular meeting. Any member
of the Council may move a nomination.
B. With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any member
of the Council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to
be filled. The Council will consider such nominations as Committee of
the Whole, which will report to a regular meeting of the Council. Where
there is a single office to be filled, the sense of the Council on the
appointment shall be taken as to each nominee, and the nominee
receiving a majority shall be deemed appointed. Where there is more
than one office to be filled, such as on a board, commission or authority,
the same procedure shall be followed with respect to each office
separately until the total number of appointments to be made has been
completed. In the discretion of the chair, a group of nominations may be
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-15
1:21
§ 4-16. Removals.
§ 4-17. Investigations.
Pursuant to the Charter (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37), the Council may, in its
discretion, require any municipal officer to prepare and submit sworn
statements regarding his official duties and performance thereof, and the
Council may otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, office or
agency of the municipal government.
§ 4-18. Annual audit.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the municipality's
accounts and financial actions as required by law. Such annual audit shall
be made by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey selected by
the Council.
considered at once where there is no apparent division in the Council
as to the nominees included in the group.
A. The Council may, for cause, remove any municipal officer other than the
Mayor or a member of the Council. A two-thirds vote of Council,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37, shall be required for the removal of any
municipal officer. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
B. The Council will consider a motion to remove for cause only after
removal has been duly proposed and considered at a meeting of the
Committee of the Whole.
C. A motion for removal shall set forth the alleged cause for removal,
making specific charges, and provide for notice and an opportunity to
be heard to the affected officer. The Clerk shall forthwith cause a copy
of the motion for removal, together with a statement of the causes and
charges involved and notice of the time and place fixed for the hearing,
to be served personally or by registered mail upon the officer affected.
A hearing shall be held not less than 10 days nor more than 15 days
after the date of such service and may be adjourned from time to time.
Such hearing shall be open to the public, and the officer charged shall
be entitled to be represented by his own counsel. Following the
conclusion of the hearing, the Chairman shall call for a vote on the
motion, which shall be determined by a majority vote of the Council.
§ 4-15 FLORENCE CODE § 4-18
1:22
ARTICLE IV
Ordinances and Resolutions
§ 4-19. Preparation and procedure for adoption.
§ 4-20. Veto; reconsideration.
The Council will consider any ordinance returned by the Mayor without his
approval pursuant to the Charter. Such reconsideration of the ordinance or
any item or part thereof from which the Mayor is constrained to withhold
his approval shall be at the next regular meeting of the Council following
the return of the ordinance by the Mayor. Whenever an ordinance has been
reconsidered by the Council following a veto by the Mayor, the Clerk shall
append to such ordinance a certification of the action of the Council upon
such reconsideration in substantially the following form:
A. All ordinances shall be prepared by the Division of Law upon direction
of the Council or Mayor. Prior to introduction, each proposed ordinance
requiring or permitting administrative action may be submitted to the
Business Administrator and the department head concerned, each of
whom shall submit to the Council an opinion as to the administrative
implications of the proposed ordinance or resolution.
B. An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the
Council. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited to a single
subject which shall be expressed in its title. After the first reading of an
ordinance, it shall be referred to the Committee of the Whole. Each
resolution shall also be referred to the Committee of the Whole upon its
introduction unless the Council shall provide for its immediate passage.
C. All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in a manner
provided by general law. Each ordinance passed by the Council shall be
promptly delivered by the Clerk to the Mayor. Each ordinance shall be
returned by the Mayor to the Clerk after the Mayor has affixed his
signature thereto or after the expiration of 10 days from the date of its
delivery to the Mayor in any event.
D. No ordinance, other than the local Budget Ordinance, shall take effect
less than 20 days after its final passage by Council and approval by the
Mayor where such approval is required, unless the Council shall adopt a
resolution declaring an emergency and at least two-thirds ( 2/3) of all
members of the Council vote in favor of such resolution.
§ 4-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-20
1:23
I hereby certify that the above ordinance, adopted by the Council on the
__________ day of _____________ 19 ___ , was delivered to the Mayor on
the ____________ day of _________________ 19 ___ and was returned to me
on the __________________ day of ____________ 19 ___ , together with the
Mayor's statement of the reasons for which he was constrained to withhold
his approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof. On reconsideration
thereof on the __________ day of _________ 19___ , (the Council duly resolved,
by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3) of its members, to enact such
ordinance, item or part thereof notwithstanding the Mayor's vote.) or (the
Mayor's veto was sustained.)
Dated __________________ ___________________________ , Clerk
§ 4-21. Failure of Mayor's approval within allotted time period.
Whenever an ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's signature by
reason of his failure to return it to the Council by filing it with the Clerk
within 10 days after it has been presented to him, the Clerk shall append to
such ordinance a certificate in substantially the following form:
I hereby certify that the above ordinance was adopted by the Council on
the ____ day of __________ , 19 __ and was presented to the Mayor duly
certified on the__________ , day of 19__, and upon his failure to sign it or
return it and file it with the Clerk within 10 days thereafter, said ordinance
took effect in like manner as if the Mayor had signed it.
Dated __________________ ___________________________ , Clerk
§ 4-22. Filing of reports and resolutions.
The Committee of the Whole shall file with the Clerk all petitions,
resolutions or other papers considered by it on each matter referred to the
committee. All reports to the Council and all resolutions shall be filed with
the Clerk and entered in the minutes of the Council.
§ 4-20 FLORENCE CODE § 4-22
1:24
ARTICLE V
Township Clerk
§ 4-23. Appointment; powers and duties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-32]
The Council shall appoint a Township Clerk for a term as provided by
law. Prior to his appointment, he shall have been qualified by training and
experience to perform the duties of his office. He shall serve as Clerk of the
Council and shall have the following functions, powers and duties provided
by the Charter and this code. He shall:
A. Keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Council and of
the proceedings of any Council committee upon request of the
Chairman.
B. Preserve and compile all ordinances and resolutions, and at the close of
the year, with the advice and assistance of the Division of Law, the Clerk
shall compile, codify and bind all the ordinances and resolutions then in
effect and shall properly index such compilation or codification and
provide for its publication.
C. Have and take custody of all official books, papers and documents of the
municipality for which no other repository is provided by Charter or
ordinance and preserve and keep them safely.
D. Provide secretarial and clerical services for the Councilmen in the
discharge of their official duties.
E. Cause the Municipal Seal to be affixed to instruments and writings
when specifically authorized by law or when necessary to exemplify any
document or record in his office or to certify any paper.
F. Publish ordinances as required by law in such official newspaper or
newspapers as may be designated by the Council.
G. Issue and deliver, with the assistance of the Police Department, all
notices of meetings required to be given to the Council.
H. Under the supervision of the Business Administrator, administer
regulatory licenses pursuant to the ordinances and general law.
I. Receive and transmit all communications to or on behalf of the Council.
J. Charge and receive for the use of the municipality such fees for
searches, transcripts and certifications as shall be authorized by
resolution of the Council.
K. Perform all other functions required by general law of a Township Clerk
pursuant to Title 19 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes and receive for
municipal use the fees prescribed therefor.
§ 4-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-24
1:25
§ 4-24. Maintenance of surety bonds. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-32]
The Clerk shall receive and keep in safe custody the surety bonds required
by the provisions of § 4-61 hereof.
§ 4-25. Deputy Clerk. [Amended 8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-25]
The Council shall appoint a Deputy Township Clerk who shall serve as the
Clerk of the Township in the absence of the Clerk and shall perform such
other duties as directed by the Township Clerk. The term of office shall be
for one year.
§ 4-24 FLORENCE CODE § 4-25
1:26
ARTICLE VI
Business Administrator, Assistant Municipal Administrator and
Administrative Assistant
[Amended 8-5-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-25; 3-1-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-4]
§ 4-26. Appointment; powers and duties.
§ 4-26.1. Assistant Municipal Administrator.
A. A Business Administrator shall be appointed, with such qualifications as
are provided by the Charter.
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, the Business
Administrator shall:
(1) Serve as chief of staff to the Mayor.
(2) Supervise the management, planning and operations of all
departments, acting as department head of each department,
except as hereinafter designated, provided that such supervision
shall not extend to the exercise of the control function in the
management of the finances of the municipality which is required
to be exercised by an officer of the municipality other than the
Business Administrator pursuant to Chapter 210, Section 3-18, of
the Laws of 1950 (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48).
(3) Prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the municipal government not inconsistent with
the Charter and code.
(4) Coordinate the operation and administration of the various
departments, divisions, offices and agencies of the municipal
government.
(5) Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and costs of municipal services.
(6) Perform such other duties as the code may require or as the
Council may otherwise prescribe.
(7) Assign and transfer employees temporarily from one department to
another as efficient administration may require, provided that any
such assignment or transfer shall not affect the civil service
classification status or compensation of any employee.5
5. Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, added 4-19-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-11 to follow this
subsection and provide for the appointment of a Deputy Business Administrator, was
deleted 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32. In addition, original Art. VII, Tax Assessor, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32. For current
provisions concerning the Tax Assessor, see § 4-36A.
§ 4-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.1
1:27
§ 4-26.2. Administrative Assistant. [Added 8-5-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-25]
The Mayor may appoint an Administrative Assistant who shall perform such
duties as are directed by the Mayor and Business Administrator.
A. An Assistant Municipal Administrator shall be appointed, as permitted
by § 40A:63-7.1 (et seq.) of the New Jersey Statutes, who shall assist the
Business Administrator in performing such duties he is directed and
those which are established herein.
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, Township Council
and Business Administrator, the Assistant Municipal Administrator
shall:
(1) Assist the Business Administrator in the administration of
municipal affairs and in the integration and coordination of
activities of the various departments.
(2) Assist the Business Administrator in the preparation and review of
the municipal budget.
(3) Assist the Business Administrator in installing modern
management methods and systems for all departments.
(4) Assist the Business Administrator in advising the Mayor and
Township Council on matters of policy.
(5) Assist the Business Administrator in editing and compiling public
information releases relating to municipal affairs and departments.
(6) Assist the Business Administrator in advising the Mayor and
Township Council on problems of personnel and administrative
organization.
(7) Prepare comprehensive reports and supervise the establishment
and maintenance of suitable records and files.
(8) Utilize various types of electronic and/cr manual recording and
information systems used by the municipality, office or related
municipal agencies.
(9) Perform such other duties as the Mayor and Township Council may
prescribe and those outlined in the then current job description.
(10) In the absence off the Business Administrator, act on matters and
perform the functions and duties of the Business Administrator.
§ 4-26.1 FLORENCE CODE § 4-26.2
1:28
ARTICLE VII
Organization and Administration
§ 4-27. Departments established.
The administrative functions, powers and duties of the municipality are
hereby allocated and assigned among and within departments established
or constituted by this code as follows:
§ 4-28. Personnel.
Each department shall have such officers and employees, with such
compensation and employment rights, as shall be authorized by the Charter,
code or other ordinance.
§ 4-29. Compensation. [Amended 12-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-26]
A. Department of Administration and Finance.
B. Department of Public Works.
C. Department of Water and Sewer.
D. Department of Police.
E. Department of Treasury.
F. Department of Fire.
G. Statutory boards, commissions and other bodies created, continued or
constituted by the Charter or code.
A. Whenever the Council shall establish compensation for an office,
employment or position within the range or ranges as prescribed by
ordinance, the Mayor, with the approval of a majority of the members of
the Council, will fix the compensation for the officer or employee within
such range or ranges, taking into consideration seniority, work
performance and relative efficiency of the respective offices and
employees.6
B. A salary resolution shall be adopted by the Council establishing the
annual salary for administrative personnel. [Amended 8-3-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-23]
6. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 27, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 4-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-29
1:29

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Administration and Finance
§ 4-30. Establishment; department head.
There shall be a Department of Administration and Finance, and the
Director of this Department shall be the Business Administrator. The
Business Administrator may designate a member of this Department as
Assistant Administrator to act for and in place of the Business Administrator
in his absence.
§ 4-31. Procedure for payment of claims; preparation of list of
payments.
A. Bills, claims and demands against the municipality shall be deemed
approved or disapproved in accordance with the procedure prescribed
in this section. A voucher on a form prescribed by the Administrator
shall be presented for each bill, claim or demand and shall be paid only
upon the audit, warrant and approval of the Administrator.
Disbursement shall be made by a combination warrant - bank check or
draft warranted and signed by the Chief Financial Officer and Township
Clerk. Should either the Chief Financial Officer or Township Clerk be
unavailable to sign a disbursement check, the Mayor is authorized to be
the second signature authorization. Payroll checks may be signed by
the Chief Financial Officer alone upon voucher and warrant of the
Administrator for total payroll. [Amended 10-2-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-31]
B. Signatures and countersignatures may be subscribed to a bank check
or a warrant check either manually or mechanically or by a combination
of such means, as the Administrator shall prescribe or approve in
writing filed in the office of the Clerk.
C. The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare a list of all bills, claims and
vouchers scheduled for payment for review and approval of the
Township Council at its regular meetings. Prior to submitting a bill list
to Township Council, the list shall be reviewed and approved by the
Business Administrator. All bills scheduled for payment must be
submitted and approved by the Business Administrator no later than
seven working days prior to the meeting. The bill list shall be prepared
in sufficient quantity for each member of Council, the Mayor and
Business Administrator, and at least one copy shall be filed with the
Clerk as a public record, open to examination in his/her office. Bills,
claims and demands may be approved for payment, when necessary,
between regular Council meetings, provided that three Township
Council members sign the voucher form, and further provided that all
other payment procedures above are followed. [Amended 10-2-1991
by Ord. No. 1991-31]
§ 4-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-32
1:31
§ 4-32. Tax searches. [Amended 10-4-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-24]
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint the
official tax search officer, who shall be authorized to make examinations and
issue official tax search certificates with respect to liens for the municipal
taxes and other charges which have the effect of a tax lien. The tax search
officer shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him and
until the appointment and qualification of his successor.
§ 4-33. Depositories.
All receipts of the municipality and any department thereof shall be
deposited in authorized depositories, to be designated by resolution of the
Council, and such deposits shall be made in such accounts and upon such
procedure as shall be approved or directed by the Business Administrator.
§ 4-34. Division of Administration.
There shall be a Division of Administration, the Director of which shall be
the Business Administrator, who shall perform the following duties:
§ 4-35. Division of Accounts and Control.
There shall be a Division of Accounts and Control, the head of which shall
be the Business Administrator. His duties shall be to:
A. Prescribe uniform forms and procedures for budget preparation by all
departments.
B. Develop and administer the municipality's personnel program,
including preparation of pay plans, recruitment of needed personnel,
in-service training programs and a complete system of personnel
records.
C. Review and analyze budget requests and assist in preparation of the
budget document.
D. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
centralized purchasing as hereinafter provided.
E. Coordinate the processes of appointment and removal of municipal
employees within the various departments and, to this end, review and
approve all proposed appointments and discharges of personnel prior
to any such action by a department, as well as maintaining an orderly
system for the consideration, review and adjustment of employee
grievances.
A. Prescribe and approve all financial systems and procedures and install
uniform charts of accounts.
B. Make revenue and expenditure estimates for the Mayor.
C. Maintain the central accounts and records.
§ 4-32 FLORENCE CODE § 4-35
1:32
§ 4-36. Division of Revenue.
There shall be a Division of Revenue, which shall consist of the Bureau of
Assessments and the Bureau of Collections.
D. Control all expenditures within the limits of appropriations through an
encumbrance system of budget operation.
E. Preaudit bills and claims.
F. Prepare warrant checks for the signature of the Treasurer.
G. Review and approve payrolls for certification by civil service and
payment by the Treasurer.
A. 7Bureau of Assessments. There shall be a Bureau of Assessments, the
head of which shall be the Tax Assessor, whose duties shall be as
provided below. The single, full-time Tax Assessor for the taxing district
of the Township of Florence shall perform the following duties:
(1) All powers and duties prescribed by law for a Municipal Tax
Assessor.
(2) To make assessments for the benefit of local improvements and, for
that purpose, have and exercise the powers and duties prescribed
by law.
(3) To maintain adequate assessment records for each separate parcel
of real property assessed or exempted and establish and maintain
such files, records and procedures as may be required for the
valuation and assessment of said property pursuant to law.
(4) Maintain a current Tax Map of the municipality as a public record
and cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or
character of real property assessed, employing for the purpose the
facilities of other departments as provided by the Administrative
Code of the Township of Florence.
B. Bureau of Collections. There shall be a Bureau of Collections, the head
of which shall be the Tax Collector, whose duties shall be as follows:
(1) To perform the functions of a Collector of Taxes under general law,
including, without limitation thereto, the rendering of bills for
property taxes pursuant to law, enforcement of tax collections by
tax sales and otherwise and the maintenance of tax accounting
records in such manner as may be prescribed or approved pursuant
to the Charter and code.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 4-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-36
1:33
§ 4-37. Division of Law. [Amended 2-21-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1]
(2) To receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes and municipal fees and charges and receive
penalties and interest pursuant to law.
(3) To make or cause to be made and certify searches for tax and other
liens on real property as may be authorized by law and charge and
collect for the use of the municipality the fee required pursuant to
law for any such search.
(4) To receive funds entrusted to or under the control of any
department and deposit all funds received by it in depositories
authorized by the Council.
(5) To perform the functions of the Collector of the amounts due
through the Water and Sewer Department, including, without
limitation thereto, the rendering of bills, enforcement of collections
and municipal liens as provided by law and the maintenance of
accounting records in such manner as may be prescribed or
approved pursuant to the law. [Added 12-4-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-34]
A. There shall be a Division of Law, the head of which shall be the Solicitor
(Township Attorney). The Township Solicitor shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council. The Township Solicitor shall be
an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the
Township. The Township Solicitor may be an employee of the Township
with the compensation as authorized by ordinance or may be
compensated in accordance with a professional services agreement.
B. The Township Solicitor shall have all powers and perform all duties as
are provided for the office of Township Solicitor by general law or
ordinances of the Township. The Township Solicitor shall represent the
Township in all judicial and administrative proceedings in which the
Township or any of its officers or agencies may be a party or have an
interest. In furtherance of the general powers and duties, both without
limitation thereto, the Township Solicitor shall:
(1) Provide legal advice and assistance to the Mayor and Council and
to all other departments and prosecute and defend actions and
proceedings by and against the municipality.
(2) Draft ordinances and resolutions and advise as to their form and
sufficiency prior to passage.
(3) Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and
instruments prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 4-36 FLORENCE CODE § 4-37
1:34
(4) Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest in the municipality as he may, in his discretion, determine
to be necessary or desirable or as directed by the Mayor or Council.
(5) Subject to the approval of the Mayor or Council, have power to
enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any
litigation in which the municipality is involved, provided that this
subsection shall not operate to limit or abridge the discretion of the
Solicitor handling any matter in regard to the proper conduct of
any trial, action or proceeding or deprive him of the powers and
privileges ordinarily exercised in judicial proceedings by counsel
acting for private clients.
(6) Render opinions, in writing, upon any question of law submitted to
him by the Mayor, the Council, the Business Administrator or the
head of any department with respect to their official powers and
duties.
(7) Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the municipality's interest and report thereon from
time to time as the Mayor or Council may require.
(8) When designated by the Mayor or Council, conduct prosecutions
for crimes and offenses recognizable by the Florence Township
Municipal Court, including violations of ordinances of the
municipality, complaints of any department under state law and for
violations of rules or regulations duly promulgated by any
department.
(9) Appoint special counsel to assist in the preparation, trial or
argument of such legal matters or proceedings as he may
determine whenever he deems the interests of the municipality so
require, subject to the approval of the Mayor and within the limits
of available appropriations.
C. Township Prosecutor. There is hereby created within the Division of
Law the office of Township Prosecutor. For the purposes of prosecuting
violations of ordinances, the Township Prosecutor is hereby designated
as an Assistant Township Solicitor. The Township Prosecutor shall be an
attorney at law of the State of New Jersey who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council. The term of the Township
Prosecutor shall begin on the first day of January of the year of
appointment and shall continue for a period of one year or until a
successor has been appointed and qualified. The Township Prosecutor
shall prosecute on behalf of the state or the Township any case to be
tried before the Municipal Court whenever requested to do so by the
Judge, the Mayor, the Business Administrator, the Township Solicitor or
the Chief of Police and shall assume any and all duties as may from time
to time be assigned to the office of Township Prosecutor by charter,
administrative code, police power or rule or regulation. The Township
Prosecutor may be an employee of the Township with the compensation
§ 4-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-37
1:35
§ 4-38. Division of Planning and Development.
There shall be a Division of Planning and Development, which shall be
comprised of the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment.
as authorized by ordinance or may be compensated in accordance with
a professional services agreement.
D. Substitute prosecutor. There is hereby created within the Division of
Law, for administrative purposes, a Substitute Prosecutor who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for a term of
one year. The Substitute Prosecutor shall receive the compensation as
shall be provided by ordinance. The Substitute Prosecutor shall be an
attorney at law of the State of New Jersey and shall serve as Prosecutor
in any matter assigned by the Township Prosecutor where there would
be a conflict of interest for the Township Prosecutor to handle the
matter or where the Township Prosecutor is not available to handle the
matter personally.
E. Public defender. There is hereby created within the Division of Law, for
administrative purposes, but independent from the Division of Law, a
Township Public Defender who shall be appointed by the Mayor for a
term of one year. The Township Public Defender shall receive the
compensation as shall be provided by ordinance or by professional
services agreement. The Township Public Defender shall be an attorney
at law of the State of New Jersey and shall represent those defendants
appearing in Municipal Court who are determined by the Court to be
indigent and whose representation is assigned to the Township Public
Defender by the Court.
F. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials
relating to the administration of the Division of Law shall be and remain
the property of the municipality. Upon the termination of his service
with the municipality, each legal officer shall forthwith surrender to his
successor all such property, together with a written consent to
substitution of his successor in all legal actions and proceedings then
pending to which the municipality is a party.
A. Planning Board. The Planning Board constituted and empowered
pursuant to law is allocated and assigned within the Division of
Planning and Development.8 The Board shall:
(1) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of a
Planning Board under general law and ordinances.
(2) Study and review plans, programs or projects with respect to all
matters related to planning and development of the municipality,
the regulation of land use, rehabilitation of housing, conservation
of neighborhoods, urban renewal and redevelopment.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 91, Land Development.
§ 4-37 FLORENCE CODE § 4-38
1:36
§ 4-39. Division of Engineering; Township Engineer. [Amended
12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-33]
(3) Study and report to the Council with respect to plans, programs
and projects which may be referred to it by the Council and submit
such report within such time as the Council may prescribe.
(4) Receive and consider findings and recommendations of the Division
of Engineering with respect to subdivision applications as
hereinafter provided.
(5) Receive and consider findings and recommendations with respect
to subdivision applications.
(6) Conduct continuous studies and collect statistical and other data to
serve as the basis for planning recommendations.
(7) Conduct studies and prepare materials for a Master Plan or general
plan of development for the municipality, including such elements
as may be authorized by law.
(8) Prepare and adopt a Master Plan or general plan of development
for the municipality, including such elements as may be authorized
by law.
(9) Be official custodian of the legally established maps of the
municipality, including, without limitation thereto, the Official Map,
Zoning Map and Election Map, as established, changed or amended
from time to time pursuant to law, except that this shall not include
the Tax Map.
B. Board of Adjustment. For purposes of the budget, personnel and
purchasing, the Board of Adjustment is allocated and assigned within
the Division of Planning and Development. The Board shall designate
and appoint one of its members as Secretary. The Board of Adjustment
shall, with the assistance of the Construction Code Official, administer
and enforce the Housing Codes, Plumbing and Electrical Codes, the
Zoning Ordinance and programs for neighborhood conservation,
improvement and rehabilitation. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
A. There shall be a Division of Engineering which shall:
(1) Provide all staff engineering, including engineering for water and
sewer facilities and general municipal engineering and land
surveying services.
(2) Prepare, maintain and preserve maps, charts and records of roads,
utilities, public buildings and structures and all public facilities
owned or operated by the municipality.
(3) Prepare, review and approve specifications for public works
contracts, supervise and inspect the execution of such contracts
§ 4-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39
1:37
§ 4-40. Division of Health and Welfare.
There shall be a Division of Health and Welfare, which shall be known as the
"Board of Health" and which shall consist of the Mayor, members of Council,
the Business Administrator, the Registrar of Vital Statistics, the Township
Welfare Officer, the Township Dog Warden and such other assistants and
deputies as the Council may otherwise provide by ordinance. The duties of
the Division of Health and Welfare shall be as follows:
and certify the satisfactory completion of work to authorize
progress payments pursuant to contract.
(4) Examine proposed preliminary and final subdivision plats, review
them for conformity with the municipal Subdivision Ordinance9 and
other land use requirements and advise the Planning Board as to
such matters and inspect and approve all installations made in
accordance with the requirements of the Planning Board prior to
the acceptance of any street or the release of any security related
to a subdivision approval, and the Planning Board shall not act on
any subdivision application unless and until the findings and
recommendations of the Division of Engineering have been
submitted to the Board and made a part of its public record.
(5) Maintain a Tax Map for the Tax Assessor in a current status and
properly record thereon all changes of ownership and information
provided pursuant to law.
(6) Inspect and control the maintenance of all municipal buildings and
structures and establish uniform standards for the protection and
preservation of such public property.
B. Township Engineer. Within the Division of Engineering there shall be
the Township Engineer, who shall be appointed by the Mayor as
provided by law and who shall be compensated for all regular services
as provided by the salary ordinance of the Township. The Township
Engineer shall be a duly licensed professional engineer of the State of
New Jersey and shall perform those duties as are prescribed by general
law and ordinance and as may be assigned to the Township Engineer.
A. To administer and enforce the local health ordinances with the
assistance of the Burlington County Board of Health.
B. To maintain and administer records of vital statistics, including births,
deaths and marriages, in accordance with state law and issue marriage
licenses pursuant to law.
C. To administer laws and ordinances relating to relief of the needy,
including the furnishing of all forms of public assistance to needy
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 91, Land Development, Part 2, Subdivision of Land; Site Plan
Review.
§ 4-39 FLORENCE CODE § 4-40
1:38
persons who are eligible for assistance provided by law through county
and state agencies.
D. To cooperate with other public agencies and institutions and with
voluntary institutions in the certification of medically indigent patients
for care and treatment.
E. To perform such other functions and duties as the head of the
department may from time to time require or deem necessary.
§ 4-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-40
1:39

ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Works
§ 4-41. Establishment; department head; divisions designated.
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be
the Business Administrator. The Department shall include the following
Divisions:
§ 4-42. Division of Streets and Roads, Parks, Grounds and
Sanitation.
Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be a Division of Streets
and Roads, Parks, Grounds and Sanitation, and the Division shall:
A. Streets and Roads, Parks, Grounds and Sanitation.
B. Recreation.
A. Maintain and repair the streets, roads, culverts and drainage of the
municipality and construct and reconstruct such streets as may be
authorized.
B. Provide for the cleaning and flushing of streets and the removal of
leaves as required.
C. Clear and remove snow and ice from the streets and provide such other
street services as may be required.
D. Operate and control the municipality's garbage and refuse collection
and disposal facilities and provide such service as may be authorized by
ordinance and operate any municipal incinerator, sanitary landfill or
other means for disposal of garbage and refuse.
E. Maintain, repair and clean the municipality's storm sewers.
F. Maintain and operate a municipal garage for the servicing and repair of
all municipally owned equipment, except as may be otherwise ordered
by the Business Administrator, and all such repairs and service shall be
provided at such hours and with such priority as the Business
Administrator may require.
G. Maintain and repair all municipal buildings, install office partitions and
assist the Division of Recreation in the construction, maintenance and
repair of recreational facilities, equipment and apparatus.
H. Assist the Department of Police in the maintenance, repair, replacement
and control of all traffic signals, signs, markers and related facilities.
I. Maintain all municipally owned and operated parks and grounds,
playgrounds and playfields, including but not limited to cultivation,
planting and maintenance of all publicly owned shrubs, trees, grass and
other greens.
§ 4-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-42
1:41
§ 4-43. Division of Recreation. [Amended 2-7-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-5]
J. Perform such other functions and duties as the Business Administrator
shall deem necessary and required.
A. Establishment, powers and duties. There shall be a Division of
Recreation, which shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To plan, develop and administer public recreational facilities.
(2) To provide for optimum coordination and development of the
Division's activities with other public and private recreational
facilities and programs.
(3) To promote and direct an all-year program of cultural and leisuretime
activities for children, youth and adults.
(4) To conduct an annual public meeting for the purpose of stimulating
comment on ongoing recreational programs as well as to
encourage suggestions for new activities.
(5) To adopt suitable rules and regulations for the conduct of persons
associated with recreational programs which receive municipal
funding or which use municipal facilities.
B. Recreation Coordinator; Community Substance Abuse Program
Representative; Recreation Committee; designation of subdivisions.
(1) Recreation Coordinator.
(a) The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall
appoint, for a term of one year, a Recreation Coordinator who
shall receive an annual salary as specified in the Florence
Township Salary Ordinance.10 The Recreation Coordinator
shall administer the functions of the Division of Recreation
relating to recreational programs and shall supervise all
activities generally with the advice and consent of the
subdivision heads and the entire Recreation Committee.11
(b) Major maintenance, repairs or replacement projects of a public
nature shall not be undertaken by the Division of Recreation
but shall be provided by the Department of Public Works,
although the Committee shall receive, whenever possible,
information on all planned projects. The creation Committee
shall submit a suggested five-year capital program with each
annual budget request.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Salaries and Compensation.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 4-42 FLORENCE CODE § 4-43
1:42
(2) Community Substance Abuse Program Representative. The Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, may appoint, for a term
of one year, a Community Substance Abuse Representative. The
Representative shall act as the liaison between the Recreation
Committee and an officially recognized community-based
substance abuse program. He shall serve without compensation.
(3) Recreation Committee.
(a) There shall be a volunteer Recreation Committee consisting of
13 members. The membership shall consist of the following
three classes:
[1] Class 1: one member of the Township Council to be
appointed by the Council. The Council member shall not be
a voting member of the Recreation Committee, except in
the case of a tie. The Council member shall serve for a oneyear
term on the Recreation Committee. The Council
member on the Recreation Committee may appoint, with
the advice and consent of the Council, an alternate to
serve in his absence. The alternate shall be vested with the
same powers as the Council member on the Committee.
[2] Class 2: the Recreation Coordinator and the Community
Substance Abuse Program Representative, who shall be
voting members of the Recreation Committee. They shall
serve one-year terms on the Committee.
[3] Class 3: other citizens of the municipality, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. Class 3 members shall be voting members of the
Committee. The terms of all Class 3 Recreation Committee
members first appointed under this subsection shall be so
determined that, to the greatest practical extent, the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over
the first five years after their appointment, provided that
the initial term of new members shall not exceed five
years. Thereafter, the term of each Class 3 Recreation
Committee member shall be five years.
(b) If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a Recreation
Committee members term, the vacancy shall be filled by
appointment as provided above for the unexpired term.
(c) All members of the Recreation Committee, with the exception
of the Recreation Coordinator, shall serve without
compensation.
(4) Subdivisions and Chairmen.
(a) The following subdivisions and subdivision chairmen are
hereby created:
§ 4-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-43
1:43
§ 4-44. Promulgation of rules and regulations; fees. [Amended
6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
The Department may adopt suitable rules and regulations for the safety
and conduct of persons using recreational facilities and for the preservation
of public peace and order at public events, and any person who shall
violate such rule or regulations may be adjudged a disorderly person. The
Department shall charge and collect for the use of the municipality a fee
for activities provided under this article or as specifically authorized by
Schedule A of Chapter 2 of the Code of the Township of Florence.
[1] The Subdivision and Chairman of T-Ball.
[2] The Subdivision and Chairman of Minor League Baseball.
[3] The Subdivision and Chairman of Little League Baseball.
[4] The Subdivision and Chairman of Male Basketball.
[5] The Subdivision and Chairman of Female Basketball.
[6] The Subdivision and Chairman of Soccer.
[7] The Subdivision and Chairman of Football and Related
Programs.
[8] The Subdivision and Chairman of Softball.
[9] The Subdivision and Chairman of Babe Ruth and Senior
Babe Ruth Baseball.
[10] The Subdivision and Chairman of the Summer Playground
Program, Tennis and Miscellaneous Programs.
[11] The Subdivision and Chairman for Liaison with
Community Substance Abuse Programs.
(b) It shall be the duty of the Subdivision Chairman to supervise
his respective subdivision activities, including the scheduling
of events and hiring of necessary additional personnel to
properly administer the particular program. The Chairman
shall attend as many program events as is possible and shall
have the responsibility to submit, with the assistance of the
Recreation Coordinator, the program's annual budget request
to the entire Recreation Committee. Such supervision of each
subdivision shall be with the advice, consent and approval of
the Recreation Coordinator and the entire Recreation
Committee.
§ 4-43 FLORENCE CODE § 4-44
1:44
ARTICLE X
Department of Water and Sewer
§ 4-45. Establishment; department head; powers and duties.
There shall be a Department of Water and Sewer, the head of which shall
be the Business Administrator. The Department shall have the following
responsibilities and duties:
A. To maintain and operate the municipality's sewerage, pumping and
treatment works.
B. To maintain and operate the municipality's waterworks.
C. To maintain, repair, clean and keep in operation the municipality's
waterlines and mains and sanitary sewer lines and mains.
D. To perform such other functions and duties within the Department as
may be necessary and required by the Business Administrator.
§ 4-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-45
1:45

ARTICLE XI
Police Department
[Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32; 6-2-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-10; 8-2-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-16]
§ 4-46. Establishment; designation of "appropriate authority."
[Amended 2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03; 5-2-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
§ 4-46.1. Chief of Police. [Amended 2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03;
5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
When the position of Chief of Police is filled, the Chief of Police shall be the
chief law enforcement officer of the municipality and shall be the head of
the Police Department.
A. There shall be a Police Department in and for the Township of Florence,
which shall be composed of such officers, full-time police officers and
special law enforcement officers as may be appointed by the Mayor.
There shall be the positions of Chief of Police and Public Safety
Director. However, if the position of Chief of Police is filled, the position
of Public Safety Director shall remain vacant. If the position of Public
Safety Director is filled, then the position of Chief of Police shall remain
vacant. When the position of Public Safety Director is filled, the Public
Safety Director shall be the "appropriate authority" as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq. When the position of Chief of Police is filled,
the Township Administrator shall be the "appropriate authority" as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.
B. The appropriate authority shall be directly responsible to the Mayor.
A. Appointment. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor and
shall hold office as provided by law.
B. Qualifications. The Chief of Police shall be a citizen of the United States
and shall be qualified by education, training and experience.
C. Powers and duties. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to policies
established by the appropriate authority:
(1) Be the executive head of the Police Department and shall be
responsible to the appropriate authority for the efficiency and
routine day-to-day operations of the Department and the
supervision of its activities, including the performance of all
functions assigned to the Chief of Police under any collective
bargaining agreements applicable to employees within the Police
Department.
(2) Be responsible for the observation and enforcement of all laws of
the state and ordinances within the jurisdiction of the Police
Department and shall perform such other duties as shall be
§ 4-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-46.1
1:47
§ 4-46.2. Public Safety Director. [Amended 2-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-03; 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
When the position of Public Safety Director is filled, the Public Safety
Director will be the head of the Police Department and appointed by the
Mayor or appropriate appointing authority and shall:
prescribed by ordinance or by directive of the appropriate
authority.
(3) Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the Police
Department and its officers and personnel.
(4) Have, exercise and discharge, as provided by law, the functions,
powers and duties of the police force.
(5) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
(6) Delegate any authority that the Chief of Police may deem necessary
for the efficient operation of the force to be exercised under the
direction and supervision of the Chief of Police.
(7) See that all persons connected with the Department are properly
instructed in their duties and shall give particular attention to the
training and instruction of new members thereof.
(8) Have control of all records and property of the Police Department
and designate any member of the Department to prepare reports
and keep the records in the manner that the Chief of Police may
prescribe, as well as to take charge of any property coming into the
custody of the Department.
(9) Furnish to the appropriate authority, in such form as shall be
prescribed by the appropriate authority, complete monthly and
yearly reports on the operation of the Police Department and make
such other reports as may be requested by the appropriate
authority.
D. In the event that the Chief of Police position is not filled, the Mayor shall
appoint the chief law enforcement officer.
A. Make, administer and enforce rules and regulations for the disposition,
conduct and discipline of the police force.
B. Establish and enforce appropriate rules and regulations for
maintenance, use and security of property and records of the
Department.
C. Organize, develop, direct, supervise and perform work involved in the
management of the Police Department.
§ 4-46.1 FLORENCE CODE § 4-46.2
1:48
§ 4-46.3. Authorized composition of Police Department. [Amended
7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-8; 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03;
2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03; 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15;
4-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
The Police Department of the Township of Florence shall be composed of
the Public Safety Director or Chief of Police (but not both at the same time);
up to three Captains; up to two Lieutenants; up to six Sergeants; and up to
30 police officers as may be appointed by the Mayor. It is the purpose of this
section to establish limits on the size of the Police Department, and nothing
herein shall require appointments or promotions to bring the staffing up to
the maximum authorized strength.
§ 4-46.4. Qualifications of Police Department members. [Amended
5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
D. Develop and prepare the Department budget.
E. Develop operational policy, work programs and budgetary policies.
F. Evaluate the effectiveness of work programs and procedures of all units
within the Department.
G. Promote close coordination and planning efforts.
H. Undertake special studies pertaining to public safety functions.
I. Establish and maintain helpful and cooperative relations with civic and
business organizations, schools, and court offices and other groups,
police and fire authorities in other jurisdictions, and others interested
in the maintenance of law and order and fire prevention.
J. Give assignments to staff.
K. Prepare reports.
L. Direct the establishment and maintenance of records and files.
M. Be responsible for the operation of the Police Department pursuant to
policies established by said Public Safety Director and shall be
responsible for the promulgation, updating and/or ratification of the
Rules and Regulations for the Police Department of the Township of
Florence. The Captain of the Police Department and all other police
officers shall be subordinate to the Public Safety Director.
A. Each applicant for a position as an officer or member of the Police
Department of the Township of Florence shall:
(1) Meet the basic requirements for a position as an officer or member
of the Police Department of the Township as provided by law.
(2) Be more than 18 and less than 36 years of age.
§ 4-46.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-46.4
1:49
§ 4-46.5. Hours of employment. [Amended 5-2-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
§ 4-46.6. Powers and duties of Police Department members.
[Amended 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(3) Be sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board
of Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New
Jersey that he or she is eligible for membership in the retirement
system.
(4) Be able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(5) Be of good moral character and must not have been convicted of
any crime involving moral turpitude.
(6) Satisfactorily serve a probationary period and successfully
complete a police training course as provided by law.
B. All applicants for the position of police officer, who have qualified under
Department of Personnel rules, shall make written application to the
Chief of Police or Public Safety Director and at the same time submit
such proof as shall be requested with respect to the above
qualifications.
A. Each full-time member of the Police Department shall devote his or her
whole time and services thereto, except that each full-time police
officer appointed to the Police Department of the Township of Florence
may, with the approval of the Township Administrator and subject to
any conditions established by the Township Administrator, pursue other
employment outside of the established duty hours. No outside
employment shall be such that it interferes with or conflicts with the
primary responsibility as a police officer of the Township of Florence.
B. Although certain hours will be allotted for the performance of regular
tours of duty, officers are considered at all times available for duty and
must act promptly at any time that their services are required, except
when on authorized vacation or medical leave or in the event of
disability.
A. The rights, privileges, powers and duties of the members of the Police
Department, including temporary officers and special law enforcement
officers, shall be those prescribed by the laws of the State of New Jersey
governing municipal police departments generally, by the Charter and
ordinances and resolutions of the Township of Florence, and by such
rules and regulations which may from time to time be established by the
Chief of Police with the approval of the appropriate authority or the
Public Safety Director.
B. The Police Department shall:
§ 4-46.4 FLORENCE CODE § 4-46.6
1:50
§ 4-46.7. Uniform and badges. [Amended 5-2-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
Upon appointment, there shall be furnished to each police officer a uniform,
badge and other necessary equipment, at the expense of the Township,
which shall remain the property of the Township and which shall be
maintained by the officer in a clean and usable condition.
§ 4-46.8. Removal. [Amended 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
The Chief of Police or Public Safety Director shall have the power to relieve
from duty any member of the Police Department for the violation of any
provision of this article or any rule governing the Police Department until
(1) Preserve the public peace, protect life and liberty, prevent crimes,
detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances
effective within the Township, suppress riots, mobs and
insurrections, disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages and
preserve order at all elections and public meetings and
assemblages.
(2) Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the use of the streets by vehicles and persons to protect
the safety and facilitate the convenience of motorists and
pedestrians, and make and enforce rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the ordinances of the Township for such
purposes.
(3) Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the Township, inspect and observe
all places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of
business requiring any state or municipal license or permit and
report thereon to the appropriate department.
(4) Respond to all fire alarms and assist the fire company in the
protection of life and property, in regulating traffic, maintaining
order and in enforcing observance of the Fire Prevention Code. The
Chief of the fire company may request the assistance of the police
in emergencies.
(5) Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for
the prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and
offenses and cooperate fully with the law enforcement and
prosecuting authorities of federal, state and county governments.
(6) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
(7) Subject to the approval of the Township Administrator, make,
administer and enforce rules and regulations for the disposition,
conduct and discipline of the Department.
§ 4-46.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-46.8
1:51
such time as complaint and charge against such member shall have been
disposed of by formal hearing.
§ 4-47. Special law enforcement officers. [Amended 2-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-03]
A. The Mayor may, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., appoint
special law enforcement officers for a term not exceeding one year and
revoke those appointments without cause or hearing.
B. Creation of position. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq., there is hereby created the position of special law
enforcement officers for the Township of Florence. Each special law
enforcement officer appointed shall be subject to the requirements of
this article and the additional requirements set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq.
C. Classification and powers. The classifications of the special law
enforcement officers shall be based upon the duties to be performed by
those officers and are established as follows:
(1) Class One. Officers of this class are authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties as may be
assigned by the Public Safety Director or, in the absence of the
Director, the Director's designee. The Class One officers are also
authorized to issue summonses for disorderly persons' and petty
disorderly persons' offenses, violations of municipal ordinances and
violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The use of firearms by
said Class One officers is strictly prohibited, and no Class One
officer shall be assigned any duties which may require the carrying
or use of a firearm.
(2) Class Two. Officers of this class are herewith authorized to exercise
full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed, full-time police officer. They shall be assigned such
powers and duties by the Public Safety Director, or the Director's
designee. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class may be
authorized only after the officer has been fully certified as
successfully completing training as prescribed by the Police
Training Commission established within the Department of Law
and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey.
D. Rules and regulations. All duly appointed special law enforcement
officers shall be subject to the ordinance of the Township of Florence
and to the rules and regulations governing the Police Department of the
Township of Florence, including, but not limited to, the Standard
Operating Procedures Police Manual of the Township of Florence.
E. Term of appointment. Special law enforcement officers shall be
appointed by the Mayor for a term not to exceed one year. In no event
§ 4-46.8 FLORENCE CODE § 4-47
1:52
§ 4-48. Adult school crossing guards. [Amended 2-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-03]
The Mayor may, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.1, appoint adult school
crossing guards for a term not exceeding one year and revoke those
appointments for cause and after a hearing before the Public Safety
Director. An adult school crossing guard shall not be a member of the Police
Department and shall not have the power to arrest or the right to bear
firearms. Every adult school crossing guard shall be under the supervision
and direction of the Police Department and shall comply with the rules and
regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of the regular police
officers of the Township.
§ 4-49. through § 4-50. (Reserved)
shall any appointment carry a term beyond the end of the calendar year
of the year in which said appointment is made.
F. Limitations on number of special law enforcement officers. The number
of special law enforcement officers employed by the Township of
Florence shall be limited as follows:
(1) Class One: not more than the number of regular officers employed
by the Township of Florence.
(2) Class Two: not more than 25% of the number of regular officers
employed by the Township of Florence.
(3) The establishment of the limitations herein shall serve to provide
maximum numbers only and shall not be interpreted to require the
appointment of any specific number of special law enforcement
officers. The number of special law enforcement officers actually
appointed shall be a management decision made by the Mayor in
accordance with the approved budget.
G. Residency requirement. No special law enforcement officer shall be
appointed to a position with the Township of Florence who is not a bona
fide resident of the Township of Florence, except that the Mayor may,
but is not required to, waive the residency requirement on a year-toyear
basis in specific cases where the Mayor determines that it is in the
best interest of the Township to grant such a waiver. Whenever a waiver
has been granted by the Mayor, the waiver may be subject to such
conditions as the Mayor may determine.
§ 4-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-49
1:53

ARTICLE XII
Department of Treasury
§ 4-51. Establishment, powers and duties of Chief Financial Officer.
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the Chief
Financial Officer, who shall have the following powers and duties in addition
to these prescribed by P.L 1938, c. 110:
A. To disburse all payments of the municipal treasury.
B. To have the safekeeping and custody of all municipal securities,
investments and bonds of the municipality.
C. To supervise proceedings for the issuance of municipal bonds.
D. To invest and reinvest surplus or idle funds of the municipality.
E. To maintain and reconcile the records of the municipal bank accounts
and provide the Business Administrator with a monthly reconciliation of
the bank accounts not later than the 10th day of each month.
F. To serve as certifying agent for the New Jersey Public Employees
Retirement System with respect to municipal employees.
G. To administer all matters relating to the certification of municipal
payrolls by the State Department of Civil Service and the status, rights
and benefits of employees of the municipality under the Civil Service
Law and under the employee benefit and welfare programs of the
municipality.
H. To act as the municipal safety officer and Chairman of the Safety
Committee for the municipal employees.
I. To promptly pay interest and principal on municipal obligations as they
fall due.
§ 4-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-51
1:55

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Fire
§ 4-52. Establishment.
A. There shall be a Department of Fire, which shall be divided into three
companies.
B. The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, one
First Assistant Fire Chief, one Second Assistant Fire Chief and one
Third Assistant Chief. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
C. The powers and duties of the officers of the Department, as well as
rules and regulations governing the Fire Department generally, shall be
as provided in Chapter 15, Fire Department.
§ 4-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-52
1:57

ARTICLE XIV
Statutory Agencies
§ 4-53. Statutory agencies enumerated.
The respective statutory agencies are allocated and assigned to the
supervision of the Mayor or of the Council, as the case may be, in
accordance with and dependent upon which of them is the appointing
authority. Statutory agencies are as follows:
A. Library. The public library as heretofore established and empowered
pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq.) is continued.
B. Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment is continued pursuant to
law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69).12
C. Municipal Court. The Municipal Court as heretofore established and
empowered pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.) is continued, and
the Judge shall hereafter be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council.13
D. Planning Board. The Planning Board as heretofore established and
empowered pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23) is continued.14
E. Housing Authority. The Housing Authority as heretofore established
and empowered pursuant to law is continued, and the members thereof
shall be appointed by the Council.15
F. Alcoholic beverage control. The local issuing authority for purposes of
alcoholic beverage control shall be the Council pursuant to N.J.S.A.
33:1-19.16
12.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 91, Land Development.
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 8, Court, Municipal.
14.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 91, Land Development.
15.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 18, Housing Authority.
16.Editor's Note: For issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses, see Ch. 36, Alcoholic
Beverages, Art. I.
§ 4-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-53
1:59

ARTICLE XV
Budget and Purchasing Procedures
§ 4-54. Preparation of budget.
§ 4-55. Administration of budget; appropriation allotment.
A. The budget shall be prepared under the direction of the Mayor. During
the month of November, the Mayor shall require all department heads
to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year and
to appear before the Mayor or the Business Administrator at public
hearings, which shall be held during that month, on the various
requests. During the period of December 1 through January 14, the
Mayor, with the assistance of the Business Administrator, shall analyze
appropriation requests and capital programs and may confer informally
with the Council with respect thereto.
B. The Business Administrator shall prepare all estimates of non-propertytax
revenues anticipated for the support of each annual budget.
C. The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by
law for municipal budgets and in accordance with the Charter. There
shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all items of
expenditure and revenue. Such analysis shall include a comparison of
the total number of positions of each class and grade to be authorized
by the budget with the actual number thereof employed at the
beginning and ending of the preceding budget period. So far as
practicable, such analysis shall include appropriate statements of the
cost of performance of functional programs and activities in terms of
quantitative, countable units of work for operating and capital
expenditures.
D. On or before the 15th of January, the Mayor shall submit to the Council
his budget document, which shall include his proposed current budget
in the form prescribed by the Local Budget Law, a capital budget and
such comment or statement as he may deem desirable.
A. The Department of Administration and Finance shall supervise the
administration of each annual budget. In consultation with the
department heads, the Business Administrator shall establish quarterly
or such other periodic allotments of appropriations as he may deem
necessary. Each department shall plan and administer its expenditure
program within the limits of such allotments.
B. If at any time during the budget year the Business Administrator shall
ascertain that the municipal government is faced with the probability of
incurring a cash deficit for the current year, he shall reconsider the
work programs and allotments of the several departments. Upon such
reconsideration and with the approval of the Mayor, he may revise the
budget allotments so as to forestall, so far as possible, the making of
§ 4-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-55
1:61
§ 4-56. Awarding of contracts; execution. [Amended 12-1-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-32]
All purchase contracts in excess of the maximum limit as allowed by law
shall be let, upon sealed bids, to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4. Where contracts are let by public competitive bidding,
the Council may, upon recommendation of the Business Administrator with
respect to all contracts other than public works contracts, let the contract in
the manner prescribed by law. The Mayor shall execute and sign contracts
let and authorized pursuant to the Charter and ordinances.
§ 4-57. Requisition for purchases; certification by Business
Administrator.
All purchases of any work, supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services for the municipality's account shall be made by the Division of
Administration pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the
department whose appropriation will be charged and the certification of
the Business Administrator that a sufficient unencumbered balance of
appropriation is available to pay therefor.
§ 4-58. Standards for requisitions and purchases established;
enforcement authority.
The Business Administrator shall establish and approve uniform standards
for requisitions and purchases. The Division of Administration shall control
the delivery of all supplies, materials, equipment and other items of
purchase and shall make or cause to be made proper test checks and
inspections thereof. The Division shall ascertain whether said supplies,
materials, equipment and other items purchased comply with the
specifications and shall cause necessary tests to be made to determine
whether the materials or supplies furnished are of the quality and standard
required.
§ 4-59. Purchasing procedure; emergency purchases.
commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized
during the fiscal year.
A. Each department shall follow such procedures and use such forms for
purchasing as the Business Administrator shall prescribe. Upon request
of the Business Administrator, each department head shall submit a
complete statement of the materials, supplies and equipment and work
and labor under contract, which will be required by the department
during the ensuing year, half year or quarter year as the Administrator
may determine, according to the best estimate of the department head.
B. In the event of an immediate need or requirement, superintendents of
the six departments hereinbefore provided under this code shall be
authorized to make periodic purchases not to exceed the sum of $50.
§ 4-55 FLORENCE CODE § 4-59
1:62
Such purchases may be made without the superintendent securing the
authorization of the Business Administrator.
C. Where purchases in excess of the amount as provided by statute are
made without competitive bidding, the Division of Administration shall
obtain, wherever possible, at least three price quotations for the item or
items purchased.
D. The Business Administrator shall establish a procedure for the
purchase of any items required for the immediate protection of the
public health, safety, morals or welfare of the municipality, which
procedure will permit such emergency purchases to be made for
specific purposes in a manner other than that prescribed by this Article.
§ 4-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-59
1:63

ARTICLE XVA
Purchasing Agent
[Added 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
§ 4-59.1. Creation of position.
There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the Township
of Florence.
§ 4-59.2. Appointment.
The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Township of Florence.
§ 4-59.3. Certificate required.
The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid qualified purchasing
agent certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division of Local Government
Services, Department of Community Affairs.
§ 4-59.4. Authority; responsibilities.
The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Township Council of the
Township of Florence, the authority, responsibility and accountability for
the purchasing activity pursuant to Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.); to prepare public advertising for and to receive bids and
requests for proposals for the provision or performance of goods, services
and construction contracts; to award contracts pursuant to New Jersey law
in accordance with the regulations, forms and procedures promulgated by
state regulatory agencies; and conduct any activities as may be necessary
or appropriate to the purchasing function of the Township of Florence.
§ 4-59.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-59.4
1:65

ARTICLE XVI
Officers and Employees17
§ 4-60. Compensation.
§ 4-61. Surety bonds.
§ 4-62. Conflict of interest.
A. Officers and employees shall receive such compensation as shall be
provided by Council pursuant to the provisions of § 4-29. [Amended
12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
B. All such salaries shall be payable at the same time and manner as other
municipal salaries, and all expenses actually incurred in the
performance of official duties shall be reimbursable.
A. Every officer or employee of the Township who, by virtue of his office or
position, is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds and any other officer or employee who may be
required so to do by the Council shall, before entering upon the duties
of his office or position, execute and deliver a surety bond in such
amount as may be fixed by resolution of the Council, binding him to the
municipality in its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and
faithful performance of his duty. Each officer or employee required by
law to give bond shall execute such a bond with sufficient surety and
deliver the same to the Township Clerk, except that the Clerk shall
deliver his bond to the Treasurer, before he enters upon the discharge
of the duties of his office or employment.
B. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute or deliver his bond as
herein required within 30 days after due notification of his election or
appointment, his office may be declared vacant by the Council.
C. In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the state or
by any ordinance of the municipality to give a bond for the faithful
performance of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a corporate
surety authorized to do business in this state, and the premium therefor
shall be paid by the Township. Each such bond shall be approved by the
Division of Law as to form and sufficiency.
A. No officer or employee elected or appointed in the municipality shall be
interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract with the municipality
or in the compensation for work done or for materials or supplies
furnished to the municipality or to any contractor or other person
17.Editor's Note: The provisions of the State Civil Service Act were duly adopted, approved
and authorized by the voters of the Township of Florence at an election held November 7,
1950. Following adoption of said Act, a survey was made by the Civil Service Commission
resulting in the submission of three separate and distinct schedules for the
implementation of civil service procedures for the Township, which schedules were
adopted 12-19-51 by Ord. No. 1951-11 and which are on file and open to public inspection
in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 4-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-62
1:67
§ 4-63. Appointment, removal and suspension; grievances.
furnishing the same to the municipality, nor shall he participate in any
profits of such contractor or other person or receive any compensation,
commission, gift or other reward for his services, except the salary or
fees established by law or by ordinance or resolution of the governing
body.
B. No officer or employee elected or appointed in the municipality shall
accept or solicit anything of value as consideration for or in connection
with the discharge of his official duties other than the fee or
compensation prescribed by law.
C. Any officer or employee who violates any provision of this section or of
any statute or ordinance relating to conflict of interests shall be deemed
guilty of misconduct in office and shall be liable to removal from office
therefor.
A. Each department head shall have the power, except as otherwise
specifically provided by law, to appoint, remove and suspend
subordinate officers and employees within the department, subject to
applicable civil service rules and regulations.
B. The Business Administrator may establish an Employee Grievance
Committee, consisting of five officers and employees of the
municipality, to hear, review and adjust informally such grievances as
any employee or department head may present to it. Such hearing,
review and adjustment shall be in accord with Article I, Section 19, of
the New Jersey Constitution (1947).
§ 4-62 FLORENCE CODE § 4-63
1:68
ARTICLE XVII
Public Records
§ 4-64. Filing and maintenance; inspection.
§ 4-65. Delivery of funds and records upon termination of
employment.
Upon the termination of the term of office or the employment of any officer
or employee, he shall forthwith deliver to his successor or, if there is no
successor, to the Clerk or other person who may be designated by Council
to receive the same all moneys, papers, books, memoranda, accounts and
any data of any nature whatever pertaining to his office.
§ 4-66. Public office hours.
The public administrative and executive business offices of the municipality
shall be open for transaction of public business daily, except Saturdays
and Sundays and legal holidays, between such hours as the Mayor may
prescribe with the approval of the Council, except as otherwise provided by
law. All departments in times of emergency shall provide municipal services
for work on any day or days whenever the Mayor determines that a public
exigency or emergency so requires.18
A. All books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other
documents acquired or produced in any municipal department shall be
carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved and be and remain
the sole property of the municipality and shall not at any time be
removed from the offices of a department except when required for use
in the official business of the municipality and shall be returned to such
office without delay. Each municipal officer shall be responsible for
assuring that the requirements of this section are complied with in
respect to his particular office. This section shall be subject to the
provisions of the Destruction of Public Records Law (1953) (N.J.S.A.
47:3-15 et seq.).
B. All public documents and records of the municipality shall, during office
hours, be open to public search, inspection and examination, subject to
and within the limitations prescribed by law.
18.Editor's Note: Original Art. XIX, Transitional Provisions, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32.
§ 4-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-66
1:69

ARTICLE XVIII
Defense and Indemnification
§ 4-67. Indemnification of Township employees, appointees and
officials.
A. Authorization of indemnification. Pursuant and subject to N.J.S.A.
59:10-4, the Township of Florence does hereby authorize the
indemnification of its employees, appointees and officials in accordance
with the indemnification provisions applicable by law to state
employees.
B. Exceptions and limitations. There shall be no indemnification pursuant
to this section if it is established that the public employee, appointee
and/or official acted or failed to act because of actual fraud, actual
malice, willful misconduct or damages resulting from the commission of
a crime. The Township Council may, but shall not be required to,
indemnify a public employee, appointee of official for an award of
punitive or exemplary damages resulting from a civil violation of state
or federal law where the Township Council determines, in its sole and
exclusive discretion, that the acts committed upon which the damages
are based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful
misconduct or an intentional wrong.
§ 4-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-67
1:71
Chapter 5
ADVISORY COMMITTEES
§ 4-67 FLORENCE CODE § 4-67
1:72
ARTICLE I
Economic Development Committee
[Adopted 3-5-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-03; amended in its entirety
2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ 5-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Economic Development Committee to
consist of six citizen members appointed as provided herein and a member
of the Council appointed by the Council. Up to four additional emeritus
members may be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council.
§ 5-2. Appointment of members. [Amended 3-7-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-07]
§ 5-3. Voting members.
A member of the Council appointed by the Council shall serve as voting
member of the Economic Development Committee.
§ 5-4. Expending of funds; administrative support.
§ 5-5. Duties.
The Economic Development Committee shall have the duty to advise the
Mayor and Council with regard to the following:
A. The members of the Economic Development Committee shall be
appointed to one-year terms. All terms shall begin on January 1 and
shall end on December 31. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment in
the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term of
the member whose vacancy is being filled.
B. Six of the members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
Council.
C. Up to four ex-official members, who were active voting members of the
Economic Development Committee for a minimum of 20 years in total,
may be appointed by the Mayor with consent of Council. Their term
ends when they no longer reside in Florence Township or they resign
the position. These members emeritus have all the rights and privileges
of the regular members, except their attendance is not required, they
do not count towards quorum, and they are not voting members.
A. The Economic Development Committee may expend funds only within
appropriations approved by the Council and as authorized by the Mayor
or the Township Administrator.
B. Administrative support shall be provided through the Township
Administrator.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:73
A. To conduct research into potential economic development of the
Township, in areas appropriate for such development.
B. To develop and recommend to the Mayor and Council a marketing plan
for the Township of Florence.
C. Within the limits of appropriations and subject to the approval of the
Mayor and Council, to advertise, prepare, print and distribute materials
to support the economic development of the Township.
D. To perform such other acts as are reasonably related to and designed to
carry out the purposes and objectives of the Committee as authorized
by the Mayor and Council.
E. To keep records of the meetings and activities of the Committee and to
make quarterly reports to the Mayor and Council.
§ 5-5 FLORENCE CODE § 5-5
1:74
Chapter 6
ASSESSORS, BOARD OF
§ 6-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authorization provided in N.J.S.A.
40:56-1 et seq.
§ 6-2. Findings and determination.
It has been found and determined by the Township Council of the Township
of Florence that it is in the best interests of the community to provide for,
from time to time, the special assessment of properties benefitted by certain
public improvements of that portion of the cost of the improvement which is
proportionate to and not in excess of the benefit to the individual property.
It is further found and determined that it is necessary and appropriate
for the Township to have a Board of Assessors as provided for by law to
make, determine, and report to Council for further action the necessary and
appropriate assessment of such benefited properties.
§ 6-3. Creation of Board of Assessors.
There is hereby created pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:56-21 a
Board of Assessors of three members to carry out assessment duties as
prescribed by statute and applicable law. The Board shall consist of three
members who shall be discreet residents of the Township of Florence who
shall be appointed by resolution of Township Council. The initial term of
the members shall be for the balance of the calendar year in which they
are first appointed. Thereafter, they shall be appointed annually at the
reorganization meeting of the Township Council. Vacancies on the Board
and compensation for the Board shall be filled and determined by resolution
consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-23.
§ 6-4. Direction to assess and report to Council.
The Board of Assessors shall forthwith provide for the assessment of
properties benefited by capital improvements constructed pursuant to
Township Ordinance Nos. 1995-11, 1997-2, and 1998-04. The Board shall
make and determine the proper assessment for each benefited property in
accord with N.J.S.A. 40:56-21 et seq., and applicable law and, thereafter,
make their report to Council as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56-30.
Chapter 8
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 27.
§ 5-5 ASSESSORS, BOARD OF § 6-4
6:75
§ 8-1. Court established; legislative authority.
A Municipal Court for the Township of Florence is established, as of January
1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as
amended and supplemented.19
§ 8-2. Name of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of Florence
Township."
§ 8-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a Seal, which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 8-4. Appointment of Municipal Judge; term.
There shall be a Municipal Judge of said Municipal Court, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Township of Florence and who
shall serve for a term of three (3) years from the date of his appointment
and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 8-5. Compensation of Municipal Judge.
The Municipal Judge shall receive an annual salary as specified in the
current Salary Ordinance, to be paid in the same manner as the salaries of
other municipal officers are paid, and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs
and any other allowances whatsoever.20
§ 8-6. Powers, duties and jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge thereof shall have, possess
and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred
by the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and
supplemented,21 or by any other law.
§ 8-7. Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-32]
There is hereby established the position of Municipal Court Administrator,
and the annual salary of said Administrator shall be as specified in the
current Salary Ordinance, to be paid at the same time and in the same
manner as the salaries of other officials of said township shall be paid.22
19.Editor's Note: Said statute, N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq., was repealed by L.1993, c.293, § 6,
effective 2-15-1994. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch.27, Salaries and Compensation.
21.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 6-4 FLORENCE CODE § 8-8
8:76
§ 8-8. Location; convening of Court.
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Municipal Complex, Broad Street,
in the Township of Florence. The Municipal Judge shall sit at such time
or times as it shall be incumbent upon him to properly and adequately
discharge the duties of his office, subject to the rules applicable to
Municipal Courts.
§ 8-9. Municipal Public Defender. [Added 5-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-8]
There shall be a Municipal Public Defender of the Township of Florence who
shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey and shall be appointed
for a one-year term, to expire on the 31st day of December of the year of his
appointment, or until his successor has been appointed and qualified at the
annual reorganization meeting of the Township Council. The Mayor shall
appoint the Municipal Public Defender with the advice and consent of the
Township Council.
§ 8-10. Powers and duties. [Added 5-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-8]
The Municipal Public Defender shall represents those defendants in the
Municipal Court of Florence Township whom the judge of the Municipal
Court has determined are indigent and constitutionally or otherwise
entitled by law to have counsel furnished without costs. The Municipal
Public Defender shall not represent those defendants who are indigent
and are constitutionally or otherwise entitled by law to counsel if such
defendants affirmatively and with an understanding of the waiver of such
rights to counsel, state an intention to proceed without counsel. The
representation of the defendant by the Municipal Public Defender shall
continue through trial and, in the event of a conviction, shall continue
through sentencing and shall include advising the defendant with respect
to his right of appeal but shall not include the preparation and filing of the
notice of Appeal or any other application for post-conviction relief.
§ 8-11. Application fee; waiver. [Added 5-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-8]
A. Any person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender
shall pay an application fee of not more than $200. [Amended
5-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12]
B. The Municipal Court may waive any required application fee, in whole
or in part, if the Court determines in its discretion that the application
fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch.27, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 8-8 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 8-11
8:77
Chapter 12
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4. Land development — See Ch. 91.
§ 12-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established an Environmental Commission
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq. which commission
shall be concerned with the protection, development and use of the natural
resources located in the territorial limits of the Township.
§ 12-2. Composition; appointment; alternates; compensation.
A. The Environmental Commission shall be composed of seven persons
appointed by the Mayor, which persons shall be citizens and residents
of the Township and one of those appointed shall also be a member of
the Township Planning Board. One of those appointed shall be a
member of the Township Council. The appointments shall include at
least one person from each of the wards established in the Township.
B. The Commissioners first appointed shall hold office for terms as follows:
two members for one year; two members for two years; and three
members for three years respectively, from the date in the year in which
the appointments are made until their successors are duly appointed
and have qualified. Thereafter, all subsequent appointments shall be for
the term of three years, and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term only and in the same manner as the original appointment was
made.
C. In addition to the regular members, the Mayor shall appoint two
alternate members. The alternates shall be designated, at the time of
their appointment, as "Alternate No. 1," who shall be appointed for a
term of two years, and "Alternate No. 2," who shall be appointed for a
term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for terms of two
years. Vacancies shall be filled and alternate members shall serve as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1.
D. Members shall receive no compensation for their services but may
receive reimbursement for proper and authorized out-of-pocket
expenses in accordance with existing Township regulations.
E. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as the
Chairperson of the Commission.
§ 8-11 FLORENCE CODE § 12-3
8:78
§ 12-3. Powers.
The Commission shall have the following powers:
§ 12-4. Acquisition by Commission.
The Commission, with the approval of the Township Council, may from
time to time acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the Township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes including but not limited to use as living museum sites
for scientific study areas for prehistoric interest and scenic beauty and
habitat for rare and endangered plants and animals and shall administer
the same for such purposes subject to the terms of the conveyance or
gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement including conservation easement, convenant
or other contractual right including conveyance or conditions or with
limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to acquire, maintain,
improve, protect, limit the future use of, or otherwise conserve and properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the Township.
A. The promotion of the conservation and development of the natural
resources of the Township.
B. The planning, implementing and informing of the general public with
respect to local conservation programs.
C. The responsibility to compile and maintain an index of all open areas,
publicly or privately owned, including marsh, swamps and other
wetlands.
D. The conduct of all appropriate research into the possible use or uses of
open space in the Township.
E. The submission of recommendations to the Planning Board of
appropriate plans and programs for inclusion in the Township Master
Plan and for the general development and use of such areas.
F. Preparation of advertisements, books, maps, charts and other
appropriate material necessary to the discharge of its duties within the
limits of funds appropriated to it for such purpose by the Township
Council.
G. To act as coordinating agency in the community with respect to
conservation matters and as a liaison between local conservation needs
and the regional, state, and federal agencies responsible for
administering to those needs.
H. The Commission shall act and discharge its duties within the limits of
funds appropriated to it for such purpose by the Township Council.
I. The Commission may adopt by-laws to provide for procedures, a copy of
which shall be provided to the Mayor and the Township Council.
§ 12-3 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 12-5
8:79
§ 12-5. Records and annual report.
The commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report on or before the first day of February and submit
the same to the Township Council, which report shall be comprehensive and
detailed, covering operations, receipts, disbursements and expenditures for
the full year.
§ 12-6. Organization.
The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and
presiding officer of the Commission. The Commission is authorized to adopt
bylaws governing its procedural operation.
§ 12-7. Removal of Commissioner.
The Mayor or the Council may remove any member of the Commission
for cause on written charges served upon the member and after hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel.
Chapter 15
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Filling of swimming pools — See Ch. 140,
§ 140-45.
§ 12-5 FLORENCE CODE § 12-7
15:80
ARTICLE I
Management of Fire Service
[Adopted 5-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1323]
§ 15-1. Fire District established.
There is hereby created and established a fire district within the Township
of Florence, County of Burlington and State of New Jersey, the boundary
of which is the corporate boundary of the Township of Florence. The Fire
District shall be known as Florence Township Fire District No. 1.
§ 15-2. Fire Company.
Within the Township of Florence, there is hereby established one Fire
Company, known as Florence Township Volunteer Fire Company No. 1. This
fire company is recognized by the Township of Florence and the Florence
Township Fire District No. 1 as being duly created and responsible for
emergency operations within the Township of Florence. The operations
of the Fire Department are administered and defined by the Standard
Operating Procedures established by the Florence Township Fire District
No. 1 and by such other applicable laws and ordinances.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 15, Fire Department, which
consisted on Part I, General Regulations, adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-12 as Ch.
15 of the 1983 Code; and Part 2, Fire District, adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983 as
§ 76-7 of the 1983 Code, as amended.
§ 15-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 15-2
15:81

ARTICLE II
Fees for Emergency Medical Services
[Adopted 6-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-18]
§ 15-3. Title.
The full title of this article shall be "Fees for Emergency Medical Services
to be Charged in the Township of Florence."
§ 15-4. Services provided.
The Township of Florence, in cooperation with Florence Township Fire
District No. 1, shall provide emergency medical services to citizens of, and
visitors to, the Township of Florence on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis
throughout the year to the extent that those services are available. This
provision includes such mutual aid arrangements involving neighboring
municipalities as may be entered into.
§ 15-5. Fee for services.
Except as may be arranged pursuant to a duly adopted emergency medical
service agreement as further set forth in this article, the fee to be charged
by the Township of Florence for emergency medical services shall be the
amount of $500 for each and every incident where the Township's
emergency medical services are utilized for transportation. In addition,
there shall be a charge of $8.50 for each mile or part of a mile traveled. Any
bill for services shall be sent directly to the individual to whom the services
were provided, and a copy of the bill shall be forwarded to that individual's
insurance carrier, if the individual has insurance coverage related to the
services.
§ 15-6. Allocation of fees.
The fee individuals pay to the Township of Florence for providing
emergency medical services shall be paid by any combination of the
following:
§ 15-7. Denial or delay of service.
No individual needing emergency medical services within the jurisdiction
and limits of the Township of Florence, or the mutual aid areas covered by
A. Payment by the insurance company for service provided to an individual
who has insurance coverage for the same.
B. Direct payments from persons for whom service has been provided for
any amount which is not covered by insurance.
C. Payments pursuant to any service agreement with any person, agency
or other entity that has entered into an emergency medical service
agreement as further set forth in this article.
§ 15-3 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 15-7
15:83
the emergency medical services, to the extent that services are available,
shall be denied the services on any basis whatsoever, including and not
limited to residency, ability to pay or any other factor. No person located
within the Township's jurisdictional limits shall be denied emergency
medical services to the extent that the same are available.
§ 15-8. Maintenance of records.
Personnel of the Florence Township Fire District No. 1 shall maintain
accurate records of all requests for emergency medical services and any
service calls and any services provided in response thereto. The records
shall be maintained on forms approved by the Township Administrator and
shall include an authorization for the services by the individual to whom
the services are rendered or verification from a medical establishment that
the services were necessary in instances where the individual receiving the
services is not able to authorize the same. The records shall further include
certain patient information, including the general nature of the call, the
complete name, mailing address, telephone number, social security number
and location for transport of all individuals receiving the emergency medical
services within the Township of Florence.
§ 15-9. Time for payment for services.
A. Persons receiving a bill from the Township of Florence for emergency
medical services shall be responsible for payment of the bill in full to
the agent designated by the Township of Florence within 30 days of the
date of mailing of the bill. The thirty-day period for payment may be
extended upon proof of submission of the bill to the individual's
insurance carrier, upon which time payment shall be due within 30 days
of the receipt of the bill by the insurance carrier but in no event later
than 60 days from the date of the bill.
B. Persons receiving emergency medical services within the Township of
Florence who have health insurance coverage regarding the services
are required to cooperate fully with the agent designated by the
Township of Florence and other Township personnel or agents thereof
so that full payment is secured for the services provided.
C. In the event that any health insurance does not fully cover the amount
billed by the Township of Florence, the Township will accept the partial
payment to the extent of the individual's policy limits concerning the
services, including any deductibles and coinsurance requirements as
payment in full for the services provided.
D. In the event that the recipient of services does not have health
insurance coverage regarding the emergency medical services,
payment in full shall be required unless the individual can submit
sufficient proof to the agent designated by the Township of Florence in
the form of an affidavit with attached tax records indicating inability to
pay the full charge. In such circumstance, a minimum payment in an
§ 15-7 FLORENCE CODE § 15-9
15:84
§ 15-10. Regulations implemented by Township Administrator.
The Township Administrator may implement appropriate written
regulations to further the purpose and intent of this article.
§ 15-11. No waiver of immunity.
Nothing in this article is intended to or in any way waives any immunity
afforded the Township of Florence, the Florence Township Fire District No.
1 or the Florence Township Police Department. This specifically includes
any immunity contained in Title 59 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated or
any other immunity provided, whether the same be statutory or otherwise.
§ 15-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person or other entity who violates this article shall be subject to
the penalties for violations of the Florence Township Code, as provided in
§ 1-10.
amount not less than the current customary payment provided by
Medicare for the services shall be accepted as payment in full.
§ 15-9 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 15-12
15:85
Chapter 18
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 87.
§ 18-1. Legislative authority; Authority established.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Housing Authorities Law of the State
of New Jersey,24 a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Housing
Authority of the Township of Florence" be and the same is hereby created
and established.
§ 18-2. Filing of provisions with state agency.
The Clerk be and he hereby is authorized and directed to file a certified copy
of this chapter with the executive officer of the State Housing Authority.
Chapter 22
POLICE DEPARTMENT
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:14A-1 et seq.
§ 15-12 FLORENCE CODE § 18-2
18:86
ARTICLE I
Private and Quasi-Public Functions
[Adopted 11-7-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-47; amended in its entirety
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-28]
§ 22-1. Furnishing of off-duty police officers.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to furnish off-duty police officers
and/or special law enforcement officers to serve private or quasi-public
functions upon written request received from such party and upon such
party's agreement to pay the charges therefor. The Chief of Police is further
authorized in the case of emergencies to accept oral requests for such
services.
§ 22-2. Rates.
§ 22-3. Compensation of officers.
Each officer of the Police Department rendering services set forth in § 221
shall be compensated at the rate of 1 1/2 times the compensation rate or
A. The party requesting the services of a member of the Florence
Township Police Department or Special Law Enforcement Office
provided for in § 22-1 shall be charged and pay for such service. In the
event that the party requesting the service requires the utilization of a
Police Department patrol car, there shall be an additional charge for
each patrol car utilized. All sums received on account of such service
shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Florence
and shall be used for reimbursement through the appropriate municipal
account.
B. Rates charged.
(1) The party or organization requesting the service of a member of the
Florence Township Police Department or Special Law Enforcement
Officer provided for in § 22-1 above shall be charged and pay for
such service at the rate of 1 1/2 times the compensation rate
payable or two times the compensation rate payable to the officer
at the time, depending on the rate which is applicable, plus the
then-current rate of workers' compensation costs, and a 5%
administration fee.
(2) All sums received on account of such service shall be paid to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Florence and shall be
used for reimbursement through the appropriate municipal
account.
(3) The fee for the use of a police vehicle shall be fixed by the Chief of
Police on a semiannual basis, i.e., as of January 1 and July 1 of each
year, taking into account the costs related to the operation of the
vehicle. The fee shall be not less than $10 per hour.
§ 22-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 22-3
18:87
two times the compensation rate, whichever is applicable and presently
payable to that officer. Each special law enforcement officer rendering
services as provided for in § 22-1 above shall be compensated at a rate
of 1 1/2 times the compensation rate payable or two times the rate of a
Level I officer as provided for in the current salary schedule of the collective
bargaining agreement between the Township of Florence and the FOP
Lodge No. 210.
§ 22-3 FLORENCE CODE § 22-3
18:88
ARTICLE II
Police Chaplain
[Adopted 5-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
§ 22-4. Position established; general requirements, duties and
procedures.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to create a partnership between
the Florence Township Police Department and the various religious
leaders of Florence Township to provide enhanced policing and
spiritual services to the service population.
B. Policy. The Florence Township Police Department recognizes the
influence and impact that faith-based leaders have in people's lives
within the community. The agency will work together in a partnership
with qualified religious leaders, regardless of denomination, who are
available to respond during a crisis or in time of need in providing a
more personalized quality of service to the community. The religious
leaders will perform tasks of a more spiritual nature while the officer
addresses those tasks that are of law enforcement nature.
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
POLICE CHAPLAIN — In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141, a
volunteer, ordained member of the clergy in good standing from the
religious body from which he or she is selected who is available to
provide spiritual help, guidance and counseling.
POLICE CHAPLAIN COORDINATOR — A volunteer Police Chaplain
who directs programs or events associated with the Police Chaplain
Program.
POLICE CHAPLAIN LIAISON — A member of the command staff,
designated by the Chief of Police, who administers the Police Chaplain
Program for the department.
D. General procedures.
(1) Qualifications.
(a) Candidates for Police Chaplain must be a duly ordained clergy
member with a degree from an accredited institution. The
candidate must be in good standing and an active participant
in his or her church, parish, synagogue, or temple and be
presently affiliated with a duly recognized religious place of
faith. [Amended 7-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-19]
(b) Police Chaplains shall conform to all police procedures and
departmental regulations, insofar as applicable, and shall be
credentialed in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-141.
§ 22-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 22-4
18:89
(c) Police Chaplains shall demonstrate compassion and
understanding for fellow human beings and be tactful and
considerate in their approach to all people, regardless of race,
creed, religion or national origin.
(d) The Police Chaplain Program is a volunteer service, without
rank or salary. The candidate shall be available to serve in an
on-call status, with a minimum availability to be determined
based on the number of members enrolled in the program.
(e) Police Chaplains shall maintain high spiritual and moral
standards and honor and abide by the seal of confessions and
confidentiality.
(f) Police Chaplains shall complete the required training and
orientation before being accepted into the program, and also
complete regularly scheduled in-service training to remain
active.
(g) Police Chaplains must possess a valid New Jersey driver's
license and pass a criminal history and background check
completed by the Police Department.
(h) Police Chaplains must not be under indictment, on bail pending
court, parole, probation, or in any way be associated with any
current criminal court proceedings, or convicted of any offense
involving moral turpitude.
(i) Police Chaplains may not be in support or involved in any
questionable activity or subversive activity against the
government entity.
(2) Duties and responsibilities.
(a) Police Chaplains shall serve a law-enforcement-related
community support service function. Police Chaplains are not
sworn officers and do not have the authority to make a full
custody arrest. Police Chaplains are not authorized to
physically interfere with law enforcement matters.
(b) Police Chaplains accept the responsibility to foster integrity
and honor with the agency and community and execute their
duties with a professional demeanor.
(c) Police Chaplains shall be requested to perform the following
duties and any other duties that may be assigned by the Chief
of Police:
[1] Assist the agency in making notifications to families
concerning serious injuries or death;
[2] Visit sick or injured police department personnel at home
or in the hospital;
§ 22-4 FLORENCE CODE § 22-4
18:90
[3] Attend and participate in funerals of active and retired
members of the agency;
[4] Counsel police personnel regarding personal problems
and stationhouse adjustments;
[5] Coordinate and conduct memorial services;
[6] Participate in in-service training programs;
[7] Attend departmental functions such as graduations,
promotions, and award ceremonies;
[8] Assist in programs and counseling targeted at youthful
offenders;
[9] Assist in enhancing public relations and community
outreach;
[10] Meet with the Chief of Police and other police personnel
on a regular basis for the purpose of ongoing evaluations,
development of programs, and discussion of departmental
morale.
(d) Police Chaplains will not wear a uniform or police-related
clothing that will give the appearance to the public that they
are a sworn police officer. Police Chaplains shall wear clothing
representative of their faith or proper attire.
[1] The agency shall issue each Police Chaplain garment(s)
identifying them as a Police Chaplain.
[2] Each Police Chaplain shall also be issued an Florence
Township Police Department photo identification card and
badge that must be worn at all times when activated into
service.
E. Appointment and term of office.
(1) The Chief of Police shall recommend to the Township Administrator
persons he or she believes meet the qualification of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-141. All applicants for the position of Police Chaplain shall
be interviewed by the Chief of Police and his or her designee(s) to
determine the applicant's qualifications in accordance with this
policy.
(2) The Township Administrator shall appoint Police Chaplains in
accordance with this policy, with the advice and consent of the
Chief of Police.
(3) A person appointed as a Police Chaplain shall serve at the pleasure
of the Township Police Department, and for a period of one year
from the date of appointment and shall continue to serve in that
§ 22-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 22-4
18:91
capacity until he or she resigns, is terminated, or reappointed by
the Township Council at the recommendation of the Chief of Police.
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the position shall be an "at will"
position and the appointment of Police Chaplain may be terminated
without cause.
F. Activation procedure.
(1) The Police Chaplain Coordinator will work with the Police Chaplain
Liaison to create and maintain a duty list of availability for the
chaplains.
(a) The list will consist of an on-call Police Chaplain and a backup
Police Chaplain who are available to respond in a time of crisis
or need.
(b) The list will follow a 24/7 concept and will be made available to
Burlington County Central Communications and the shift
supervisors.
(2) The shift supervisor will determine when a Police Chaplain is
needed and utilize the on-call list to activate the Police Chaplain
response in the emergent situation. If the on-call Police Chaplain is
not available, the backup Police Chaplain shall be contacted. If the
on-call and back-up Police Chaplains are not available, any
available Police Chaplain from the list shall be requested.
(a) If the involved person(s) discloses his or her specific faith or
requests to speak with a specific member of the clergy, the
supervisor may forego the above process and contact a
representative of that faith or the specific clergy member
directly.
(3) The shift supervisor will direct the Police Chaplain to respond to
the location where the service is to be provided. The Police
Chaplain is authorized to be present for support and guidance to
the involved person(s) during the course of their duties and
responsibilities. If requested, the Police Chaplain will also assist
the involved person(s) in contacting a representative of their
religious faith for additional support if the faith is different from the
responding Police Chaplain.
(4) The shift supervisor will be responsible for the physical safety of
the Police Chaplain. While risk of injury is an inherent part of police
work, care is to be given as to not place the Police Chaplain in the
way of undue harm.
G. Training.
(1) The agency shall provide Police Chaplains training in those duties
which they are authorized and assigned to perform.
§ 22-4 FLORENCE CODE § 22-4
18:92
(2) Prior to appointment, each Police Chaplain candidate must attend
and successfully complete a basic Police Chaplain training course
given by the International Conference of Police Chaplains.
(3) Upon appointment, each Police Chaplain shall receive orientation
training consisting of a review of the rules and regulations and
policies and procedures of the Florence Township Police
Department.
(4) The orientation training shall also contain a block of field training
instruction on the various incidents and tasks handled by the
agency. Emphasis will be placed on the Police Chaplain's role as a
support function, and the training will aid the Police Chaplain in
knowing what to expect from members during a particular
situation to assist in a support capacity.
(5) Upon completing the orientation training, the Police Chaplain shall
then schedule a ride-along session with a Field Training Officer or
supervisor to personally experience the nature of police work. Each
Police Chaplain will be required to complete a ride-along at least
once annually thereafter.
(6) All the Police Chaplains will meet as a group at least semiannually
to receive updated instruction on updated policies and procedures
from the Police Chaplain Liaison. These meetings will give Police
Chaplains the ability to network with each other and discuss ideas
and/or concerns with the program.
(7) All training shall be coordinated by the Police Chaplain Coordinator
and Police Chaplain Liaison.
H. Confidentiality.
(1) All police information shall be considered confidential in nature.
Police Chaplains shall not release or discuss confidential
information to anyone.
(2) Each Police Chaplain shall be required to sign a nondisclosure
agreement. Subsequent disclosure of any confidential information
verbally, in writing, or by any other means or media shall be
grounds for immediate dismissal and possible criminal prosecution.
(3) Police Chaplains shall hold to the "seal of confession" without
exception. They should not surrender to subpoena, and they should
not testify in a court of law, consult with anyone professional or
otherwise in any way that might jeopardize the seal of confession,
even at risk of personal or professional harm.
(a) Any conversations held that indicate criminal activity of the
part of the person speaking to the Police Chaplain are not
privileged conversations and that information is to be relayed
§ 22-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 22-4
18:93
immediately to a member of the Florence Police Department as
required by law.
(4) Privileged communication not regarded as confessional in nature
should be regarded as highly confidential material and should only
be revealed with the consent of the person involved. It is not the
intent of the Florence Township Police Department to use Police
Chaplains as a tool to solicit criminal confessions. Confidential
information should only be revealed when it is assumed the
revelation is for the greater good of the individual.
§ 22-4 FLORENCE CODE § 22-4
18:94
Chapter 24
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget and purchasing procedures — See Ch.
4.
§ 22-4 PURCHASING § 22-4
24:95

ARTICLE I
Joint Agreement With Board of Education
[Adopted 12-7-1988 as Ord. No. 1988-27]
§ 24-1. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Florence Township/
Florence Board of Education Joint Purchasing Agreement."
§ 24-2. Authorization to enter agreement.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-10(b) and N.J.S.A. 18A:18A-12,
the Township of Florence is hereby authorized to enter into a joint
purchasing agreement with the Florence Township Board of Education. The
Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into a joint purchasing agreement with
the Florence Township Board of Education whereby the Florence Township
Board of Education will act as the lead agency for the purpose of the
purchase of general paper supplies and recreation equipment supplies.
§ 24-3. Lead agency; compliance with other provisions required.
The Florence Township Board of Education is the lead agency entering into
contracts on the behalf of the Township of Florence and shall be responsible
for complying with all the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of the revised statutes of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 24-1 PURCHASING § 24-3
24:97
Chapter 25
REDEVELOPMENT AREAS
§ 25-1. Designation of areas in need of redevelopment.
Chapter 27
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 29
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 132.
§ 29-1. Commission established; powers and duties; membership.
There is hereby created a Shade Tree Commission which, pursuant to this
chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., shall exercise the functions, powers
and duties prescribed by said statute and this chapter. The Commission
A. The John A. Roebling Steel Plant and environs are designated as an area
in need of redevelopment. The plant site consists of Block 126.01, Lots
1 and 2.01, Block 139, Lots 1, 2 and 3, Block 141.01, Lots 2.01, 2.02 and
7 covering approximately 200 acres situated on the Delaware River and
Craft's Creek, together with 42 additional properties in the vicinity
consisting of the following: Block 118, Lots 14, 18, 25, 26 and 27; Block
119, Lots 12, 13, 14.01 and 14.02; Block 121, Lots 3.01, 4.02, 4.03,
4.04, 7, 8, and 9; Block 125, Lots 20, 21, 22.01, 22.02, 23, 24, 25 and 26;
Block 140.02, Lots 1.01, 1.02, 1.03, 1.04, 1.05, 2.01 and 2.02; Block
140.03, Lots 9 and 10; Block 141.01, Lots 5, 6, 8 and 9; Block 141.02,
Lots 1 and 2; Block 141.03, Lot 42; and Block 500, Lots 1 and 3.
B. The Township Council of the Township of Florence, by resolution,
authorized the Florence Township Planning Board to undertake a
preliminary investigation to make a determination regarding a
redevelopment area. The Florence Township Planning Board, by motion
adopted at a public meeting held on May 16, 2011, following a public
hearing, adopted a map and report prepared by the Planning Board
Planner and recommended that Block 45, Lots 8, 13, 14, and 15, and
commonly known as the former Marcella Duffy School on West Second
Street, and 203 West Second Street, identified as Block 45, Lots 9 and
10, and currently occupied as a single-family dwelling, be designated as
an area in need of redevelopment.
§ 24-3 FLORENCE CODE § 29-1
27:98
shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor who shall be
residents of the municipality and shall serve without compensation.
§ 29-2. Terms of office.
§ 29-3. Powers and duties.25
§ 29-4. Officers; rules and regulations; journal; quorum.
A. First Commissioners.
(1) The first Commissioners shall be appointed within sixty (60) days
after the ordinance providing for the Commission shall become
effective, and their terms of office shall commence upon the day of
their appointment and be for the following periods:
(a) One (1) member for a one-year term.
(b) One (1) member for a two-year term.
(c) One (1) member for a three-year term.
(d) Two (2) members for four-year terms.
(e) Two (2) members for five-year terms.
(2) The above terms shall be calculated from January 1, 1989. The term
of each appointee shall be designated in his appointment.
B. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the
full term of five (5) years, to take effect on January 1.
A. The Commission shall advise and assist the Mayor and Council with
respect to the selection, planting, care, culture, trimming and
development of shade trees in the township. It shall develop and
recommend to the Mayor and Council a suitable shade tree program for
the township.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Shade Tree Commission to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and update annually and administer
the Master Plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually
to the Mayor and Township Council and, upon its acceptance and
approval, shall constitute the Official Comprehensive Tree Plan for
Florence Township, State of New Jersey. The Shade Tree Commission,
when requested by the Mayor and Township Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 29-1 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 29-4
29:99
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 33
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 87.
§ 33-1. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
The Township of Florence shall comply with the following monitoring and
reporting requirements regarding the status of the implementation of its
Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own
rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings.
B. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business.26
A. Beginning on November 22, 2018, and on every anniversary of that date
through November 22, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual
reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH), or Local Government Services (NJLGS), or
other entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided
to Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC) and posted on the municipal
website, using forms developed for this purpose by the NJDCA, COAH,
or NJLGS. The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and amount of funds
collected and the amount and purpose for which any funds have been
expended.
B. Beginning on November 22, 2018, and on every anniversary of that date
through November 22, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual
reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity within the
municipality through posting on the municipal website with a copy of
such posting provided to FSHC, using forms previously developed for
this purpose by COAH or any other forms endorsed by the Special
Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its Plan and an
26.Editor's Note: Original § 29-4, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 29-4 FLORENCE CODE § 33-1
29:100
§ 33-2. Definitions.
The following terms, en used in this chapter, all have the meanings given in
this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units in accordance with this chapter, N.J.A.C. 5:93,
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity. Such posting shall invite
any interested party to submit comments to the municipality, with a
copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites no longer present a realistic
opportunity. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing
before the Court regarding these issues.
D. By November 22, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, the Township will post on its municipal website,
with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its
very low income requirements, including its family very-low-income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low-income and family very-lowincome
housing obligations.
§ 33-1 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-2
29:101
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that: all the residents of the development wherein the unit
is situated are 62 years of age or older; or at least 80% of the units are
occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or the development
has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section
807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a very-low-, low-income household or moderateincome
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
§ 33-2 FLORENCE CODE § 33-2
29:102
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by the Township pursuant to
this chapter, by COAH or a successor entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between spouses; the transfer of ownership between
former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce or judicial
separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
§ 33-2 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-2
29:103
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 33-3. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Florence pursuant to
the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. Moreover, this chapter shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide very-low-, low- and
moderate-income housing units.
C. Where applicable within the Township, this mandatory set-aside
requirement of 20% if the affordable units will be for sale and 15% if the
affordable units will be for rent, for any multifamily residential
§ 33-2 FLORENCE CODE § 33-3
29:104
§ 33-4. Alternative living arrangements.
§ 33-5. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
development of at least five units created through any Planning Board
action on subdivision or site plan applications; municipal rezoning;
Zoning Board use or density variance; redevelopment plan or
rehabilitation plan that provides a substantial density increase
resulting in a minimum density at or above six units per acre (or other
compensatory benefit). This does not give any developer the right to
any such rezoning, variance or other relief, or establish any obligation
on the part of Florence Township to grant such rezoning, variance or
other relief.
D. Projects receiving Federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit financing
shall comply with the income and bedroom distribution requirements of
UHAC (with the exception that the UHAC requirement for 10% of the
affordable units in rental projects being required to be at 35% of
median income be modified as required by the statutory requirement,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 to 13% of affordable units in such projects shall
be required to be at 30% of median income) and the length of the
affordability controls applicable to such projects shall be not less than a
thirty-year compliance period plus a fifteen-year extended use period.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
§ 33-3 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-5
29:105
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low-and
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 33-6. New construction.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very-low-income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very-low- or low-income
units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements:
§ 33-5 FLORENCE CODE § 33-6
29:106
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following:
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route of
travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Florence Township has
collected funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of
the adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Florence's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Florence for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
§ 33-6 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-6
29:107
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of Florence for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds
are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(g) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier
Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design:
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and the calculation procedures as approved by the Court and
detailed herein.
(a) Regional income units shall be established for the region that
the Township is located within (i.e., Region 5) based on the
median income by household size, which shall be established
by a regional weighted average of the uncapped Section 8
income limits published by HUD. To compute this regional
income limit, the HUD determination of median county income
for a family of four is multiplied by the estimated households
within the county according to the most recent decennial
Census. The resulting product for each county within the
housing region is summed. The sum is divided by the estimated
total households from the most recent decennial Census in the
Township's housing region. This quotient represents the
regional weighted average of median income for a household
§ 33-6 FLORENCE CODE § 33-6
29:108
of four. The income limit for a moderate-income unit for a
household of four shall be 80% of the regional weighted
average median income for a family of four. The income limit
for a low-income unit for a household of four shall be 50%
of the HUD determination of the regional weighted average
median income for a family of four. The income limit for a
very-low-income unit for a household of four shall be 30% of
the regional weighted average median income for a family of
four. These income limits shall be adjusted by household size
based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by
household size. In no event shall the income limits be less than
those for the previous year.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, which very-low-income units shall be
part of the low-income requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2-person
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 4 1/2-person
household; and
§ 33-6 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-6
29:109
§ 33-7. Utilities.
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2-person
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rent increases
for units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing
low-income housing tax credits.
§ 33-6 FLORENCE CODE § 33-7
29:110
§ 33-8. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 33-9. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for the Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this chapter for a period of at least 30 years, until Florence Township
takes action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such
action, a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this chapter, an amount equal
to the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and
its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a
recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
§ 33-7 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-9
29:111
§ 33-10. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 33-11. Buyer income eligibility.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 33-13.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income
unit if and only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there is
an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing
region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable
efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold
§ 33-9 FLORENCE CODE § 33-11
29:112
§ 33-12. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 33-13. Capital improvements to ownership units.
to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of First Purchase Money Mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
§ 33-11 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-13
29:113
§ 33-14. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 33-15. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of
the unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
chapter for a period of at least 30 years, until Florence Township takes
action to release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action,
a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Burlington. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to
the administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
§ 33-13 FLORENCE CODE § 33-15
29:114
§ 33-16. Tenant income eligibility.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
chapter.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this chapter.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
§ 33-15 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-16
29:115
§ 33-17. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A and B above with the
administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
A. The Township of Florence shall appoint a specific municipal employee
to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for overseeing the
Township's affordable housing program, including overseeing the
administration of affordability controls on the affordable units and the
affirmative marketing of available affordable units in accordance with
the Township's Affirmative Marketing Plan; fulfilling monitoring and
reporting requirements; and supervising administrative agent(s).
Florence Township shall adopt this chapter which creates the position
of Municipal Housing Liaison and Florence Township shall adopt a
Resolution which appoints the person to fulfill the position of Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by
the governing body and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the Court and shall
be duly qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable
Housing Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Florence
Township, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Florence Township's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Florence Township's
Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the Court and by this chapter;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Township of Florence shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer and to
§ 33-16 FLORENCE CODE § 33-17
29:116
§ 33-18. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. The fees of the administrative
agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as
set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and
18 thereof, which includes:
affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in the Township in
accordance with UHAC and this chapter. An operating manual for each
affordable housing program shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject
to approval of the Court. The operating manual(s) shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk, in the office of
the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative
agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the work of the
administrative agent(s).
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the Township of Florence and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15;
and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
§ 33-17 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-18
29:117
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Florence when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Florence: Fair Share Housing
Center, the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino
Action Network, the Southern Burlington County Branch of the
NAACP, Willingboro NAACP, Moorestown Ecumenical
Neighborhood Development (MEND), Lutheran Social Ministries
(LSM) and the Burlington County Community Action Program
(BCCAP).
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Burlington County Register of Deeds or Burlington County Clerk's
office after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- (or very-low-) and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
§ 33-18 FLORENCE CODE § 33-18
29:118
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
chapter;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Township Committee and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 33-18 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-18
29:119
§ 33-19. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the
Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this chapter.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Township of Florence shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 5 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 5, comprised of
Burlington, Camden and Gloucester Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township of Florence shall implement the Affirmative Marketing Plan to
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
§ 33-18 FLORENCE CODE § 33-19
29:120
§ 33-20. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the administrative
agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in Florence Township, and copies of the application
forms, to the following entities: Fair Share Housing Center, the New
Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network, the
Southern Burlington County Branch of the NAACP, Willingboro NAACP,
Moorestown Ecumenical Neighborhood Development (MEND),
Lutheran Social Ministries (LSM) and the Burlington County
Community Action Program (BCCAP).
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
§ 33-19 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-20
29:121
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of Florence
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any First
Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
§ 33-20 FLORENCE CODE § 33-20
29:122
§ 33-21. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed in writing with the Court.
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
First Purchase Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 33-20 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 33-21
29:123
Chapter 34
AGRICULTURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 91.
§ 33-21 FLORENCE CODE § 33-21
34:124
ARTICLE I
Right To Farm
[Adopted 6-2-1993 as Ord. No. 1993-12]
§ 34-1. Intent.
This Article shall not be construed as a zoning ordinance and does not
supersede any zoning ordinance and the rights and privileges arising from
said ordinances. It is the intent of this Article to prohibit farming from being
found to be a nuisance when practiced according to customary farming
practices.
§ 34-2. Right to farm activities protected.
In accordance with the purposes set forth above and the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-l et seq., the following farming activities shall be acceptable,
recognized and entitled to encouragement and protection as the collective
embodiment of the right to farm, subject in all cases, however, to any
supervening applicable federal, state or county laws or regulations
respecting the public health, safety or otherwise:
A. Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest products,
livestock, poultry and other related commodities;
B. Process and package the agricultural output of the farm;
C. Provide for the wholesale and retail marketing, including "U-Pick"
marketing and sales, of the agricultural output of the farm, and related
products that contribute to farm income, including the construction of
building and parking areas in conformance with applicable municipal
standards;
D. Replenish soil nutrients, including but not limited to the spreading of
manure and applying chemical and organic fertilizers;
E. Use federally-approved products, in accordance with labeled
instructions, as recommended by the New Jersey Agricultural
Experiment Station and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency for the control of pests, predators, varmints, diseases affecting
plants and livestock and for the control of weed infestation;
F. Clear woodlands using state forestry approved burning methods and
other accepted techniques and install and maintain vegetative and
terrain alterations and other physical facilities for water and soil
conservation and surface water control in wetland areas;
G. Use irrigation pumps and equipment and undertake aerial and ground
seeding and spraying, using tractors and other necessary equipment;
H. Hire and utilize necessary farm labor;
I. Construct fences;
§ 34-1 AGRICULTURE § 34-2
34:125
§ 34-3. Notice of farm use. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-14]
J. Transport large, slow-moving equipment over roads within the
township;
K. Conduct farming activities on holidays and Sundays as well as
weekdays, in the evening and during the day, notwithstanding the
production thereby of normal but unavoidable noise, dust, odors and
fumes caused by such necessary activities when conducted in
accordance with recognized agricultural practices.
A. For the purpose of giving due notice of nearby farming uses to proposed
new residential areas adjacent to unimproved land then being
commercially farmed or suitable therefor, the Planning Board shall
require an applicant for an adjacent major or minor subdivision, as a
condition of approval of such application, to include a provision in each
and every contract for and deed conveying all or any portion of the
lands thereby subdivided, as well as on the filed final subdivision maps,
the following record notice to and waiver by grantees of such present or
future proximate farming uses, which such provision shall be made to
run with the land: "grantee hereby acknowledges notice that there are
presently or may in the future be farm uses adjacent or in close
proximity to the above described premises. Grantee further
acknowledges that the Township of Florence has adopted Ordinance
No. 1993-12, as amended, entitled `An Ordinance to Encourage,
Establish and Preserve Agricultural and Horticultural Right to Farm
Activities in the Township of Florence,' has deemed established as
acceptable, recognized and entitled to encouragement and protection,
farm activities which may result in the emanation of noise, odors, dust
and fumes caused by such necessary activities when conducted in
accordance with recognized agricultural practices. Such activities
include but are not limited to the production and processing of
agricultural and horticultural crops and livestock, aerial and ground
spraying, the spreading of manure and chemical and organic fertilizers
and the wholesale and retail marketing of agricultural and related
products. Grantee further acknowledges that such activities may occur
on holidays, weekends and at all times of the day, including early
morning, evening and nighttime hours. By acceptance of this
conveyance, Grantee does hereby waive objection to such activities."
B. Exceptions and prohibited agricultural practices. The provisions of this
section are not intended to protect or encourage the land application of
sludge or sewerage waste or its by-products as a recognized acceptable
agricultural practice, which practices are specifically prohibited in the
Township of Florence.
§ 34-2 FLORENCE CODE § 34-3
34:126
Chapter 35
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 15. Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
§ 35-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BURGLAR/FIRE ALARM EQUIPMENT — Any and all equipment which is
intended to detect unlawful entry onto any premises or a fire on any
premises and which activates an audible signal or summons outside
assistance situated in the Township of Florence.
§ 35-2. Compliance required.
No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other business entity shall
hereafter operate or be permitted to install or replace a burglar/ fire alarm
system without first having complied with the terms and conditions of this
chapter. All alarm systems must include an automatic shutoff device that
deactivates the alarm signal after fifteen (15) minutes.
§ 35-3. Application.
Each applicant for the operation, installation or replacement of a burglar/
fire alarm system shall complete an application which shall contain the
following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises
in which the burglar/fire alarm system is to be installed.
C. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of persons acquainted
with the burglar/fire alarm who can be contacted in the event of an
emergency.
D. The make, model and manufacturer of the burglar/fire alarm system.
E. The name, address and telephone number of the installer and
maintenance contractor of the burglar/fire alarm system.
F. Such other information as may be required by the Chief of Police, in his
discretion, or the Fire Official in order to enable them to effectively
monitor the burglar/fire alarm system.27
§ 34-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 35-4
35:127
§ 35-4. Fees.
There shall be charged a fee of ten dollars ($10.) upon the filing of an
application, which fee shall be utilized to defer the cost of maintaining the
Florence Township records regarding burglar/fire alarm systems. The fee is
waived for the first ninety (90) days after final approval for alarms presently
in service. After the ninety (90) days expire, everyone will be charged the
fee.
§ 35-5. False alarms; violations and penalties.
§ 35-6. Exemptions.
All governmental buildings, including fire stations and all buildings rented
by governmental agencies, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 35-7. Installation and maintenance.
The applicant shall be solely responsible for the proper installation and
maintenance of its burglar/fire alarm system, including all lines and wiring
thereto, and the Township of Florence shall not be responsible for any
failure or breakdown of the burglar/fire alarm system or malfunction
thereof.
A. In order to minimize false alarms and the unproductive time that results
therefrom to the Florence Township Police Department personnel and
the personnel of the Fire Departments located in the Township of
Florence, there shall be a penalty charged the owner of the premises in
which the burglar/fire alarm system is located beginning with the fifth
false alarm and each subsequent one thereafter in any calendar year,
which penalty is payable to the Township Clerk as follows:
(1) Fifth offense: twenty-five dollars ($25.).
(2) Sixth offense: fifty dollars ($50.).
(3) Seventh and subsequent offenses: one hundred dollars ($100.).
B. All other violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding ninety (90) days or a period of community service not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof.28
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 35-4 FLORENCE CODE § 35-7
35:128
Chapter 36
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages at boat ramp — See Ch.
53.
Littering — See Ch. 95.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 110.
§ 35-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 35-7
35:129

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation
§ 36-1. Number of licenses limited.
§ 36-2. Package goods liquor stores.
The number of package goods liquor stores within the boundary lines of the
Township of Florence shall at no time exceed the number of four, and at no
time shall any three such places be located within the radius of one mile.
§ 36-3. Fees. [Amended 7-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-11; 6-5-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-15]
A. Plenary retail consumption licenses. The number of plenary retail
consumption licenses shall be limited to 12.
B. Club licenses. The number of club licenses shall be limited to nine.
C. Plenary distribution licenses. The number of plenary distribution
licenses shall be limited to four.
A. Plenary retail consumption license. The annual fee for each plenary
retail consumption license shall be as set forth hereafter:
Year Fee
2000 $1,194.39
2001 1,433.27
2002 1,719.93
2003 1,805.00
2004 1,895.00
2005 1,989.00
2006 and each year thereafter 2,000.00
B. Club license. The annual fee for each club license shall be $150.
C. Plenary distribution license. The annual fee for each plenary
distribution license shall be the amount as set forth hereafter:
Year Fee
2000 $597.20
2001 716.64
2002 859.96
2003 946.00
2004 1,041.00
2005 1,145.00
2006 1,260.00
§ 36-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 36-3
35:131
§ 36-4. Hours of sale. [Amended 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-4;
1-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
§ 36-4.1. Administrative background search fee. [Added 5-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-14]
Any person applying for an administrative background search in connection
with the transfer of any alcoholic beverage license shall pay to the Township
of Florence a fee of $25.
2007 1,386.00
2008 1,525.00
2009 1,678.00
2010 1,846.00
2011 and each year thereafter 2,000.00
A. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or permit the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises on New Year's
Day between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. and on weekdays
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. During the hours that
sales are hereinabove prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall be
closed, but this subsection shall not apply to hotels, restaurants as
defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t, or to clubs as set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12,
Subsection 5, and State Regulation No. 7.
B. Sunday sales shall be permitted by the holders of plenary retail
consumption and club licenses between 12:00 noon and 12:00
midnight. Sunday sales shall be permitted by the holders of retail
distribution licenses between the hours of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m.
The Township Council may, but shall not be required to, adopt a
resolution extending the hours for holders of plenary retail
consumption and club licenses to engage in sales of alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the licensed premises, on Sunday beyond 12:00
midnight, for not more than two hours on dates where the Township
Council, in its exclusive discretion, determines that there are special
events, such as, but not limited to, major national sporting events, that
warrant the extended hours.
§ 36-3 FLORENCE CODE § 36-4.1
35:132
ARTICLE II
Regulation of Minors
§ 36-5. Sale or service to minors.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to enter any premises licensed for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverages in the Township of Florence for the purpose
of purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her any alcoholic
beverages.
§ 36-6. Purchase and/or consumption by minors.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to consume any alcoholic beverage on
premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or to purchase,
attempt to purchase or have another purchase for him or her any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 36-7. Misrepresentation of age.
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age
or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee
or an employee of a retail licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic
beverage to a minor.
§ 36-8. Conspicuous display of provisions on premises.
All holders of plenary retail consumption licenses issued by the township
shall cause at least one copy of this Article to be exhibited in a conspicuous
place in the licensed premises.
§ 36-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
A violation of this article by a minor shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or by a period of community service of not more than 90
days, or by any combination thereof, in the discretion of the court.
§ 36-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 36-9
35:133

ARTICLE III
Consumption; Discarding Containers
§ 36-10. Disorderly acts enumerated. [Amended 8-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-23; 9-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-16]
§ 36-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a period of community
service of not more than 90 days, or by any combination thereof.
A. Any person shall be considered a disorderly person who shall:
(1) Consume alcoholic beverages while in or on a public street, lane,
sidewalk, public parking lot, public or quasi-public place or in any
public conveyance;
(2) Consume alcoholic beverages in a private motor vehicle while the
same is in motion or parked in any public street, lane or public
parking lot;
(3) Consume alcoholic beverages while upon any private property not
his own without the express permission of the owner or other
person having authority to grant such permission; or
(4) Discard alcoholic beverage containers upon any public street, lane,
sidewalk, public parking lot, public or quasi-public place or upon
any private property not his own without the express permission of
the owner.
B. It shall be unlawful to possess an open container of any alcoholic
beverage upon any public street, lane or sidewalk, public parking lot or
public and/or quasi-public place.
C. The Township Council may approve specific events at which alcoholic
beverages may be consumed on public property or in public buildings.
§ 36-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 36-11
35:135

ARTICLE IV
Possession or Consumption by Underage Persons
[Added 4-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
§ 36-12. Possession of alcoholic beverages on private property or on
public property.
No person who is under 21 years of age, i.e., the legal age established by
law for the purchase or consumption of alcoholic beverages, shall possess
alcoholic beverages on private property; nor shall any such person possess
alcoholic beverages while upon any public street, road, sidewalk, parking
lot, or other public place or in any private vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion, stopped or parked in or on any public street, road or parking lot,
except as provided herein.
§ 36-13. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on private property or
on public property.
No person who is under 21 years of age, i.e., the legal age established by
law for the purchase or consumption of alcoholic beverages, shall consume
alcoholic beverages on private property; nor shall any such person consume
alcoholic beverages while upon any public street, road, sidewalk, parking
lot, or other public place or in any private vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion, stopped or parked in or on any public street, road or parking lot,
except as provided herein.
§ 36-14. Exceptions.
As provided by law, this article shall not apply to underage persons
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase or consume
alcoholic beverages nor shall this article prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages by any underage person while actually engaged in the
performance of employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of
the Revised Statutes or while actively engaged in the preparation of food
while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post secondary educational institution; however, this
provision shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty
under N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises licensed
for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 36-15. Others subject to penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity which aids, supports,
promotes, assists, encourages or permits any individual under 21 years
of age to violate any provision of this article shall be in violation of the
§ 36-12 ALARM SYSTEMS § 36-15
35:137
provisions herein and shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set
forth herein.
§ 36-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of underage possession and/or consumption shall
be fined $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense. In
addition to the above fine, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2, the Court
may suspend or postpone the person's driving privilege for a period of six
months. If the person is under the age of 17 years, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege of
operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is
imposed and shall run for a period of six months after said person reaches
the age of 17 years of age. If the person convicted under this article is not
a resident of the State of New Jersey, the Court shall suspend or postpone,
as appropriate, the nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the
age of the person.
§ 36-15 FLORENCE CODE § 36-16
35:138
Chapter 39
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages — See
Ch. 36.
Auctions, markets and casual sales — See Ch.
43.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 110.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 112.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permit — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
§ 36-16 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 36-16
39:139

ARTICLE I
Public Amusements
§ 39-1. License required.
From and after the passage of this Article, no person or persons, firm or
firms or corporation or corporations shall hold or conduct or permit or
allow for hire or otherwise his, her, their or its property of whatever kind
or description to be used for the holding or conducting of a park or place
for public amusements, carnivals, picnics, dances or other similar forms of
public amusements of any kind or character without first securing or having
issued to him, her, them or it a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
§ 39-2. Fees.
The license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.); however, the Council
reserves the right to waive the fee in the event that the activity is of a
limited nature or time period.
§ 39-3. Application; license certificate.
Application for said license or licenses shall be made, in writing, to the
Mayor and Council, which shall determine whether said license shall be
issued or not, and if said Mayor and Council determines to issue said
license or licenses, then there shall be issued to the licensee a license
certificate, in writing, to be signed by the Mayor and Council, attested
by the Township Clerk and the township's Seal to be affixed thereto. The
license certificate shall state the purpose or object for which said license
is issued, the date of expiration of the license and the amount of license
fee, and said license certificate shall be exhibited by the holder thereof
whenever demand therefor is made by an official of the township.
§ 39-4. Revocation.
The Mayor and Council shall have the privilege and power of revoking
any license issued under the provisions of this Article at any time that it
appears necessary or advisable if it appears to the Mayor and Council that
said licensee is conducting said amusement park, carnival, picnic, dance or
other form of amusement in an improper or unlawful manner, notice of said
revocation to be given the licensee.
§ 39-5. Violations and penalties.29
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or may be imprisoned in the county jail for
a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or may serve a period of community
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 39-1 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 39-5
39:141
service not to exceed ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof. Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable as such.
§ 39-5 FLORENCE CODE § 39-5
39:142
ARTICLE II
Pinball Machines, Video Games and Other Devices
§ 39-6. License required.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons, firm, association,
corporation or other entity, for the purpose of profit, to own, possess,
operate or cause or permit to be operated within the Township of Florence
any pinball machine, slot machine, video machine, amusement machine or
pool table without having first applied for and obtained from said Township
of Florence a license to so own, operate or possess said machine for the
calendar year in which said license is granted.
§ 39-7. Application and fee.
Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity owning,
possessing or operating, or causing to own or operate, any such machine
or device as set forth in § 39-6 hereof shall make written application to the
Clerk of the Township of Florence, setting forth the nature, description and
serial number of such machine or device, by whom the same is owned and
by whom and where the same is possessed and to be operated and such
other further information as may be required by the township, and, together
with said completed application, the applicant shall submit a nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.) for each machine to be
located on said premises.
§ 39-8. Issuance; license fee.30
The Township Clerk shall have the authority to issue licenses for any
machine or device as set forth in § 39-6 hereof. Upon proper application
being filed in accordance with § 39-7 hereof, the Construction Code Official
shall investigate the proposed location of said machines and devices and
the intended operation and shall certify to the Township Clerk a
recommendation as to whether or not the license should be granted. Upon
receipt of the written recommendation by the Construction Code Official to
grant said license, the Clerk shall issue same, upon payment of the licensing
fee set forth in § 39-11. The Township Clerk is hereby authorized to waive
said licensing fee whenever the applicant is a not-for-profit corporation as
provided for by statute. In the event that the Construction Code Official
recommends not granting the license, at the applicant's request, the
application shall be referred to the Mayor and Council for decision.
§ 39-9. Licenses subject to certain conditions; standards for
determination of accessory use.
The issuance of any said licenses for said amusement machines, video
machines, pinball machines or pool tables and all similar machines not
dispensing products, which provide amusement generally by means of the
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 39-6 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 39-9
39:143
insertion of a coin, token or similar object, shall be wholly optional and in
the discretion of the Construction Code Official. Any license granted for
amusement machines as set forth above shall be subject to, but not limited
to, the following conditions:
§ 39-10. Duration of license; nontransferability; renewal or
revocation.
A. Pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 91, Land
Development, the use of amusement machines as set forth above is
permitted only as an accessory use to a primary use otherwise
permitted by Chapter 91. An accessory use shall be incidental,
customary and complementary to the primary use of the applicant's
site. For purposes of this section, "incidental, customary and
complementary" shall mean a secondary use that bears a close
resemblance and obvious relation to the main or principal use and
which may be necessary or common to the common or contemplated or
expected principal use.
B. In determining whether or not the licenses for amusement machines
should be granted and/or renewed, the Construction Code Official shall
consider the following standards in considering whether or not the
proposed use of the amusement machines is truly an accessory use to
an otherwise permitted principal use:
(1) The nature, type and extent of the principal and accessory use.
(2) No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the
applicant's site shall be devoted to the accessory use of the
amusement machines, with the balance of eighty-five percent
(85%) of the floor area to be devoted and used for the principal use.
(3) Upon demand, the applicant shall submit gross receipts,
statements and records, together with sales tax records, for both
the principal and accessory uses in order to establish that the use
of said amusement machines is accessory and not the principal use
of the applicant's site.
(4) The applicant shall consent to periodic inspection by the township
to determine the number of patrons respectively using the principal
use and the accessory use of amusement machines in order to
determine that said amusement machines are the accessory use
and not the principal use of the applicant's site.
(5) The accessory use and the principal use shall be housed in a single,
enclosed building with no outside entrances devoted to the
amusement machines. The layout and design of the building must
be such that the patrons must proceed through the principal use
area in order to reach the accessory use amusement machines
area.
§ 39-9 FLORENCE CODE § 39-10
39:144
§ 39-11. Specific license fees enumerated.
§ 39-12. Licenses subject to additional approvals.
The granting of the licenses pursuant to this Article is expressly subject
to any conditions or approvals required by the Planning and/or Zoning
Boards of Florence Township, pursuant to Chapter 91, Land Development,
including site plan or related approvals. The granting of said licenses is
A. Any license issued pursuant to this Article shall be for the term of the
balance of the calendar year in which the license is issued. All such
licenses must be renewed annually no later than the first day of
February in each calendar year. Any license granted pursuant to this
Article shall not be transferable and cannot be transferred or moved to
any other site or for any other owner or for any other machine without
reapplication to the township.
B. The Mayor and Council shall be the sole party for revocation of any
licenses granted pursuant to this Article. By establishing the standards
set forth in this Article, the township has expressed its concern for the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of Florence Township with
regard to the licensing and use of amusement and vending machines
and devices. Any applicant granted licenses pursuant to this Article
shall certify by signature on the application that the granting of the
licenses herein is solely in the discretion of the township and that said
licenses can and will be revoked at any time and without notice or not
renewed in the event that the terms and conditions imposed by this
Article granting said licenses are violated or in the event that the
township finds that the operation of said machines creates a nuisance
or disturbance to the surrounding community.
C. In the event of a revocation of any license pursuant to this Article, the
Construction Code Official shall serve a copy of the resolution revoking
said license on the applicant at the applicant's site or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Upon such service, any further use of said
machines shall be deemed in violation of this Article, and the applicant
shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein.
A. The fees to be charged for any license issued pursuant to this Article
shall be as follows:
(1) Each pinball machine, video machine, pool table or other
amusement machine for one (1) year: one hundred dollars ($100.).
(2) For any and all other machines within the meaning and intent of the
definitions above, unless otherwise specified, for one (1) year: fifty
dollars ($50.).
B. No license shall be granted for less than the applicable annual license
fee above, and no rebate shall be granted to any application after said
license has been issued.
§ 39-10 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 39-12
39:145
further expressly conditioned and contingent upon any additional
requirements or conditions imposed by said Boards pursuant to said
approvals by way of landscaping, parking, etc.
§ 39-13. Violations and penalties.31
A. First offense. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of
a violation of this Article or any section thereof shall be punished on the
first offense by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.).
B. Second offense and subsequent offenses. Any person, firm, corporation
or other entity convicted of a violation of this Article or any section
thereof shall be punished on the second or subsequent offense by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor in excess of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.) or by a term of imprisonment not to exceed
ninety (90) days or by a period of community service not to exceed
ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the
sentencing court.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 39-12 FLORENCE CODE § 39-13
39:146
Chapter 41
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Noise — See Ch. 102.
Public Health nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 110.
§ 39-13 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 39-13
39:147

ARTICLE I
Animal-Related Nuisances
§ 41-1. Objectives.
§ 41-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
AT LARGE — Any dog or cat, licensed or unlicensed, registered or
unregistered, muzzled, unmuzzled, traveling unattended by at least one
person and under no control by harness, rope, leash on other proper
controlling device.
CAT — A domesticated carnivore, Felis Domestica, bred in many varieties,
of either sex of variety, whether or not neutered or spayed.
DOG — A domesticated carnivore, Canis Familaris bred in many varieties,
of either sex or variety, whether or not neutered or spayed.
FARM — A tract of land of six acres or more.
KENNELS — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Clerk of the Township of Florence or any
designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance
and revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this chapter.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat, includes
every person having a right of property or custody in such dog or cat, and
every person who has such dog or cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or
maintains a dog or cat or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or
about any premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
A. It is the objective of this chapter to protect the public and animals from
the spread of rabies to animals and humans and to protect the public
from animal-related nuisances and threats of public health safety and
welfare.
B. It has been determined that these objectives can be fostered by
assuring that animal owners meet responsibilities for the control and
care of their pets.
§ 41-1 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-2
39:149
PET STORE — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs or cats for sale are kept or displayed.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Within the purview of this chapter, a dog or cat shall
be considered a public nuisance if it has no known owner or custodian or if
it has no known place of care or shelter or if it habitually trespasses upon
or damages either private or public property or annoys, bites, scratches or
harms lawful uses or occupants thereof.
§ 41-3. Running at large and entry upon certain public areas
prohibited. [Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
§ 41-4. Establishment of public pounds.
The Township of Florence is hereby authorized to rent or otherwise prepare
a suitable place or places, within or without said township, to be used as
a public pound for the retention, care and maintenance of any dog or cat
seized or otherwise taken under the authority of this chapter.
§ 41-5. Appointments of animal control officers.
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to appoint one or more animal
control officers for such period or periods of time as it may deem advisable.
The animal control officer will have the authority to enforce all provisions of
this chapter.
§ 41-6. Seizure; disposition of unclaimed dogs and cats.
Whenever any dog or cat, as indicated in § 41-3 of this chapter, shall be
found traveling at large, it shall be the duty of any animal control officer
or of any member of the uniformed Police Department of said township, or
other persons thereby designated and authorized, to seize or otherwise take
into possession such dog or cat and to take or transport such dog or cat
to the public pound established for such purpose and thereto be retained.
If said dog or cat shall not have been redeemed by payment of costs and
charges as authorized by law within seven days following its detention,
said dog may be offered for adoption upon public notice being provided,
as required by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16, and notice that such dog or cat will be
offered for adoption given to the owner or keeper of such dog or cat, if
A. It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat to travel at large either upon the
public streets or other public or private places, other than upon the
private property of the owner or keeper of such dog or cat within said
Township of Florence.
B. It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat to be allowed to enter upon any
portion of public properties used for organized sports and other
recreation activities or services, including but not limited to those areas
used for baseball and softball fields, football and soccer fields,
basketball and tennis courts, tot-lots and play areas, batting cages and
warm-up areas, memorial gardens and monument areas.
§ 41-2 FLORENCE CODE § 41-6
39:150
known; or if the name and address of the owner or keeper of such dog or cat
cannot be reasonably ascertained and, in the opinion of said animal control
officer or Police Department, such dog or cat is not valued at the amount
of costs and charges assessable against it and it is not reclaimed within
seven days after notice, when such notice can be given, said animal control
officer or Police Department may cause said dog or cat to be destroyed in
any manner causing as little pain as possible.
§ 41-7. Provisions deemed supplemental to state regulations.
This chapter shall not be deemed to be inconsistent with any law of the
State of New Jersey controlling the licensing of dogs or cats and kennels,
but only as supplemental thereto.
§ 41-8. Payment of costs.
Any and all costs incident to the seizing or taking or detention of any dog or
cat by virtue of this chapter shall be paid by the owner of said dog or cat.
§ 41-9. Annual registration; license and tag fees.
§ 41-10. Rabies vaccination required.
No dog or cat shall be issued a license or registration tag unless the owner
thereof provides evidence that said dog or cat has been given a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendation of the United States Department of Agriculture and the
United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare, or has been
A. Every owner of or person who harbors or keeps a dog or cat within the
limits of Florence Township shall report to the Township Clerk annually,
within 30 days after the first day of January each year, his or her name
and address and shall give the name, breed, color and sex of each and
every dog and/or cat owned or kept by said person and shall pay to the
Township Clerk of the Township of Florence a fee as established in
Schedule A of Chapter 2 of the Code of the Township of Florence.
[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
B. The owner of any dog or hybrid dog determined to be a "potentially
dangerous dog" pursuant to the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
et seq., shall pay a licensing fee of $700 for a potentially dangerous dog
license and a registration tag fee of $1.
C. Dogs used as guides for the blind and commonly known as "Seeing Eye"
dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs, except that the
owner or keeper of the dog shall not be required to pay any fee
therefor.32
32.Editor's Note: Former Subsecetion D, regarding registration and license fee for cats,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11.
§ 41-6 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-10
39:151
certified to be exempt by the regulations of the State Department of Health
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 41-11. Failure to license and register dog within time period;
exception.
§ 41-12. Curbing of dogs or cats.
A. In the event that the owner or keeper of a dog within the Township of
Florence fails to make application to the Clerk of the Township of
Florence within 30 days of the first day of each year, then an additional
late fee of $5 shall be charged and paid to the Township Clerk;
provided, however, that where a dog or cat becomes eligible for
licensing during any calendar year after January 31, then said owner or
keeper of a dog or cat shall be entitled to a grace period not to exceed
30 days from the date of acquisition of the animal. After January 31, an
additional late fee of $2 will be charged to the owner or keeper of a cat
within the Township of Florence.
B. The owner of any "potentially dangerous dog," as defined in N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et seq., shall be subject to the violations and penalties set forth
in § 41-15 of this chapter in the event of failure to renew the dog license
prior to January 31 of any calendar year or within 30 days of the dog
becoming eligible for licensing during any calendar year after January
31.
A. Regulations.
(1) No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog or
cat shall cause, suffer or allow such animal to do any injury to any
person or any animal or do any damage to any property, either real
or personal, owned privately or publicly, or permit such dog or cat
to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, passageway, bypass, play area, park or any place
where people congregate or walk or upon any public property
whatsoever or upon any private property without the permission of
the owner of said property; except, however, that dogs or cats may
soil, defile or defecate on that portion of the public street line
between the curblines, which portion of the street shall be used to
curb dogs or cats.
(2) In the event that any dog or cat shall soil, defile, defecate on or
commit any nuisance contrary to the foregoing provisions,
regardless if done in a place other than between the curbs, the
person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of such dog or cat
shall immediately remove all feces by such dog or cat by any
sanitary method, including but not limited to implements and
plastic bags, to remove any feces so deposited, and said person
shall dispose of such feces in a sanitary manner.
§ 41-10 FLORENCE CODE § 41-12
39:152
§ 41-13. Disposition of fees.
§ 41-14. Potentially dangerous dogs. [Amended 10-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-17]
(3) Residential properties on which animals are kept or maintained
must be kept free of accumulated feces so as not to create an
unsanitary or odorous nuisance as defined in Section II of the New
Jersey State Department of Health Public Nuisance Code No.
102-3.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to blind persons who may
use dogs as guides.
C. The provisions of this section shall be enforced upon written complaint
by the complaining witness filed in the Municipal Court.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this chapter, except registration tag fees and costs, fines
and fees collected pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., shall be
forwarded to the Township Chief Financial Officer within 30 days after
collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate
from any of the other accounts of the Township and shall be used for the
following purposes:
(1) For collecting, keeping and disposing of animals liable to seizure.
(2) Local prevention and control of rabies and for providing for antirabies
treatment under direction of the local Board of Health for
any person known or suspected to have been infected with rabies.
(3) For all other purposes prescribed in the statutes of the State of
New Jersey governing the subject and for administering the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special accounts shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this subsection. At the end of
said third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there should be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the township any amount that is in such account which
is in excess of the total amount paid into said special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding. The registration tag fees shall be
forwarded within 30 days after collection by the township to the State
Department of Health.
C. The costs, fines and fees collected pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.,
shall be deposited in a special account separate from any of the other
accounts of the Township and shall be used by the township to
administer and enforce the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
§ 41-12 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-14
39:153
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to receive and investigate
complaints involving attacks or bites by any dog, including dog-fighting
activities in the training or encouragement of dogs to make unprovoked
attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. It shall be the duty of all appropriate Township officials to enforce the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. as applicable within the Township.
C. Potentially dangerous dogs, license required. Where a dog has been
declared potentially dangerous by the Municipal Court in accordance
with the provisions of this section, the owner shall, within the time
provided in the Court's order, or, in any event, not less than 60 days
from the date of the Court's decision, obtain a special potentially
dangerous dog license, registration number and red identification tag.
The fee for such license, and renewals thereof, shall be $700. Renewals
shall be made at the same time and manner as ordinary dog licenses,
except that the same registration number shall be reissued for the life
of the dog. In addition, the owner shall, at his own expense, have the
registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location. The
time for compliance shall be tolled by the filing of an appeal.
D. In order to receive a license, the owner must comply with the following
conditions:
(1) Display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure.
(2) Immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the dog will be kept and
maintained, which has sound sides, top and bottom to prevent the
dog from escaping by climbing, jumping or digging and within a
fence of at least six feet in height separated by at least three feet
from the confined area. The owner shall securely lock the enclosure
to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude any
release or escape of the dog by an unknowing child or other person.
All potentially dangerous dogs shall be confined in the enclosure or,
if taken out of the enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained with
a tether approved by the Chief of Police and having a tensile
strength sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the
potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than
three feet from the owner and under the direct supervision of the
owner.
(3) If required by the Municipal Court, provide proof of liability
insurance in an amount specified by the Court to cover any damage
or injury caused by the dog. The liability insurance, which may be
separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision naming the Township Clerk as a party to be notified by
the insurance company in the event that the policy is canceled or
terminated or expires.
§ 41-14 FLORENCE CODE § 41-14
39:154
§ 41-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-17]
Except where otherwise provided by law:
E. Seizure and impoundment:
(1) The Chief of Police, or other designated official, shall seize and
impound a dog when the officer has reasonable cause to believe
that the dog:
(a) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b, to that person;
(b) Caused bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a
person during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat
of harm to persons or domestic animals;
(c) Engaged in dog-fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and 4:22-26; or
(d) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged
to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic
animals.
(2) The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether
the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval
of the Chief of Police, the dog may be impounded in a facility or
other structure agreeable to the owner.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Court of the Township of
Florence to determine whether a dog is vicious or potentially dangerous
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. The Court may impose a fine in
accordance with penalties as provided in § 1-10 of the Florence Code.
G. Cost of impoundment and destruction. If a dog is declared vicious or
potentially dangerous and all appeals pertaining thereto have been
exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be liable to the Township for the
accrued costs and expenses of the impoundment and/or destroying the
dog. The owner shall incur that expense of impounding the dog in a
facility other than the municipal pound, regardless of whether the dog
is ultimately found to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
A. The owner or owners or keeper or keepers of any dogs, hybrid dogs,
cats or livestock (as defined in Article II) who should knowingly or
willfully cause, allow, permit or otherwise be responsible for any animal
traveling at large or who should otherwise violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or to a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
§ 41-14 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-15
39:155
B. The owner of a "potentially dangerous dog," as defined by N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et seq., who is found by a preponderance of the evidence to
have violated the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et seq. or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto or to
have failed to comply with an order of the court shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $1,000 per day of the violation, or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof, and each day's
continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Disposition of fees and fines. All fines and fees collected or received by
the Township pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special
account and used by the Township to administer and enforce the
provisions hereof.
§ 41-15 FLORENCE CODE § 41-15
39:156
ARTICLE II
Livestock
§ 41-16. Limitation of animals.
A. The keeping of livestock shall be permitted subject to the following
standards, which shall be applicable to small lots and areas rather than
full-scale farms:
(1) Not more than one livestock unit may be kept on a lot of at least one
acre, provided that a pen or corral containing at least 800 square
feet is included and that a stable under a roof of at least 100 square
feet is provided, and further provided that the pen, corral, fences or
similar enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to the adjacent
property lines or 10 feet to the adjacent property lines with proper
screening, but in no case closer than 50 feet to any existing
neighboring dwelling.
(2) Not more than two livestock units may be kept on a lot of at least
1 1/2 acres, provided that they are enclosed in a pen or corral
containing at least 800 square feet per animal, including a stable
under a roof of at least 100 square feet per animal, and further
provided that the pen, corral, fences or similar enclosures are not
closer than 20 feet to the adjacent property lines or 10 feet to the
adjacent property with proper screening, but in no case closer than
50 feet to any existing neighboring dwelling.
(3) Not more than three livestock units may be kept on a lot of two
acres, provided that they are enclosed in a pen or corral containing
800 square feet for the livestock unit and 400 square feet for each
additional livestock, including a stable under a roof containing at
least 100 square feet per animal, and further provided that the pen,
corral, fences or similar enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to
the adjacent property lines or 10 feet to the adjacent property lines
with proper screening, but in no case closer than 50 feet to any
existing neighboring dwelling.
(4) Not more than four livestock units may be kept on a lot of 2 1/2
acres and must comply with the provisions of § 41-16A(3).
(5) Not more than five livestock units may be kept on a lot of 3 1/2
acres and must comply with the provisions of § 41-16A(3).
(6) Nor more than six livestock units may be kept on a lot of 4 1/2 acres
and must comply with the provisions of § 41-16A(3).
(7) Not more than seven livestock units may be kept on a lot of 5 1/2
acres and must comply with the provisions of § 41-16A(3).
B. The "stable" shall be defined as a structure on a tract qualifying as a
farm for housing livestock and products used for the keeping and
handling of livestock. No structure housing livestock shall be located
§ 41-16 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-16
39:157
nearer than 50 feet to any adjacent property lines with proper
screening and 50 feet to any neighboring dwelling. Stables must be
built so as not to create offensive odors, fly breeding or other nuisances.
C. A planted buffer (all season evergreens) will be required along the
dividing line between an applicant's property and that of his neighbor.
D. Manure from stabled horses or other livestock must be removed from a
stable or a similar housing structure three times each week. Manure
must be stored a minimum of 25 feet from a stable and 75 feet from the
nearest neighboring dwelling. Any stockpile of manure shall not exceed
100 square feet. All stockpiles of manure shall be limed at least once
every week.
E. Fences must be constructed of such materials and in such a manner as
to prevent and preclude the escape of livestock. Any application for a
building permit for a fence to pen livestock must include, in addition to
any other information required, the height, the span between fence
posts, a sketch of the proposed fence, the type of material to be used
and whether the same has been treated. The Building Inspector shall
issue a building permit for any such fence only when, in his discretion,
the proposed fence shall adequately prevent the escape of livestock.
F. For purposes of this section, the term "livestock" shall include the term
and concept "animal unit" and shall refer to domestic animals only.
Livestock shall be permitted as per the provision of this section in
accordance with the description, number and ratios set forth in the
following Table 1. An "animal unit" shall be defined to be a large,
mature, domesticated animal such as a horse, cow or steer. A horse,
cow or steer shall be considered one animal unit. Combination of
different types of livestock are authorized so long as the total densities
are not exceeded for the acreage available. Table 1 establishing the
categories and animal unit ratios and descriptions is as follows:
TABLE 1
Animal Units for Specific Livestock Categories or Type
Livestock
Animals
(per unit) Remark
Cattle
Dairy
1 year or older 1 Or cow with
nursing calf
Under 1 year 2
Beef
1 year or older 1 Or cow with
nursing calf
Under 1 year 2
§ 41-16 FLORENCE CODE § 41-16
39:158
TABLE 1
Animal Units for Specific Livestock Categories or Type
Livestock
Animals
(per unit) Remark
Steers (dairy or beef)
1 year or older 1
Under 1 year 2
Bulls 0
Horses
All breeds and sexes 6
months or older with foal
until weaned or
1 Includes ponies,
mules, burros,
donkeys. Mares up
to age of 6 months
equals 1 unit.
All breeds under 6 months 2 (See above
remarks)
Sheep
All breeds, 1 year or older 5 Ewe with nursing
lamb up to 3
months, 1/5 unit
Lambs over 3 months and up
to 1 year
10
Goats, all breeds and sexes Same as sheep
Chickens 20
Ducks 10
Turkeys 5
Geese 5
Vietnamese pot-belly pig 2
Rabbits 50
Small birds, such as pigeons 50
Swine (restricted to a farm of
6 acres or more)
Sow with suckling
pigs under 3
months, 1/2 unit
All breeds, over 2 (Sow is 1/2 unit
and suckling pigs
under 3 months
are 1/2 unit.)
1 year All sexes, 3 months to
1 year
5
§ 41-16 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-16
39:159
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section and in the event that a
property contains chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese, rabbits or small
birds (such as pigeons), the following pen and stable requirements shall
apply:
(1) The location of a pen, barn, cage, coop, hutch or any other type of
enclosure on the property shall conform to the location
requirements.
(2) Pen or barn, fully enclosed (applicable to chickens, turkeys, ducks
and geese):
(a) Three square feet per chicken and six square feet for ducks,
turkeys and geese. The total size of the pen or barn shall
depend on the mix of fowl.
(b) If the poultry or fowl has access to an outside enclosure, 15
square feet per animal. The outside enclosure shall be fenced
to contain the fowl to prevent escape.
(3) Cage or coop (applicable to pigeons): one square foot per bird. The
cage or coop shall be separate from a pen or barn.
(4) Hutch (rabbits):
(a) For a three-and-one-half-pound to seven-pound mature rabbit,
the hutch shall be 2 1/2 feet deep by three feet long and two
feet wide.
(b) For a rabbit in excess of seven pounds to an eleven-pound
mature rabbit, the size shall be 2 1/2 feet deep by four feet long
by two feet wide.
(c) For a rabbit in excess of 11 pounds to a fifteen-pound mature
rabbit, the size shall be two and one-half feet deep by five feet
long by two feet high.
(d) The hutch shall be separate from cages, coops, pens or barns.
(5) Pigeons or rabbits may be located outside a cage or coop or hutch
in an area which must be fenced or fully enclosed in order to
contain the pigeon or rabbit and to prevent escape.
H. Health requirements. In addition to the requirements of this section
and any other provision of the Code of the Township of Florence with
respect to the care and maintenance of animal waste, animal waste
shall be managed in accordance with the recommended management
practices established in "Recommended Guidelines for Home Animal
Agricultural in Residential Areas," as published and revised by the New
Jersey Cooperative Extension Service, New Jersey Agricultural
Experiment Station, Cook College, Rutgers, New Jersey, New
Brunswick, New Jersey, hereinafter referred to as "recommended
guidelines," copies of which are on file in the office of the Township
§ 41-16 FLORENCE CODE § 41-16
39:160
Clerk and available for public inspection during regular business hours
. Furthermore, the premises on which animals on residential lots are
maintained and kept shall meet and conform to the following health
standards:
(1) The location of any building, stable or other structure for the
keeping of animals shall be located so as to preclude odors and
sounds from interfering with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property on neighboring premises.
(2) Buildings, food storage bins, appliances, equipment and such other
facilities on premises are to be constructed and maintained in such
a fashion as to permit proper cleansing.
(3) There shall be adequate water supply on the premises to ensure
proper sanitation.
(4) Water or other liquids to which mosquitoes may have access is to
be properly treated to prevent their breeding.
(5) Disposition of animal waste, garbage, refuse or vegetable matter
shall be such so as to prevent insects breeding, rodent infestation,
pollution of the air or any body of water or the creation of any other
unhealthy or unsanitary condition.
(6) The Health Officer of the Township of Florence shall be authorized
to inspect any premises where animals are kept for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions herein.
I. Kennels.
(1) Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a
kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Clerk of
the Township or other local official designated to license dogs in
the municipality for a license entitling him to keep or operate such
establishment.
(2) The application shall describe the premises where the
establishment is located or is proposed to be located, the purpose
or purposes for which it is to be maintained, and shall be
accompanied by the written approval of the Health Officer of the
State Department of the Board of Health showing compliance with
the local and state rules and regulations governing location of and
sanitation at such establishment.
(3) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall
state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained and all
such licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year
and be subject to revocation by the Township Council on
recommendations of the State Department of Health for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department of
§ 41-16 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-16
39:161
the Board of Health governing the same after the owner has been
afforded a hearing by the State Department Board of Health.
(4) Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at
such establishment; such license shall be transferable to another
owner.
(5) The annual fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
less dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual
license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a
shelter or pound.
(6) The Clerk of the township or other local official designated to
license dogs in the municipality shall forward to the State
Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and
pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses therefor are
issued, which list shall include the name and address of the
licensee and kind of license issued.
(7) No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
permitted off such premises, except on a leash or in a crate or other
safe control.
§ 41-16 FLORENCE CODE § 41-16
39:162
Chapter 43
AUCTIONS, MARKETS AND CASUAL SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 114.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permit — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
§ 41-16 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 41-16
39:163

ARTICLE I
Auctions and Markets
§ 43-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTION BLOCK — The stand or platform from which the public auction
sales are conducted.
AUCTIONEER and AUCTION — Includes all persons, firms, corporations
and partnerships, principals and agents who engage in the selling of goods
at public sale or auction to the highest bidder on commission or for
recompense, as well as those who sell their own goods at public sale or
auction to the highest bidder.
GOODS — Any goods, wares, works of art, commodity, compound or thing,
chattel, merchandise or personal property which may be lawfully kept or
offered for sale.
MARKET — Includes any place in which two (2) or more sellers, other than
farmers selling produce grown by themselves, assemble or gather for a
public sale.
RETAIL SALE — Any sale or offer to sell other than through bidding.
§ 43-2. License required.
It shall not be lawful for any person within the limits of the Township of
Florence, without a license first had and obtained in the manner prescribed
by this Article, to conduct a market or markets under a penalty as herein
set forth for each and every offense.33
§ 43-3. Application and contents.
Before any license is granted, the applicant shall make application therefor
to the Mayor and Council, in writing, on a form to be provided by the Mayor
and Council, and under oath. Such application shall state the following:
A. The full name of the applicant.
B. The applicant's residential address.
C. The length of time of continuous bona fide residence in the township
immediately prior to making application.
D. The places where the applicant has resided for a period of three (3)
years immediately prior to making the application.
E. Whether any person or corporation other than the applicant has any
interest, directly or indirectly, in the license applied for or in the
33.Editor's Note: Original § 42-3, Purpose, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 43-1 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 43-3
39:165
§ 43-4. Bond required.
The Mayor and Council shall, as a condition precedent to the granting of
the license to engage in the auction business, require the applicant to enter
into a bond to the township with two (2) responsible freeholders as sureties
or, in lieu thereof, the bond of a surety company authorized to do business
under the laws of the state, such bond to be approved by the Mayor and
Council and to be in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.), conditioned
for the due observance of all such ordinances of the township as are in
force or may be passed respecting the conduct or operation of the auction
business at any time during the continuance of such business. Such bond
shall be for the benefit of any person who shall have recovered judgment
against any person licensed under and by virtue of this Article by reason of
any damage sustained by such person as a result of having purchased any
article or commodity at a public auction sale conducted or operated by the
licensee, due to fraud or deceit practiced in effecting such purchase or sale
to such person, and such bond shall be for the protection of persons and
property and for the preservation of the safety and property of the township
and its inhabitants and as may now or hereafter be required by any state
law or municipal ordinance or regulation.
business to be conducted, and, if so, the name, residence and interest
shall be stated.
F. If the applicant is a corporation, the following shall be stated:
(1) The location of the registered office in New Jersey and the name of
the registered agent.
(2) The date and state of incorporation.
(3) The names and residences of all stockholders, directors and
officers.
G. The address of the place of business.
H. The experience an applicant has had as an auctioneer or as a person
engaged in the auction business.
I. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.
J. The place and the time that the applicant has been so engaged as an
auctioneer or in the auction business.
K. The names of the persons or bonding company to furnish the bond as
hereinafter required.
L. References of two (2) resident freeholders of the township as to the
applicant's character and integrity, and the applicant shall also answer
such questions and interrogatories as may be propounded or
promulgated by the Mayor and Council seeking to determine the
applicant's fitness, integrity and character.
§ 43-3 FLORENCE CODE § 43-5
39:166
§ 43-5. Investigation of application; issuance of license.
The Mayor and Council shall investigate or cause to be investigated each
and every application filed as aforesaid and is hereby vested with the sole
discretion of either granting or refusing to grant a license.
§ 43-6. Conditions of issuance.
No license required by this section shall be issued to any person unless the
Mayor and Council shall be satisfied that the applicant is a person of good
moral character.
§ 43-7. Duration of license; expiration and renewal.
Every license required by this section which shall be granted shall entitle
the licensee to operate anywhere within the legal limits of the township
for the period from the date of issuing of such license to the 30th day of
June of the succeeding year, and all renewals of such license shall be for a
period of one (1) year from the first day of July to the first day of July of the
succeeding year. All licenses shall expire on the 30th day of June, at 12:00
midnight, and shall not be renewed unless all of the terms and conditions of
this Article have been fully complied with.
§ 43-8. License fees.
§ 43-9. Suspension and/or revocation of license.
The Mayor and Council may, upon its own motion or upon the verified
complaint, in writing, of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee,
and the Mayor and Council, as aforesaid, shall have the power to suspend
a license, after notice and public hearing, for the unexpired portion of the
license period or for a period less than the unexpired portion of the license
period or to revoke any license issued under the provisions of this Article
where the licensee, in performing or attempting to perform any of the acts
mentioned herein, is deemed to be guilty of the following:
A. The annual license fee for the conduct of a market or markets or
auction sales shall be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.), which
shall be payable on presentation of the application and returned in the
event that said application is not granted. If the term for which said
license is sought is less than a year, the fee shall be, nevertheless, the
same.
B. The annual fee for the license required for this Article shall be fifty
dollars ($50.) for public auctioneers, except that each licensed
establishment may conduct its own business through its proprietor or
one (1) of its proprietors, if a partnership, or one (1) of its officers, if a
corporation, without paying said license fee.
A. Willfully making any false promise or willful misrepresentation.
§ 43-5 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 43-9
39:167
§ 43-10. Sale of goods or merchandise restricted to licensed
auctioneers.
No person except a licensed auctioneer or such person authorized by
§ 43-12 of this Article shall sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise
in any manner similar to that of a public auction or by public outcry, even
though no competitive bids are solicited.
§ 43-11. Display of auctioneer's name during sale required.
Each auctioneer shall, during the sale, cause his name to be conspicuously
displayed on a sign at the place where he shall conduct an auction sale, and
only the name of the licensed auctioneer actually selling at the sale shall be
displayed on or about the premises.
§ 43-12. Conduct of business at licensed establishments.
No licensed establishment shall operate without licensed public
auctioneers, except that each licensed establishment may conduct its own
business on such licensed premises through its proprietor or one (1) of
its proprietors, if a partnership, or one (1) of its officers, if a corporation,
without any further license.
§ 43-13. Terms of sale.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to accept anything other than bona
fide bids, and such auction sales are to be so conducted as to dispose
of merchandise to the highest bidder, unless terms otherwise are publicly
announced immediately before the sale.
§ 43-14. Misrepresentation of goods prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer in describing goods or merchandise
that are being auctioned to, directly or indirectly, either by act of
commission or omission, knowingly misrepresent the goods or merchandise
being auctioned.
B. Pursuing a flagrant and continued course of willful misrepresentation
or the making of a false promise through agents, salesmen,
advertisements or otherwise.
C. Failure to account for or to pay over any moneys belonging to others
coming into possession of the licensee.
D. Any conduct which demonstrates unworthiness, incompetency, bad
faith or dishonesty.
E. The violation of any of the provisions of this section.
§ 43-9 FLORENCE CODE § 43-15
39:168
§ 43-15. Maintenance of records; information entered.
Every auctioneer or person engaged in the business of selling goods at
auction in the township, whether acting in his own behalf or as the officer,
agent or representative of another, shall, upon the receipt or acceptance by
him of any goods for the purpose of sale at auction and before offering the
same or any part thereof for sale at auction, write or cause to be written in
a book to be kept by him for that purpose:
§ 43-16. Days of sale restricted.
Sales shall be held by the licensee on any three (3) weekdays, provided that
said days for sales are advertised one (1) week in advance by the licensee
by a sign which shall be posted on the premises. It shall be unlawful to hold
public sales on Sunday.
§ 43-17. Sales on streets and sidewalks prohibited.
No licensed auctioneer or other person shall sell or attempt to sell at public
auction any goods, chattels or personal property in or upon any street or
sidewalk in the township.
A. The name and address of the person who employed him to sell such
goods at auction.
B. The name and address of the person for whose benefit, behalf or
account such goods are to be sold at auction.
C. The name and address of the person from whom such auctioneer
received or accepted such goods.
D. The name and address of the person who was the owner of such goods
immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance for the purpose of sale at
auction of the same by such auctioneer.
E. The location, with street number, if any, of such goods immediately
prior to the receipt or acceptance of same by such auctioneer for the
purpose of sale at auction.
F. The date of the receipt or acceptance by such auctioneer of such goods
for the purpose of sale at auction.
G. The place, with street number, if any, in which such goods are to be
held, kept or stored until sold or offered for sale at auction.
H. The place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods are to be
sold or offered for sale at auction.
I. A description of such goods, the quantity thereof and the distinctive
marks thereon, if any.
J. The terms and conditions upon which such auctioneer receives or
accepts such goods for sale at auction.
§ 43-15 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 43-18
39:169
§ 43-18. Use of means to attract public attention prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to engage in what is commonly called
"barking," "ballyhooing," "ringing of bell" or the use of any other noise
device in order to attract people passing the place where any auction is
being conducted to enter the place of business.
§ 43-19. Violations and penalties.
§ 43-20. Applicability of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or require a license
for auction sales conducted by any judicial officer, executor, administrator,
trustee or any bona fide licensed auctioneer employed by any judicial
officer, executor, administrator or trustee for the purpose of liquidating
either the real or personal property of an estate, nor shall any provision
herein be construed to prohibit or require a license for any department
store or supermarket owned by one (1) individual, person, firm, partnership
or corporation or for any commissary operated by any industry as a service
or convenience to its employees.
A. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation owning, operating,
maintaining or conducting or permitting or suffering the ownership,
operation, maintenance or conduct of any such auction market, auction
mart or multiconcession market without having obtained a license
therefor or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this Article shall
be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty not exceeding
the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or to imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or to a period of
community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof, within the discretion of the Judge.34
B. Each and every day that any violation of this Article shall be continued
shall be construed and be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense subjecting the violator to the fines, penalties and
imprisonment herein provided for.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 43-18 FLORENCE CODE § 43-20
39:170
ARTICLE II
Casual Sales
§ 43-21. Definitions.
§ 43-22. License required; fee. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a casual sale within any
residential zone in the Township of Florence without first filing with the
Clerk the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Clerk
a license to do so, to be known as a “casual sale license.” The fee for such
license shall be established in Schedule A of Chapter 2 of the Code of the
Township of Florence.
§ 43-23. Conditions of license. [Amended 9-17-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-18]
The casual sales license shall be issued to any one person or any one
property only once within a six-month period, and no such license shall be
issued for more than three consecutive calendar days, none of which days
shall fall upon a Sunday. Where the applicant for the license certifies that
the casual sale is being held because the resident of the property is moving,
a second license may be issued within the six-month period. Each license
issued under this article must be prominently displayed on the premises
upon which the casual sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the
licensed sale.
§ 43-24. Information required to be on file.
The information to be filed with the Clerk pursuant to this Article shall be
as follows:
A. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CASUAL SALES — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale," "yard sale" or any
similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by
any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said
sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations
and corporations.
A. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said casual sale.
§ 43-21 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 43-24
39:171
§ 43-25. Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 43-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale without
being properly licensed therefor or who shall violate any of the other terms
and regulations of this Article shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days or serve a period of community service not to exceed ninety
(90) days, or any combination thereof, for each such violation.
B. The name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted and the consent of the owner if the applicant is other than
the owner.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of the sale.
E. The date and nature of any past sale.
F. The relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any
other person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sale.
G. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any local, state or federal agency.
H. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale any items of personal property
which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and
which separate items do not exceed five (5) in number.
D. Any recognized and organized charity, civic or religious group.
§ 43-24 FLORENCE CODE § 43-26
39:172
Chapter 47
BLASTING
Chapter 53
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 2. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 36.
§ 53-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to:
§ 53-2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
FLORENCE TOWNSHIP RESIDENT — A person owning a valid New Jersey
driver's license which lists upon it the applicant's name and an address
located within the boundaries of Florence Township.
NEW JERSEY STATE RESIDENT — A person owning a valid New Jersey
driver's license which lists upon it the applicant's name and an address
located within the State of New Jersey.
OUT-OF-STATE RESIDENT — All other applicants that are neither Florence
Township residents or New Jersey State residents as defined herein.
§ 53-3. Permit required.
No one shall be permitted to use the boat ramp or designated trailer
parking only area without obtaining a permit from Florence Township.
Applicants for a permit must provide proof of a valid registration for the
boat and trailer, if applicable. If a trailer is to be used, then the permit will
be assigned to the trailer. If a trailer will not be used, then the permit will
be assigned to the boat.
A. Protect the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of
Florence Township and visitors to the Township.
B. Protect the dock, ramp, ramp area and parking lot.
C. Provide for an orderly procedure for the use of the ramp and ramp area
by boaters and visitors alike.
§ 43-26 BLASTING § 53-4
47:173
§ 53-4. Date and time of permit. [Amended 2-5-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-3]
Permits for the boat ramp and designated trailer parking area shall be
issued for the period of January 1 through December 31. The ramp and
parking area shall be closed to all boats and vehicles between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from March 2 to September 30 and between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. from October 1 to March 1.
§ 53-5. Fees; duration of permit. [Amended 9-19-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-2635]
§ 53-6. Parking decals.
§ 53-7. Restrictions and regulations.
A. Permit fees will be charged for the use of the ramp and designated
trailer parking lot in accordance with Chapter 2 of the Code of the
Township of Florence.
B. Permits are valid only for the calendar year in which they are issued.
C. A resident of the Township of Florence may receive additional annual
permits at no additional cost for each boat/trailer combination
registered to that resident after having purchased the first permit for
the year. Florence Township resident daily permits are to be purchased
separately, and each permit requires payment of the daily permit fee.
A. Upon receiving a permit from the Township, a decal shall be
conspicuously affixed to the left front of the boat trailer. If no trailer is
used to launch the boat, then the decal shall be conspicuously located
on the side of the boat itself at the port bow.
B. No person shall park a vehicle which is not connected to a trailer in the
areas designated for trailer parking only.
C. Parking shall be prohibited in the dock parking lot during those hours
that the ramp is closed to the public. The Police Department shall be
empowered to cause any vehicle parked in violation of these provisions
to be towed away at the owner's expense.
A. Boat restrictions.
(1) Mooring of boats shall not be permitted in the ramp or dock area so
as to restrict access to the ramp or dock.
(2) No boat shall be permitted to be tied to the municipal dock for a
period in excess of 15 minutes.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect at 12:01 a.m. on January 1,
2013.
§ 53-4 FLORENCE CODE § 53-7
47:174
§ 53-8. Liability.
All persons using the municipal boat launching ramp shall do so at their
own risk. The Township assumes no responsibility for theft, loss or damage
to any boats or motor vehicles or any equipment used in connection with
them.
§ 53-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person who violates any one or more of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to a period of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or to a period of community service not
to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof, for each separate offense.
In the case of a continuing violation or violations, such penalties may be
assessed for each day that the violation or violations continue unabated,
until such time as the violation or violations are corrected. A separate
(3) It shall be unlawful to obstruct the use of the ramp and dock areas
used by the public.
(4) Boats passing within the vicinity of the dock and ramp shall do so at
slow speed so as to prevent the creation of wakes which may
endanger the safety and welfare of the public.
(5) Jet ski boats are prohibited from launching from the dock.
B. Regulations.
(1) Boat and trailer regulations. All boats and trailers using the
municipal facilities must have valid registrations.
(2) Vehicle repair. There shall be no repairing of vehicles, boats or
trailers or any repair work in the parking area.
(3) Loitering; fishing. There shall be no loitering or fishing allowed on
the dock or in the ramp area.
(4) Swimming: No swimming is permitted at any time.
(5) Alcoholic beverages. No alcoholic beverages can be consumed in
the municipal parking lot, boat ramp or dock.
(6) Bicycles. No bicycles shall be permitted on the dock at any time.
(7) Removal of fire hazards. Any conditions about or around a boat
declared to be a fire hazard in the judgment of the Fire Official,
Chief of the Fire Department or Assistant Chief shall be removed by
the owner or person in charge of such boat.
(8) Waste oil products. Waste oil shall not be deposited or disposed of
into the waters of any stall or slip nor into the waters adjacent
thereto.
§ 53-7 BLASTING § 53-9
47:175
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 56
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 104. Solid waste — See Ch. 122.
§ 56-1. Removal of obnoxious growth, garbage and debris required.
Any lands lying within the Township of Florence, County of Burlington
and State of New Jersey, containing brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris which
is or may become a hazard to life, health or general welfare or might
tend to extend a conflagration in the Township of Florence aforesaid shall,
as prescribed below, be removed by the owner, tenant or agent of said
premises immediately.
§ 56-2. Time limit for removal following notification. [Amended
11-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-34; 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
A. If, after inspection by the Chief of Police, the Code Enforcement Officer,
the Construction Code Official or the Health Officer of the Township of
Florence or their designees, it is determined that any such condition of
land is hazardous to life, health or general welfare or may tend to
extend a conflagration, the owner, tenant or agent thereof shall, within
10 days after being notified by the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement
Officer, Construction Code Official or Health Officer or their designees
who made the inspection, remove such brush, weeds, dead or dying
trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and
debris or similar substance.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if it shall appear to the Chief of Police,
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Construction Code Official or the
Health Officer of the Township of Florence or their designees, that a
second or subsequent violation of this chapter has occurred within a
six-month period as to the same property, the notice requirements of
this chapter shall not be applicable unless during the six-month period
either the legal title to or possession of the property shall have
changed. In such instance involving an alleged second or subsequent
violation of this chapter, the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer,
the Construction Code Official or the Health Officer of the Township of
Florence or their designees, may issue a notice demanding immediate
abatement of the condition and/or issue a summons for the violation of
this chapter without any further notice.
§ 53-9 FLORENCE CODE § 56-3
47:176
§ 56-3. Noncompliance; removal by township; costs; creation of
lien. [Amended 11-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-34]
In the event that any owner, tenant or agent shall refuse to comply with
said notice from said Chief of Police, Construction Code Official or Health
Officer of the Township of Florence or their designees within ten (10) days
from the date of the notice, the condition which is the subject of the notice
shall be removed and/or corrected by the township, its employees, agents
or assigns. The Township Administrator shall certify the dollar amount
of any such work performed by the township, its employees, agents or
assigns to the Mayor and Council of the Township of Florence, which shall
direct the Clerk to notify the property owner or his agent or tenant of the
cost incurred by the township. The Township Administrator shall cause the
amount incurred by the township to be charged against said land, and the
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall
be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
against such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as delinquent
taxes and to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as the collection of taxes.
§ 56-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-3-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-34]
Any owner, tenant or agent who violates the provisions of this chapter by
failing to comply with the notice from the Chief of Police, Construction Code
Official or Health Officer of the Township of Florence or their designees may
be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or may
be imprisoned for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment.
Chapter 59
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 91. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 126.
§ 59-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all streets, avenues, roads and public rights-ofway
located in the Township of Florence.
§ 59-2. Numbering required; standards.
Numbers of all houses and business places of the Township of Florence
shall comply with the provisions of the Act Providing for a Standard 9-1-1
Locatable Mailing Address System Pilot Program of Burlington County, P.L.
1991, c. 265, as approved August 16, 1991.36 The numbers of all houses
§ 56-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-2
59:177
and business places in the Township of Florence shall be on file with the
current tax records of the Township of Florence filed in the office of the Tax
Assessor, and it shall be the duty of all property owners to have their houses
and business places display their number as designated by the township
so as to conform with the provisions of P.L. 1991, c. 265. Numbers shall
be displayed on a background of a contrasting color so as to enhance the
visibility.
§ 59-3. Application for number; display.
In all cases where any number is or shall be hereinafter placed in the tax
records by the Township Tax Assessor, it shall be the duty of the owner
thereof to apply to the Tax Assessor of the township for the correct number
of said house or business place as the same is indicated in the current tax
records, and upon said application the Tax Assessor shall furnish to said
applicant the correct number of said property, and said property owner
should thereupon display in front of said house or business place said
number in conformity with the previous sections and P.L. 1991, c. 265.37
§ 59-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to abide by the provisions of this chapter, after two
(2) written notices from the Zoning Officer or the Chief of Police or his
designate shall be liable to a penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.).
Chapter 64
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 2.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 59.
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 65.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Housing standards — See Ch. 87, Art. I.
Development fees for affordable
housing — See Ch. 87, Art. IV.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Noise — See Ch. 102.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Soil removal — See Ch. 120.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permit — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 131.
§ 64-1. Enforcement agency established; subcode officials and
qualifications; office location.
36.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:23-47 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:23-47 et seq.
§ 59-2 FLORENCE CODE § 64-1
59:178
§ 64-2. Construction Board of Appeals.
The Construction Board of Appeals for the Township shall be the Burlington
County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 64-3. Fees; report of Construction Code Official. [Amended
11-7-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-16; 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-15;
8-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-20; 12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-29;
11-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26; 4-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-10]
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Florence a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcement agency, to be known as the
"Florence Township Construction Enforcement Agency," consisting of a
Construction Code Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing
Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode
Official, Code Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Officer Trainee
and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Construction Code Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency. [Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-29]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereby shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,38 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. General.
(1) The fee for plan review, computed as a percentage of the fee for a
construction permit, shall be paid at the time of application for a
permit. The amount of this fee shall then be deducted from the
amount of the fee due for a construction permit when the permit is
issued. Plan review fees are not refundable.
(2) The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum of
the basic construction fee plus all applicable special fees, such as,
but not limited to, elevator or sign fees. This fee shall be paid
before a permit is issued.
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 64-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 64-3
59:179
(3) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid
before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition to the
construction permit fee.
(4) Where the Department, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.24, is
designated as the plan review agency, or when the Department has
been requested to provide plan review services by a municipality
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.24, or when the Department is
designated as the local enforcing agency pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.3, the following schedule of fees shall pertain.
(5) Newly constructed residential units that are to be legally restricted
to occupancy by households of low or moderate income shall be
exempted from the fees as set forth in Subsections B and C below
and otherwise payable to the Department.
(6) State of New Jersey training fee. This fee shall be calculated in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19, as amended and supplemented
from time to time.
B. Departmental plan review fee. The fees listed in Subsection C(2) below
shall be in addition to a departmental plan review surcharge in the
amount of 20% of each listed fee. Where the Department performs plan
review only, the plan review fee shall be in the amount of 25% of the
new construction permit fee which would be charged by the
Department pursuant to these rules. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-18]
C. Departmental (enforcing agency) fees shall be as follows:
(1) Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 25% of the amount
to be charged for a new construction permit, except that elevator
device plan review shall be as in Subsection C(6) and C(7) below.
(2) The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed
on the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of
electrical fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers,
standpipes and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates
provided herein plus any special fees. There shall be a minimum
permit fee of $75 per subcode.
(a) Building volume or cost. The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
[1] Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume
of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be
in the amount of $0.037 per cubic foot of volume for
buildings and structures of all use groups and types of
construction as classified and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of
the building subcode; except that the fee shall be $0.023
§ 64-3 FLORENCE CODE § 64-3
59:180
per cubic foot of volume for Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4,
F-1, and F-2, and the fee shall be $0.0015 per cubic foot for
structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), with the maximum fee for such
structures on farms not to exceed $1,250.
[2] Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site
construction associated with pre-engineered systems of
commercial farm building, premanufactured construction,
and the external utility connection for premanufactured
construction shall be based upon the estimated cost of the
work. Fees are cumulative based on the fees contained
herein. The fee shall be in the amount of $30 per $1,000.
From $50,001 to and including $100,000, the additional
fee shall be in the amount of $24 per $1,000 of estimated
cost above $50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee
shall be in the amount of $21 per $1,000 of estimated costs
above $100,000. For the purpose of determining estimated
cost, the applicant shall submit to the Department such
cost data as may be available produced by the architect or
engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating firm, or
by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if available,
shall be submitted. The Department shall make the final
decision regarding estimated cost. For the purpose of
determining estimated cost for decks, the fee basis shall
be $25 per square foot.
[3] Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as
for new construction for the added portion.
[4] Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsections C(2)(a)[2] and [3] above.
[5] Fees for tents in excess of 900 square feet or more than 30
feet in any dimension in any direction shall be $125 each.
Tents or temporary structures meeting the size
requirements above, with or without appurtenances, for
nonprofit organizations based within the Township shall
have a flat fee of $75 regardless of the number of
structures at the same property. Tents or temporary
structures with platforms used as a stage, regardless of
size, shall require a permit with the fees provided for
herein.
[6] Fees for roofing or siding work completed on a structure in
Use Group R-5 having no more than two dwelling units
shall be $75 for each type of work completed. Roofing and
siding shall be considered separate and shall each be
charged separately. All other use groups shall be charged
in accordance with § 64-3C(2)(a)[2].
§ 64-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 64-3
59:181
[7] The fee for aboveground pools shall be $125 for a pool
with a surface area greater than 550 square feet. The fee
for all other aboveground pools shall be $85. The fee for an
in-ground pool shall be $175 for a pool with a surface area
greater than 550 square feet. The fee for all other inground
pools shall be $100. The fee for hot tubs and spas
shall be $85.
[8] The fees for new structures, including additions in Use
Groups S-1 and S-2, shall be computed per cubic foot of
volume, and such fees shall be cumulative and calculated
in accordance with the following schedule:
[a] Up to and including 1,000,000 cubic feet, the
construction fee shall be in the amount of $0.015 per
cubic foot of volume.
[b] Over 1,000,000 cubic feet up to and including
5,000,000 cubic feet, the fee shall be in the amount of
$0.013 per cubic foot of volume.
[c] Over 5,000,000 cubic feet up to and including
35,000,000 cubic feet, the fee shall be in the amount
of $0.011 per cubic foot of volume.
[d] Over 35,000,000 cubic feet up to and including
45,000,000 cubic feet, the fee shall be in the amount
of $0.006 per cubic foot of volume.
[e] For any remaining volume above 45,000,000 cubic
feet, an additional fee in the amount of $0.0012 per
cubic foot of volume shall be charged.
[9] The minimum building subcode fee shall not be less than
$75.
[10] Sheds greater than 100 square feet up to 400 square feet
using light frame construction shall be charged a minimum
fee of $75.
[11] The fee for all fences acting as pool barriers in R-3 and R-5
Use Group properties shall be $75. [Added 5-1-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-11]
(b) Plumbing fixtures and equipment. The fees shall be as follows:
[1] The fee shall be in the amount of $75 for the first one to
four fixtures connected to the plumbing system and/or gasor
oil-fired appliances connected to the gas or oil systems,
and the fee for each fixture or appliance over four shall be
$15 each.
§ 64-3 FLORENCE CODE § 64-3
59:182
[2] The fee shall be $75 per special device for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, water-cooled air-conditioning
units, refrigeration units, utility service connections,
backflow preventers equipped with test ports (doublecheck
valve assembly, reduced pressure zone, pressure
vacuum breaker), steam boilers, hot-water boilers
(excluding those for domestic water heating), active solar
systems, sewer pumps, and interceptors. There shall be no
inspection fee charged for gas service entrances.
[3] The fee for tents and temporary structures with plumbing
appurtenances, regardless of size, for nonprofit
organizations based in the Township shall be a flat $50 for
all tents or temporary structures on the same property. For
all other applicants, the fee shall be $75 for all pertinent
tents or temporary structures on the same property.
(c) Electrical fixtures and devices. The fees shall be as follows:
[1] For from one to 40 receptacles, fixtures or rain sensors,
the fee shall be in the amount of $75; for each 25
receptacles or fixtures in addition to this, the fee shall be
in the amount of $50; for the purpose of computing this
fee, receptacles or fixtures shall include lighting outlets,
wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience
receptacles or similar fixtures and motors or devices of
less than one horsepower or one kilowatt or less.
[2] For the first one to four motor(s) or electrical device(s)
greater than one horsepower and less than or equal to 10
horsepower, and for each one to four transformers and
generators greater than one kilowatt and less than or
equal to 10 kilowatts, the fee shall be $75; and for each
motor or device over four, the fee shall be $11.
[3] For each motor or electrical device greater than 10
horsepower and less than or equal to 50 horsepower, for
each service panel, service entrance or subpanel less than
or equal to 150 amperes, and for all transformers and
generators greater than 10 kilowatts and less than or
equal to 45 kilowatts, the fee shall be $100. [Amended
6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
[4] For each motor or electrical device greater than 50
horsepower and less than or equal to 100 horsepower, for
each service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater
than 150 amperes and less than or equal to 1,000 amperes,
and for transformers and generators greater than 45
kilowatts and less than or equal to 112.5 kilowatts, the fee
shall be $200.
§ 64-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 64-3
59:183
[5] For each motor or electrical device greater than 100
horsepower, for each service panel, service entrance or
subpanel greater than 1,000 amperes, and for each
transformer or generator greater than 112.5 kilowatts, the
fee shall be $665.
[6] The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently
installed private swimming pool as defined in the building
subcode, spa, hot tub, fountain, or man-made pond with
electric devices shall be a flat fee of $125, which shall
include any required bonding, and associated equipment
such as filter pumps, motors, disconnecting means,
switches, required receptacles and heaters, etc., excepting
panel boards and underwater lighting fixtures. For public
swimming pools, the fee shall be based on the number of
electrical fixtures and rating of electrical devices involved,
in accordance with § 64-3C(2)(c)[1] and [2] above.
[7] The fee charged for the installation of single- and multiplestation
smoke, heat or carbon monoxide detectors and fire,
burglar or security alarm systems in any one- or two-family
dwelling shall be a flat fee of $75 per dwelling unit. For
fire, burglar, or security alarm systems in buildings other
than one- or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be charged
in accordance with § 64-3C(2)(c)[1] and [2] above.
[8] For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee
shall be based upon the ampere rating of the main bus and
not upon the number of meters or rating of disconnects on
the meter stack. Individual load side panel boards shall be
charged in accordance with § 64-3C(2)(c)[3], [4] and [5]
above. There shall be no additional fee for the concurrent
installation of individual feeder conductors.
[9] For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent
installation of individual controls, relays and switches, the
fee shall be based only upon the rating of the motor device.
There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent
installation of individual circuit components, for example,
controllers, starters and disconnecting means.
[10] For electrical work requiring replacement of service
entrance conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee
shall be in accordance with § 64-3C(2)(c)[2] through [5]
above, based on the designated ampere rating of the
overcurrent device of the service or feeder.
[11] The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on
the ampere rating of the overcurrent device protecting the
conductor feeding the process equipment or the cutoff
device.
§ 64-3 FLORENCE CODE § 64-3
59:184
[12] For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except
those in plug-in appliances shall be counted, including
control equipment, generators, transformers and all
heating, cooking or other devices consuming or generating
electrical current.
[13] The fee for tents or temporary structures with electrical
appurtenances for nonprofit organizations based in the
Township shall be a flat fee of $50 regardless of the
number of tents or structures on the same property. All
other applicants shall pay a flat fee of $75 for the same
type structures with appurtenances, regardless of the
number of structures on the same property.
[14] The fee for all photovoltaic systems in R-3 and R-5 use
groups shall be $75. This fee is only for PV modules with
micro-inverters, grounding, bonding and junction boxes.
The fee for other associated equipment shall be charged in
accordance with § 64-3C(2)(c)[1] for associated equipment
on the basis of electrical devices involved, such as
inverters, combiner box, subpanels, production meter,
disconnects, and back-fed circuit breakers. Stand-alone
systems shall be charged as a service addition to the above
fees. For all other use groups, the fee for total PVS shall
be: [Amended 4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]]
Type Fee
1 KW to 10 KW $75
More than 10 KW to 20 KW $200
More than 20 KW to 100
KW
$300
More than 100 KW to 500
KW
$400
More than 500 KW to 1 MW $500
More than 1.0 MW to 2.0
MW
$600
More than 2.0 MW to 5.0
MW
$700
More than 5.0 MW $800
[15] Generators up to and including 20 KW in R-3 and R-5 Use
Groups shall be charged a flat fee to include all subcodes
in the total amount of $250. [Added 6-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-06]
[16] Replacement of a service cable from a service head to a
distribution panel, not to include replacement or alteration
to a distribution panel and/or main disconnect, shall be
§ 64-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 64-3
59:185
charged a flat fee of $75. [Added 6-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-06]
(d) Fire-protection and other hazardous equipment, sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat) pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not
connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems,
incinerators and crematoriums:
[1] The fee for 20 or fewer heads shall be $85; for 21 to and
including 100 heads, the fee shall be $150; for 101 to and
including 200 heads, the fee shall be $300; for 201 to and
including 400 heads, the fee shall be $785; for 401 to and
including 1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,055; for over
1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,330.
[2] The fee for each standpipe shall be $290.
[a] Hose stations added to sprinkler systems in S1, S2 and
B Use Groups shall be charged $150 for 1 to 10
stations, and $75 for each additional group or portion
of 10 stations. [Added 6-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-06]
[3] The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall
be $150.
[4] The fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance that is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $75.
[5] The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $125.
[6] The fee for each incinerator shall be $425.
[7] The fee for each crematorium shall be $425.
[8] The fee for 1 to 12 fire and/or smoke detectors shall be
$75; for each additional 25 detectors, or portion thereof,
there shall be an additional fee of $25.
[9] For single- and multiple-station smoke, heat or carbon
monoxide detectors and fire alarm systems in any one- or
two-family dwellings, there shall be a flat fee of $75 per
dwelling unit. For detectors and fire alarm systems in
buildings in other than one- or two-family dwellings, the
fee shall be charged in accordance with § 64-3C(2)(d)[8].
[10] The fee for tents or temporary structures with fire
appurtenances, regardless of size, for all nonprofit
organizations based in the Township shall be a flat fee of
$50, which shall cover all pertinent tents or structures on
the property. For all other applicants, the fee shall be $75.
§ 64-3 FLORENCE CODE § 64-3
59:186
[11] The fee for alarm valves/dry pipe valves and preaction
valves shall be $75 each. The fee for fire pumps shall be
$300 each. The fee for fireplaces/solid fuel heaters and
wood stoves shall be $75 each.
[12] The fee for the removal of combustible liquid tanks in Use
Group R-5 shall be $75. In all other use groups, it shall be
$125.
(3) Certificates and other permits. The fees are as follows:
(a) The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $100 for a
structure of less than 5,000 square feet in area and less than
30 feet in height for one- or two-family residences (Use Group
R-5 of the building code) and structures on farms, including
commercial farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), and
$175 for all other use groups.
(b) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount
of $1.30 per square foot of surface area of the sign, computed
on one side only for double-faced signs. The minimum fee shall
be $75.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in the amount of
10% of the new construction permit fee that would be charged
by the Department pursuant to these regulations. The
minimum fee shall be $175, except for one- or two-family (Use
Group R-5 of the building subcode) structures of less than
5,000 square feet in area and less than 30 feet in height and
structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings
subject to N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), for which the minimum fee shall
be $120.
(d) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use group shall be $250.
(e) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $175,
except that the fee for a one- or two-family dwelling shall be
$120.
(f) There shall be no fee for an initial temporary certificate of
occupancy. Renewal of an expired temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be $30.
(g) The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the
alternate systems and nondepletable energy source provisions
of the energy subcode shall be $293 for one- and two-family
homes (Use Group R-5 of the building subcode) and for light
commercial structures having the indoor temperature
controlled from a single point, and $1,465 for all other
structures.
§ 64-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 64-3
59:187
(h) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $250 for Class I structures and $125
for Class II and $75 for Class III structures. The fee for
resubmission of an application for a variation shall be $100 for
Class I structures, $75 for Class II and $30 for Class III
structures.
(i) The fee for removal of nonregulated underground,
aboveground, or basement heating oil tanks shall be $75 in Use
Group R-5. In all other use groups, the fee shall be $250.
(4) For cross-connections and backflow preventers that are subject to
testing, requiring reinspection every three months, the fee shall be
$75 for each device when they are tested (thrice annually) and
$150 for each device when they are broken down and tested (once
annually). For cross-connections and backflow preventers that are
subject to testing, requiring reinspection annually, the fee shall be
$75 for each device when they are tested.
(5) Annual permit requirements are as follows:
(a) The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall
be charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the
number of maintenance workers who are employed by the
facility and who are primarily engaged in work that is governed
by a subcode. Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be
considered maintenance workers for the purpose of
establishing the annual construction permit fee. Annual
permits may be issued for building/fire protection, electrical
and plumbing.
(b) Fees for annual permits shall be as follows:
[1] One to 25 workers (including foremen): $714 per worker;
each additional worker over 25, $243 per worker.
[2] Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $140 per subcode shall be submitted by
the applicant to the Department of Community Affairs,
Bureau of Technical Assistance, Training Section, along
with a copy of the construction permit (Form F-170C).
Checks shall be made payable to "Treasurer, State of New
Jersey."
(6) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in Use
Group R-5 and for elevator devices wholly within dwelling units in
R-2 structures shall be $75 for each device.
(7) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in use
groups other than R-5 and devices in R-2 exempted by Subsection
C(6) above shall be $278 for each device.
§ 64-3 FLORENCE CODE § 64-3
59:188
§ 64-4. Local construction code requirements. [Added 3-1-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-03]
At the time of demolition, prior to backfilling and before any final approval
is issued by the Township, the property owner shall notify the Florence
Township Construction Enforcement Agency, in writing, of the project's
status and request an inspection to ensure the proper removal of all
materials. The Florence Township Construction Enforcement Agency shall
perform an inspection, related solely to the proper removal of materials,
which shall be free of charge, and confirm that all materials that once
comprised a structure or appurtenance thereof which were the subject of
the demolition be removed from the property. The requirement to properly
dispose of all materials includes but is not limited to footings, foundations,
foundation walls, thrust blocks, piers, piles, columns, slabs, sidewalk,
driveway/parking areas, pavement, floors, pools and any material not native
to the ground where the demolition is taking place. Following this
inspection, and approval from the Florence Township Construction
Enforcement Agency, the property owner may apply for final approval
consistent with the terms of the applicable sections of the Township Code.
Chapter 65
CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
(8) The fee for elevator device inspections and tests shall be as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
(9) The fee for a mechanical inspection in a Use Group R-5 structure by
a mechanical inspector shall be $75 for the first device and $15 for
each additional device. No separate fee shall be charged for gas,
fuel oil or water piping connections associated with the mechanical
equipment inspected.
(10) The fee for the annual electric inspection of swimming pools, spas
or hot tubs shall be $75.
D. Report of the Construction Code Official. The Construction Code
Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials, prepare and
submit to the Township of Florence, biannually, a report recommending
a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the agency and any
other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.39
39.Editor's Note: Original § 64-4, Fire limits, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32.
§ 64-3 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 64-4
65:189
§ 65-1. License required. [Amended 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
Every general contractor or contractor for masonry, plastering, carpentry
or heating or cooling systems shall be licensed by the Construction Official
of the township prior to the issuance of any construction permit.
§ 65-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
CONTRACTOR — Any person or firm seeking a construction permit except
a property owner who is working on his own property in which he resides.
§ 65-3. Terms of license.
All such licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.
§ 65-4. Conditions for issuance of license.
Prior to the issuance of the contractor's license, the Construction Official
shall be familiar with the applicant's experience, workmanship and
capability of performing the work normally undertaken by such contractors.
The Construction Official may request up to three references from other
municipalities for applicants who have not previously done work in Florence
Township. For applicants who have not done prior contracting work, the
Construction Official may restrict the new contractor's work until such time
as the new contractor has proven his capability to perform in an acceptable
manner in accordance with established code standards.
§ 65-5. Revocation or denial of license; appeals.
§ 65-6. Fees.
A. The contractor license may be revoked by the Construction Official
upon serious violation of the construction codes or upon repeated minor
violations of the construction codes or upon inadequate and poor
quality workmanship as determined by consumer complaints and
testimony of two other licensed contractors.
B. The Construction Official may refuse to issue a contractor's license or
may revoke an issued license only after notice to the contractor stating
his reasons for the refusal or revocation; within 10 days of the notice,
the contractor may request a hearing at which the contractor may
present evidence indicating why the license should be issued or not
revoked. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed
by the Mayor.
A. The fee for a general contractor's license shall be $25 and a renewal for
same shall be $15 for each subsequent year or a portion thereof.
§ 64-4 FLORENCE CODE § 65-6
65:190
§ 65-7. Insurance requirements.
Prior to the issuance of any license, each contractor shall provide evidence
of insurance to the Construction Official for general liability coverage,
including completed operations with bodily injury limits of $100,000 for
each occurrence and $300,000 aggregate and $50,000 property damage.
Such evidence of insurance shall remain in effect during the license year or
shall provide ten-day notice of cancellation to the Construction Official.
§ 65-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person in violation of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
90 days, or both.
Chapter 65A
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free, drunk-driving-free and sexoffender-
free zones — See Ch. 70.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 110.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 114.
§ 65A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Identification Division and/or the New Jersey State Bureau
of Identification in the Division of State Police.
NONSPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any youth programs not
sponsored by the Township of Florence but that utilize municipal facilities
or have affiliation with a Township-sponsored youth program and having
contact with person under the age of 18 years.
TOWNSHIP-SPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any programs sponsored
by the Township of Florence, including any and all leagues, boards and
commissions falling within the purview of or acting for or on behalf of the
Township of Florence and having contact with persons under the age of 18
years.
B. A special license may be granted to the contractors who are licensed in
other communities and are performing a single contract in Florence
Township with a value of $1,000 or less upon payment of an application
fee of $10. Special licenses are not renewable.
§ 65-6 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 65A-1
65:191
YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any programs that allow for participation in
activities by those persons under 18 years of age. Activities may include, but
are not limited to, sporting activities, passive recreation groups, clubs or
camps and trips or other activities whereby some control and responsibility
for children is assigned to some person acting for or on behalf of the
Township other than a parent or caregiver.
§ 65A-2. Nonsponsored youth programs. [Amended 2-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-02]
§ 65A-3. Township-sponsored youth programs.
A. Prior to any club or organization not defined as a Township-sponsored
youth program being authorized to use Township-owned facilities for
functions participated in by children, all adults, those persons 18 years
of age or older, in any way assisting in the function, including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions, must provide
the Florence Township Recreation Director with findings of a criminal
background check obtained from the State Bureau of Identification in
the New Jersey State Police.
B. The submission of background check findings must be based upon a
check performed within three years of the start of use of the Townshipowned
facility. In the case of coaches performing duties as employees of
a school district, the policy of background checks adopted by the
individual school district shall be used to establish eligibility for use of
Township-owned facilities. In all cases, the background check must
comply with the provisions of any applicable laws regarding same, but
not less detailed than those performed by the Township for individuals
involved in administering Township-sponsored youth programs. The
cost of background checks for individuals not administering a
Township-sponsored program shall be borne by the individual or
program with which they are participating.
A. All adults, those persons 18 years of age or older, including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions involved in
educating, directing or supervising youth, and in any way assisting in a
Florence Township-sponsored function participated in by children, shall
submit sufficient information on forms supplied by the Florence
Township Recreation Director from the New Jersey State Police, for the
purpose of obtaining a criminal history background check with the
State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police.
Applications for background checks shall be processed by the Florence
Township Recreation Director. Based upon the memorandum of
understanding executed between the Township of Florence and the
New Jersey State Police, the individual applying for the background
check shall authorize the Recreation Director to be the recipient of the
affirmative or negative response from the State Police based upon the
findings of the background check. Individuals involved in a Florence
Township-sponsored youth function, and who are required to undergo
§ 65A-1 FLORENCE CODE § 65A-3
65:192
§ 65A-4. Qualification. [Amended 4-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
Individuals engaged in providing recreation opportunities for, or on behalf
of, the Township of Florence shall be issued identification cards with
appropriate expirations based upon the date of their individual background
check. Coaches background check identification cards are required to be
displayed while in performance of their duty involving youth programs as
prescribed by this Code.
§ 65A-5. Disqualification.
background checks based upon this chapter, shall not be responsible for
the costs involved with obtaining the criminal background check. The
Township of Florence shall bear the costs for the background checks
for individuals qualified under this section.
B. All league officers and/or those individuals in charge of each recreation
program are required to ensure compliance with this chapter for that
league or program. The president or leader of each recreation program
shall file an annual roster of individuals that are required to participate
in the background check procedures of this chapter. The roster shall be
on forms supplied by the Township of Florence and shall contain a
certification as to the accuracy and completeness of the roster and
individuals names. Any person who knowingly certifies a background
check roster that excludes an individual required to be checked shall be
in violation of this chapter and laws regarding false swearing.
A. Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the State
Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the Recreation
Director shall notify the applicant and the president or leader of the
recreation program of affirmative or negative results. The
determination of the Recreation Director is based upon § 65A-5B of this
chapter. Details in the background check that result in a negative
determination by the State Police are not afforded to the Recreation
Director and are only available to the applicant upon making a formal
request to the State Bureau of Investigation.
B. In the event the criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses which negatively impact the health,
safety and welfare of children, said person shall not be qualified to
participate in any official capacity in any function for persons under the
age of 18 years held at any Township-owned facilities. Such offenses
shall includes, but not be limited to:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq. or N.J.S.A 2C:15-1 et seq.;
§ 65A-3 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 65A-5
65:193
§ 65A-6. Frequency of background checks. [Amended 2-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-02]
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq.;
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes;
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of subsection a. of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection B(1) of this section.
C. The list of crimes and violations contained in this section is for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as a limitation on
those criminal activities or violations that would be grounds to
disqualify a person from assisting with youth-related activities as
indicated herein.
D. Refusal by individuals required to submit to background checks will
result in an immediate dismissal of the individual from any Townshipsponsored
activities requiring background checks. In addition, refusal
to comply with this chapter by any individual falling within the scope of
requirements for nonsponsored youth programs will forfeit that
individual's ability to participate with the respective program. Refusal
of a non-Township-sponsored youth program to subscribe to the
requirements of this chapter shall forfeit that program's ability to use
municipal facilities.
A. All nonsponsored youth programs that have individuals subject to this
chapter shall supply background checks for all of its participants prior
to the individual being able to participate at any function at a Townshipowned
facility to the extent covered by this chapter. Thereafter, every
three years a new background check shall be submitted to the
Recreation Director.
B. All Township-sponsored youth programs that have individuals subject to
this chapter shall direct those individuals to the Recreation Director for
background checks prior to the individual being able to participate at
any function sponsored by the Township of Florence. Thereafter, every
three years a new background check shall be submitted to the
Recreation Director. Final approval shall consist of the Township of
Florence receiving a letter of approval from the New Jersey State
Police. Approved individuals are required to display their Townshipissued
coaches background check identification card while in
§ 65A-5 FLORENCE CODE § 65A-6
65:194
§ 65A-7. Privacy.
Any and all criminal background checks supplied to the Recreation Director
shall be filed and maintained in a secure and locked cabinet or room and
shall not be available to the public. The Recreation Director shall take
appropriate steps to safeguard such records. The records shall be exempt
from public disclosure under the common law or the New Jersey Right to
Know Law. The records shall only be retained for such period of time as is
necessary to serve their intended and authorized purpose.
§ 65A-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in § 1-10 of the Florence Code.
Chapter 66
CURFEW
§ 66-1. Findings and purpose.
performance of their duty involving youth programs as prescribed by
this Code. [Amended 4-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
A. The Township Council of the Township of Florence hereby finds that
there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision normally
provided by certain parents and guidance for juveniles under 18 years
of age resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide range of
unacceptable behavior, including vandalism, noisy and rowdy behavior,
breaking and entering, public drinking and littering and harassment of
residents.
B. The Township Council further finds that the offensive activities of the
juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances
because the activities are easily concealed whenever police officers are
present and that the establishment of reasonable curfew regulations
will enable the community to better control the free and unobstructed
access to the streets and public places by the majority of residents and
will enable the police to act reasonably and fairly to prevent the
violation of laws and ordinances by juveniles.
C. The Township Council further finds and has determined that a curfew
meets a very real local need and that curfew ordinances in other
communities have been a significant factor in minimizing juvenile
delinquency. A curfew in Florence is particularly appropriate in view of
the basic residential nature of the community in the sense of the
community that there is a proper time for the cessation of outdoor
activities of juveniles. That sense of community is reflected by the
curfew hours declared by this chapter which take into consideration
§ 65A-6 CURFEW § 66-1
66:195
§ 66-2. Definitions; word usage.
The following terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
also the danger hours for nocturnal crime and for accumulations of
juveniles with potential risk incident to immaturity.
D. In enacting this chapter, the Township Council adopts the findings of
the legislature expressed in P.L. 1992, Chapter 13240 and has taken note
of the peculiar vulnerability of children, both as victims of crime and as
perpetrators of offenses because of peer pressure. This chapter is
intended not only to prevent children from causing harm but also is
intended to protect children themselves from being harmed as victims
of nocturnal crime.
E. Florence is basically a family community. Parental responsibility for the
whereabouts of children is the accepted norm by a substantial majority
of the community. Legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have
had a demonstrated effectiveness in many communities over the years.
The Township Council has determined that as parental control
increases there is a likelihood that juvenile delinquency decreases and
that there is a need for a nocturnal curfew for juveniles in Florence and
that the establishment of a curfew applicable to juveniles will reinforce
the primary authority and responsibility of parents and guardians over
juveniles in their care and custody.
F. It is not the intent of this chapter to supplant parental supervision. The
Township Council recognizes the right of parents to direct their
children's upbringing and family autonomy against unreasonable
interference. The Township Council is also aware that in cases in which
harm to the physical or mental health of a child or to the public safety,
peace, order or welfare is threatened, the legitimate interests of the
community as a whole may override the parents qualified right to
control the upbringing of their children.
G. The Township Council also recognizes that juveniles are protected with
certain constitutional rights and guaranties that are enjoyed by all
citizens of this community. It is not the intention of this chapter to
deprive juveniles of the ability to exercise valid rights secured to them
under the Constitution of the United States or the State of New Jersey.
The function of this chapter is, instead, to protect juveniles and to
balance the right of all citizens of the Township of Florence so that all
may enjoy the rights and privileges of citizens as guarantied to them by
the Constitution and the laws of this country and this state.
40.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52.
§ 66-1 FLORENCE CODE § 66-2
66:196
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
§ 66-3. Establishment of curfew for juveniles. [Amended 2-5-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-5]
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to be on or remain on or upon any public
place within the Township of Florence between the following hours:
§ 66-4. Exceptions.
A juvenile on the street during the hours referred to in § 66-3 shall not be
considered in violation of this chapter under the following circumstances:
A. Beginning at 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights, and official
holidays, Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve nights, and extending until
5:00 a.m. on the following day.
B. Beginning at 10:00 p.m. on all other nights and extending until 5:00
a.m. the following day, except as otherwise provided below.
C. Beginning at 9:00 p.m. and extending until 5:00 a.m. on all nights
during the period of October 27 through November 2 of each calendar
year.
A. When accompanied by a parent or guardian of such juvenile.
B. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such juvenile
to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
C. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of such exercise, provided that the juvenile has in
his possession a written communication, signed by the juvenile and
countersigned by a parent or guardian of the juvenile with their home
address and telephone number, specifying when, where and in what
manner the juvenile will be on the streets at night during hours when
the Curfew Ordinance is otherwise applicable to said juvenile in the
exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such communication.
D. In case of reasonable necessity for the juvenile remaining on the
streets, providing that the juvenile has in his possession a written
communication, signed by the juvenile and countersigned by a parent
or guardian of the juvenile with their home address and telephone
number setting forth the facts establishing the reasonable necessity
relating to specified streets at a designated time for a described
purpose including points of origin and destination.
§ 66-2 CURFEW § 66-4
66:197
§ 66-5. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian having legal custody of a
juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile
to be or remain in any public place under circumstances not constituting
an exception to or otherwise beyond the scope of this chapter. The term
"knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's
legal custody. It is intended to hold parents and guardians to a reasonable
community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It
shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was inattentive or indifferent
to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile.
§ 66-6. Enforcement procedures.
E. When the juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile
resides or on either side of or across the street from the place where the
juvenile resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has
given permission for the juvenile to be there.
F. When returning home from and within one hour after the termination of
a school or township sponsored activity, or an activity of a religious or
other voluntary association, providing that the juvenile has in his
possession a written communication, signed by the juvenile and
countersigned by a parent or guardian of the juvenile with their home
address and telephone number indicating the place and probable time
of termination of the activity.
G. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. It is the intention of this provision to
clearly exempt bona fide interstate movements along major routes
through the Township of Florence and interstate travel beginning or
ending in the Township of Florence.
H. When engaged in or traveling to or from a place of employment.
I. When engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency.
A. If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is in a public place
in violation of this chapter, the officer shall so advise the juvenile and
take the juvenile into custody. The juvenile shall then provide his or her
name, age, address and telephone number and advise the officer where
and how to contact his or her parent or guardian. The juvenile shall
then be taken to the police station where a parent or guardian shall
immediately be notified to come and take custody of the juvenile.
B. If the parent or guardian cannot be located or fails to take custody of
the juvenile, then the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile
authorities or, in appropriate cases, may be temporarily entrusted to an
adult neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent or
guardian, assume responsibility for the juvenile.
§ 66-4 FLORENCE CODE § 66-6
66:198
§ 66-7. Violation and penalties.
If, after the parent or guardian receives the notice pursuant to § 66-6E, the
juvenile violates this chapter a second time, this shall be treated as a first
offense by the parent. Upon a finding of parental culpability for the first
parental offense, a parent shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250. For
each subsequent offense by a parent, the parent shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or shall be required to perform community service, or
both.
§ 66-8. Construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose and
intent of P.L. 1993, c.132.41
§ 66-9. Notice.
Notice of the existence of this chapter and of the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted in or about such public or quasi-public
places as may be determined by the Chief of Police or his designate in order
that the public may be informed of the existence of this chapter and its
regulations.
Chapter 70
DRUG-FREE AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE ZONES
C. In the absence of documentary evidence, a police officer may use his or
her best judgment in determining age.
D. Within 24 hours of the violation, the police officer who took the juvenile
into custody shall file a written report, in a form to be prescribed by the
Chief of Police, with the office of the Chief.
E. In the case of a first violation, the Chief of Police or his designee shall,
by certified mail, send to the parent or guardian, written notice of the
violation. The notice shall advise the parent or guardian of his or her
right to contest the charge in Municipal Court and that the failure to
contest the charge will be deemed an admission by the parent or
guardian that the violation occurred. The notice will further advise the
parent or guardian that there are no penalties for first offenses but that
a subsequent violation by the juvenile will result in the imposition of
monetary penalties upon the parent or guardian. This notice shall be
deemed received upon mailing.
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:44-3.
§ 66-6 CURFEW § 66-9
66:199

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 10-5-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-18]
§ 70-1. Adoption of map. [Amended 4-21-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-11;
5-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4; 1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-20]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et
seq., the Drug-Free School Zone Map of the Township of Florence dated
April 15, 2004, and revised December 15, 2004, prepared by Dante Guzzi
Engineering Associates, the Township Municipal Engineer, is hereby
approved and adopted as the official finding and record of the locations
and areas within the municipality which is on or within any property used
for school purposes which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board or within 1,000 feet of such property.
§ 70-2. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 70-1
of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 70-3. Notification of changes.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Solicitor of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 70-4. Filing and availability of copies.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 70-1 of this chapter
and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy
of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the Clerk
of Burlington County and to the office of the Burlington County Prosecutor.
§ 70-1 CURFEW § 70-5
66:201
§ 70-5. Use as evidence in prosecutions; compliance with statutory
requirements.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 70-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and
was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the
effective date of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 70-1 of this chapter. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44,42 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
§ 70-5 FLORENCE CODE § 70-5
66:202
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Areas
[Adopted 4-21-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-12; amended in its entirety
1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-20]
§ 70-6. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 et
seq., the Drug-Free Zone Map of the Township of Florence dated April
15, 2004, and revised December 15, 2004, and prepared by Dante Guzzi
Engineering Associates, the Township Municipal Engineer, is hereby
approved and adopted as the official finding and record of the locations
and areas within the municipality property which are used as a "public
housing facility," "public park" and "public building" as defined by N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1(f) and of the areas on or within 500 feet of such public housing
facility, public park or public building.
§ 70-6 CURFEW § 70-6
66:203

ARTICLE III
Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones
[Adopted 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8]
§ 70-7. Designation of school crossings. [Amended 1-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-20]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40, the
following is a list of school crossings which have been designated by the
Township of Florence:
§ 70-8. Adoption of map. [Amended 1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-20]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et
seq., and N.J.S.A. 39:4-50, the Drunk-Driving-Free School Zone Map of the
Township of Florence dated March 1, 2000, and revised December 15, 2004,
prepared by Dante Guzzi Engineering Associates, the Township Municipal
Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as the official finding and record
of the locations and areas within the municipality which are used for school
purposes and which are owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board or within 1,000 feet of such of such property.
§ 70-9. Map and list to constitute official findings. [Amended
1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-20]
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant
to § 70-8 of this chapter shall constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drunk-driving-free school
zones. The list of school crossings designated above by the Township shall
continue to constitute an official finding and record of the location of school
crossing zones within the Township of Florence until such time, if any, that
A. Delaware and Hornberger Avenues.
B. Hornberger Avenue near Parish Lane.
C. Hornberger Avenue near Tenth Avenue.
D. Broad and Second Streets.
E. West Second and Spring Streets.
F. West Second and Summer Streets.
G. Delaware Avenue at railroad tracks.
H. Hornberger Avenue at railroad tracks.
§ 70-7 CURFEW § 70-9
66:205
this chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to school crossing zones in Florence Township.
§ 70-10. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Township Engineer and the
Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes or
of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
§ 70-11. Original map and list to be on file; copies.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 70-8 of this chapter
and the list of school crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost a true
copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to time
request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true
copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby
further directed that a true copy of such map and list and of this chapter
shall be provided without cost to the Burlington County Clerk and to the
office of the Burlington County Prosecutor.
§ 70-12. Map and list as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated: It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted
pursuant to this chapter were prepared and are intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this
state and that, pursuant to state law, such map and list shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the following:
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
B. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board.
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
D. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
E. The location of all school crossings in the Township of Florence.43
43.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Sex-Offender-Free Zone, adopted 2-1-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-1, was repealed 6-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12.
§ 70-9 FLORENCE CODE § 70-12
66:206
Chapter 73
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 102. Peace and good order — See Ch. 112.
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic or
semiautomatic rifle or any gun, device or instrument in the nature of a
weapon from which may be fired or ejected any solid projectable ball, slug,
pellet, missile or bullet or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing by means
of a cartridge or shell or by the action of an explosive or the igniting of
flammable or explosive substances. It shall also include, without limitation,
any firearm which is in the nature of an air gun, spring gun or pistol or other
weapon of similar nature in which the propelling force is a spring, elastic
band, carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas or vapor, air or compressed
air or is ignited by compressed air and which ejects a bullet or missile
smaller than 3/8 of an inch in diameter with sufficient force to injure a
person.
PROJECTILE WEAPONS — Any weapon which fires a projectile by means
other than a cartridge or shell or the action of an explosive or the igniting
of a flammable or explosive substance, including, but not limited to, bow
and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, dart gun.[Added 10-16-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-28]
WEAPON — Anything readily capable of lethal use or of inflicting serious
bodily injury.[Added 10-16-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-28]
§ 73-2. Discharge prohibited in designated area. [Amended
11-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-23; 5-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-8;
10-16-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-28]
No person shall discharge any firearm or projectile weapon or cause a
firearm or projectile weapon to be discharged in so much of the Township of
Florence as is encompassed within the following designated area: beginning
at the mouth of Craft's Creek in the point where it joins the Delaware
River, following Craft's Creek and up the several courses and distances
thereof to the point of intersection with the northern border of the Township
of Mansfield, then southerly along such border to its intersection with
the Pennsylvania Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike, then westerly
along the southern side of the Pennsylvania Extension of the New Jersey
Turnpike to its intersection with New Jersey State Highway Route 130, then
southwesterly along the southeasterly side of the New Jersey State Highway
§ 70-12 FIREARMS § 73-2
73:207
Route 130 to the Burlington Township Line then northerly to the Delaware
River then following the New Jersey and Pennsylvania Border to the starting
point at the mouth of Craft's Creek.
§ 73-3. Applicability; construal of provisions. [Amended 10-16-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-28]
§ 73-4. Parental responsibility. [Amended 10-16-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-28]
No parent, guardian or other person standing in loco parentis to any minor
child shall suffer or permit any such minor child to discharge any firearm
or projectile weapon or cause any firearm or projectile weapon to be
discharged within the area defined in § 73-2 of this chapter.
§ 73-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90
days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof.
§ 73-6. Map of areas within which the discharge of firearms is
prohibited. [Added 11-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-23; amended
5-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-8]
The map prepared by the Township Engineer and on file with the Township
Clerk designating the areas within which the discharge of firearms is
prohibited in accordance with § 73-2 of the Code of the Township of
Florence is hereby adopted as a visual aid to indicate the areas described in
§ 73-2.
Chapter 74
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
A. This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the use of any firearm or
projectile weapon in the defense of one's person or property.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any bona fide members or guests of bona
fide members of any pistol or rifle club or archery or bow and arrow
club shooting on a range or by any person on a site which has been
approved, in writing, as to safety by the Chief of Police of the Township
of Florence.
C. This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the discharge, by an
official, of a blank gun for the purpose of signifying the start or finish of
an authorized athletic event.
§ 73-2 FLORENCE CODE § 74-1
74:208
§ 74-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authorization provided in N.J.S.A.
17:36-8 to 17:36-13.
§ 74-2. Prohibition.
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay to a claimant any claim in excess of $2,500 for
fire damages on any real property located within the Township of Florence,
pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption
of this chapter and the filing of this chapter with the State Commissioner
of Insurance, until such time as all taxes, assessments and other municipal
liens or charges due and payable appearing on the official certificate of
search shall have been paid either by the owner of such real property or
by the insurance company pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-10 or the Township
submits to the insurance company a copy of a resolution adopted pursuant
to N.J S.A. 17:36-11.
§ 74-3. Agreement for payment by installments.
The Township may enter into an agreement, when authorized by a duly
adopted resolution of the Township Council, with the owner of any firedamaged
property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other
municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the
redemption of a tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-65 et seq. if the Township Council is satisfied that the claim for fire
damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property.
§ 74-4. Filing of ordinance.
Upon final adoption, the Township Clerk shall file a certified copy of this
ordinance with the State Commissioner of Insurance.
Chapter 76
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 15.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 35.
Blasting — See Ch. 47.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Housing standards — See Ch. 87.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permit — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
§ 74-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 76-1
76:209
§ 76-1. Local enforcement authorized.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., the
Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383), the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code shall be locally enforced in the Township of Florence by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention in the Florence Township Fire District No. 1.
§ 76-2. Local enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the
Florence Township Fire District No. 1 and shall hereafter be referred to as
the "Bureau."
§ 76-3. Agency composition.
The Bureau shall consist of the Fire Official/Marshal and such Fire
Inspectors as may be required to carry out the intent of the code, as well as
and any other support staff as may be required.
§ 76-4. Duties of local enforcing agency.
The Bureau shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and
regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures, and premises
within the established boundaries of the Township of Florence, other than
owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings used exclusively for dwelling
purposes, and faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 76-5. Fire Official/Marshal.
A. The Fire Official/Marshal shall be hired by the Board of Fire
Commissioners in accordance with New Jersey Department of
Personnel regulations.
B. The Fire Official/Marshal shall enforce the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code, all related ordinances of the Township of Florence and those
regulations set forth in the New Jersey Administrative Code or adopted
locally in accordance with the authority vested by the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code.
C. The Fire Official/Marshal shall meet all qualifications for the position as
required by law.
D. The Fire Official/Marshal shall:
(1) Be in charge of the day-to-day operations of the Bureau.
(2) Take all actions necessary to enforce the provisions of the Fire
Safety Act.
(3) Make or cause to be made an investigation of each occurrence of
fire within the Township of Florence.
§ 76-1 FLORENCE CODE § 76-5
76:210
§ 76-6. Fire Inspectors.
§ 76-7. Removal.
Appointed personnel serving the Bureau shall be subject to removal by the
Board of Fire Commissioners for inefficiency or misconduct or otherwise as
provided by law. Each person proposed to be so removed shall be afforded
an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a designated
hearing officer.
§ 76-8. Life-hazard uses.
The Bureau shall carry out the registration and periodic inspections of
life-hazard uses as required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 76-9. Local use inspections, registrations, and certificates of
registration.
(4) Provide the Board of Fire Commissioners, upon request, specific
reports relating to the Bureau.
(5) Establish standing operating procedures for the operation of the
Bureau.
(6) Respond to enforcement and information requests from the
Township Administrator and provide the Township Administrator
with such reports as may be requested by the Township
Administrator.
A. Those Fire Inspectors as may be determined by the Board of Fire
Commissioners to be necessary for the efficient operation of the Bureau
shall be appointed or hired by the Board of Fire Commissioners as
provided by law.
B. Fire Inspectors shall enforce the code and regulations in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:71-3.3(c).
C. Fire Inspectors shall meet all qualifications for the position as required
by N.J.A.C. 5:71, Subchapter 4.
D. Fire Inspectors shall:
(1) Enforce the provisions of the Fire Safety Act.
(2) Assist the Fire Official/Marshal in the investigation of fires.
(3) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by Fire Official/
Marshal or Board of Fire Commissioners.
A. In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the New
Jersey Fire Safety Act and the Regulations of the State of New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, additional inspections and fees shall
§ 76-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 76-9
76:211
be required for local uses, none of which shall apply to fees or
inspections of life-hazard uses as governed by the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Safety Act.
B. Whenever the Fire Official/Marshal shall have cause to believe a
building or use is a local use, he shall serve a registration survey on the
owner of the building or use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an
owner to fail to complete and return the survey within 30 days of
receipt of same.
C. A registration survey shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the use.
(3) A description of the use being registered, including:
(a) The geographical location, including block and lot number;
(b) The height of the building in which the use is located;
(c) The location of the use in the building;
(d) The floor area of the use;
(e) The capacity, when the use is public assembly; and
(f) A description of the processes carried out or materials stored.
D. When more than one local use exists at a given business or entity, only
the primary use shall be registered, with the remaining uses listed as
accessory uses incidental to the primary use.
E. When applying for registration and thereafter as required by this
chapter, the owner of each local use shall appoint an agent for the
purpose of receiving service of process and orders or notices issued by
the Bureau pursuant to this chapter. Each agent shall be either a
resident of this state or a corporation licensed to do business within this
state. If the owner of a local use has not fulfilled the requirements of
this section, the Fire Official/Marshal shall notify the owner, in writing,
that he is in violation of this section and shall order that registration be
accomplished within 30 days. The notice and order shall include an
accurate restatement of the subsection with which the owner has not
complied.
F. Failure to comply with the order of the Fire Official/Marshal within 30
days of the date on which it was received by the owner shall result in
the imposition of a penalty in the amount of $500 for each such failure.
Each day of continued failure to comply shall constitute a separate
violation.
G. All local uses shall be inspected in accordance with § 76-10 of this
chapter for compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire Safety
§ 76-9 FLORENCE CODE § 76-9
76:212
§ 76-10. Local uses designated. [Amended 2-2-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-6; 5-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-12]
§ 76-11. Inspection and registration fees. [Amended 2-2-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-6]
Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. Where, in the opinion of the Fire
Official/Marshal, there exists a condition liable to cause fire, contribute
to the spread of fire, interfere with fire-fighting operations, endanger
life or property or cause violations of the provisions or intent of this
code, he shall inspect as often as necessary for the purpose of
ascertaining these conditions and causing them to be corrected.
[Amended 2-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-6]
A. Local uses are defined by square footage, regardless of use. The only
exceptions are R-1 uses, R-2 uses and churches. All local uses shall be
inspected annually.
Type Square Feet
Type L1 1 to 500
Type L2 501 to 800
Type L3 801 to 1,500
Type L4 1,501 to 2,000
Type L5 2,001 to 5,000
Type L6 5,001 to 8,000
Type L7 8,001 or more
B. Doubtful local use classifications. When a building or structure is not
specifically provided for in this chapter or the classification of which is
doubtful, the building or structure shall be included in the local use
group which it most nearly resembles in respect to the existing life and
fire hazard, and it shall be so classified by the Fire Official/Marshal.
A. The owner of a local use registered within the Township of Florence
shall pay an inspection fee in the amount specified in this section.
Inspection fees shall be paid when due. It shall be the responsibility of
the Fire Official/Marshal to ensure the collection of inspection fees. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner to pay the fee to the Fire
Official/Marshal. The owner of a local use shall pay the inspection fee
within 30 days of the day on which it was required by the Fire Official/
Marshal. For failure to pay the required inspection fee within 30 days of
the day on which it was demanded, the owner shall be subject to a
penalty in the amount equal to the amount of the inspection fee. Should
an owner fail to make the required payment of both the inspection fee
and penalty, the Fire Official/Marshal may, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq., issue a certificate to the Clerk of the Municipal Court
stating that the owner is indebted to the local enforcing agency for the
payment of the inspection fee, and the Clerk shall immediately enter
§ 76-9 FIRE PREVENTION § 76-11
76:213
§ 76-12. Permits and fees. [Amended 2-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-6]
upon his record of docketed judgments the name of the owner and of
the local enforcing agency a designation of the ordinance under which
fee is assessed, the amount of the fee is certified and the date the
certification was made. The making of the entry shall have the same
effect as the entry of the docketed judgment in the office of the Clerk,
but without prejudice to the owner's right of appeal.
B. Where more than one local use exists under one ownership at a given
structure location, only the inspection fee for the primary local use
registered shall be charged.
C. The following fees shall be paid to the Florence Township Fire District
No. 1 for local inspections and registration:
Type or Use Fee
Type L1 $35
Type L2 $45
Type L3 $55
Type L4 $65
Type L5 $85
Type L6 $100
Type L7 $125
A-4 (church) $25
R-1 $60
R-2, per
building
$45
A. Permits required pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code shall be charged by
the Fire Official/Marshal and paid to the Florence Township Fire
District No. 1.
B. Permit fees shall be as follows:
(1) Uniform Fire Code.
Type Fee
1 $55
2 $175
3 $350
4 $550
(2) Nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from permit fees except
for an administrative fee of $10.
§ 76-11 FLORENCE CODE § 76-12
76:214
§ 76-13. Board of Appeals.
In accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any
person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the
right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Burlington County.
§ 76-14. Fee for use of fire apparatus.
When code enforcement procedures of the abatement of a violation require
the use of apparatus or manpower of any of the volunteer fire companies
or fire district, the fee for each unit of apparatus used shall be $100 per
hour. The fee for each firefighter involved in the enforcement or abatement
activity shall be $15 per hour. The units of apparatus and number of
firefighters for each enforcement or abatement activity shall be determined
by the fire officer in charge at the scene of the activity.
Chapter 79
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Housing standards — See Ch. 87.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Soil removal — See Ch. 120.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permit — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 140.
C. Fire investigation reports that may be requested from the Bureau shall
be provided for a fee of $25. Photographs will be provided at cost, plus
an administrative fee of $10. Diagrams will be provided for a fee of $10
per page.
D. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of smoke detector/CO detector
compliance as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70:2.3 shall be:
(1) Forty dollars for requests received 14 days or more prior to the
date on which it is needed.
(2) Fifty dollars for requests received seven days to 13 days prior to
the date on which it is needed.
(3) Seventy-five dollars for requests received two days to six days prior
to the date on which it is needed.
(4) One hundred twenty-five dollars for requests received with less
than 48 hours' notice.
E. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of fire code status shall be $25.
§ 76-12 FIRE PREVENTION § 76-14
76:215

ARTICLE I
Authority; Findings; Purpose; Reduction of Flood Losses
§ 79-1. Statutory authorization.
The legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Township of
Florence of Burlington County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 79-2. Findings of fact.
§ 79-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Florence are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 79-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-3
76:217
§ 79-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 79-3 FLORENCE CODE § 79-4
76:218
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 79-4.1. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one foot and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one foot and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township Administrator's or
Construction Code Official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter
or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
§ 79-4.1 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-4.1
76:219
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building i) built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water, and ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 79-4.1 FLORENCE CODE § 79-4.1
76:220
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 79-4.1 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-4.1
76:221
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act [P.L. No. 97-348])44
— Includes substantial improvements and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
44.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 79-4.1 FLORENCE CODE § 79-4.1
76:222
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 79-4.1 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-4.1
76:223

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 79-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Florence, Burlington County, New Jersey.
§ 79-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 79-7. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Florence
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 79-8. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Florence,
Community No. 340098, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Burlington County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated December
21, 2017.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Burlington County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panel(s) 34005C0014F,
34005C0018F, 34005C0019F, 34005C0127F, 34005C0131F,
34005C0132F, 34005C0135F, 34005C0141F, whose effective date
is December 21, 2017.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at office of
the Township Clerk, 711 Broad Street, Florence, New Jersey.
§ 79-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-9
76:225
§ 79-9. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 79-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor to repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Florence, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 79-9 FLORENCE CODE § 79-10
76:226
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 79-11. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 79-6. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Business Administrator or
Construction Code Official and may include, but not be limited to, plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 79-12. Designation of Local Administrator.
The Township Administrator or the Construction Code Official, as his
delegate, is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
§ 79-13. Duties and responsibilities of Administrator.
Duties of the Business Administrator and the Construction Code Official, as
his delegate, shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 17-16B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 79-17A are met.
§ 79-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-13
76:227
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 79-6,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Business
Administrator or the Construction Code Official, as his delegate, shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer § 79-16A, Specific standards: residential construction, and
B, Specific standards: nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 79-11.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control, and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of Substantial Damage
Determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§§ 17-16A, Specific standards: residential construction; 79-16B,
Specific standards: nonresidential construction; and 79-16C,
Specific standards; manufactured homes.
§ 79-13 FLORENCE CODE § 79-13
76:228
§ 79-14. Variances.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 79-14.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board, as established by the Mayor and Township
Council, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township Administrator or the
Construction Code Official, as his delegate, in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq. [Amended 2-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-02]
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
§ 79-13 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-14
76:229
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 79-14A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Township Administrator or the Construction Code Official, as
his delegate, shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 79-14A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
§ 79-14 FLORENCE CODE § 79-14
76:230
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 79-14A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 79-14 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-14
76:231

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 79-15. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 79-15 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-15
76:233
§ 79-16. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 79-6, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 79-13B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage
in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI
24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more restrictive.
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
§ 79-15 FLORENCE CODE § 79-16
76:234
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified), and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment,
either
(1) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive, and require within any AO or AH Zone on the
municipality's DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified
in feet plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified), and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is more
restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; have structural components
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy; and be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall
be provided to the official as set forth in § 79-13C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 79-15A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
§ 79-16 FIRE PREVENTION § 79-16
76:235
§ 79-17. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 79-6 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive; and
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 79-17A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
have been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
§ 79-16 FLORENCE CODE § 79-17
76:236
Chapter 83
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 83-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate all games of chance held,
operated or conducted within the Township, pursuant to acts of the
legislature of the State of New Jersey known as the “Bingo Licensing
Law45” and the “Raffles Licensing Law46” and in accordance with the rules
and regulations issued or to be promulgated by the Legalized Games of
Chance Control Commission in the Department of Law and Public Safety
of the State of New Jersey. All applications, licenses and proceedings in
connection therewith shall be subject to the provisions of such Acts and the
rules and regulations and any laws, rules and regulations hereafter enacted
and shall be further subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 83-2. Conduct of games on Sunday.
All licensees authorized by law to conduct any games of chance, including
raffles and bingo, shall be permitted to conduct the same on any day of the
week, including Sundays.
§ 83-3. Organizations eligible for license.
No license to conduct a game of chance as authorized by law shall be issued
to any organization not having a bona fide situs established in good faith
within the State of New Jersey and actively engaged in serving one or more
of the authorized purposes as defined by the rules and regulations of the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 83-4. Games of chance during elections prohibited.
No games of chance shall be conducted under any license at any time
during which a general municipal, primary, special or Board of Education
election is being held, while the polls are open for voting.
§ 83-5. Municipal licensing fees.
As provided by the regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance
Commission, the municipal licensing fee shall be in the same amount as
the fee payable to the Legalized Games of Chance Commission, provided,
however, that there shall be no separate licensing fee payable to the
Township of Florence by any organization with a majority of its membership
consisting of residents of the Township of Florence.
45.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
46.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
§ 79-17 GAMES OF CHANCE § 83-6
83:237
§ 83-6. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in the Florence
Township Code § 1-10, or as provided in the New Jersey Administrative
Code.
Chapter 87
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 56.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Littering — See Ch. 95.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Soil removal — See Ch. 120.
Solid waste — See Ch. 122.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 131.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 133.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 140.
§ 83-6 FLORENCE CODE § 83-6
83:238
ARTICLE I
General Standards
[Adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-12 as Ch. 87 of the 1983
Code; amended in its entirety 12-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-30]
§ 87-1. Designation of enforcement officers; compensation.
The Construction Code Official of the Township of Florence, in the County
of Burlington and State of New Jersey, and the Burlington County Health
Department and its authorized officers, are hereby designated as the
enforcement officers for and on behalf of the Township of Florence to
exercise the powers prescribed by this article, and they shall serve in such
capacity without any additional salary.
§ 87-2. Adoption of standards by reference; copies on file.
Pursuant to the provisions of c. 21. P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1). the New
Jersey State Housing Code, as approved by the Departments of Health
and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of
State’s office, is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to
be used as a guide in determining whether buildings in this municipality are
safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New
Jersey State Housing Code is annexed to this article, and three copies of the
same have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the Township of
Florence and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the
same.
§ 87-3. Right of entry for inspection and/or repairs.
The enforcement officers are hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units and premises located within the Township of Florence in order that
the enforcement officer may perform his duty of safeguarding the health
and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the
purpose of making such inspections, the enforcement officers are hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or person in
charge thereof, shall give the enforcement officers access to such dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for
the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof or his agent
or employee access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
article or with any lawful rule or regulations adopted or any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 87-4. Notice of violations.
§ 87-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-4
83:239
A. Notification; contents of notice. Whenever the enforcement officer
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this article or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the enforcement officer shall give
notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall be put in writing,
shall include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued, shall
allow reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires and
shall be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case
may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy thereof is sent by
registered mail to his last known address or if a copy thereof is posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice or
if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state. Such notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this article and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
B. Hearing. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article or of
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Mayor and Council of the
Township of Florence, provided that such person shall tile in the office
of the Clerk of the Township of Florence a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within 10 days after the notice was served. Upon receipt of such
petition, the Township Clerk shall set a time and place for such hearing
and shall give the petitioner a written notice thereof. At such hearing,
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition
was filed, provided that, upon application of the petitioner, the
Township Clerk may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable
time beyond such ten-day period if, in his judgment, the petitioner has
submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
C. Decision. After such hearing, the Mayor and Council of the Township of
Florence shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon
its findings as to whether the provisions of this article and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If
the Mayor and Council of the Township of Florence sustains or modifies
such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to this article shall automatically become an order if a written
petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Clerk of the
Township of Florence within 10 days after such notice is served.
D. Maintenance of records. The proceedings at such hearing, including the
findings and decision of the Mayor and Council of the Township of
§ 87-4 FLORENCE CODE § 87-4
83:240
§ 87-5. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Mayor and Council of the Township of Florence are hereby authorized
and empowered to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as
they may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of
this article; provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be
in conflict with the provisions of this article nor in any way alter, amend or
supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Mayor and Council shall file
a certified copy of’ all rules and regulations which they may adopt in the
office of the Clerk of the Township of Florence.
§ 87-6. Compliance with standards required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code
established hereby as the standard to be used to determine whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 87-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90
days or serve a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, or
any combination thereof, and each violation of any of the provisions of this
article and each day that the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to
be a separate and distinct offense.
Florence, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a
matter of public record in the office of the Clerk of the Township. Such
records shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter.
E. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council
may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
F. Emergency situations. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health or safety. the enforcement officer may, without notice or a
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as the enforcement officer deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this article, such orders shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but,
upon petition to the Township Clerk, shall be afforded a hearing as soon
as possible. After such hearing, depending upon its findings as to
whether the provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Mayor and
Council shall continue such order in effect or modify it or revoke it.
§ 87-4 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-7
83:241

ARTICLE II
Sale or Marketing of Affordable Housing Units
[Adopted 8-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-25]
§ 87-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the marketing and rental of
both indigenous and inclusionary affordable housing units to be produced
pursuant to Florence Township's housing element and fair share plan, so as
to assure that:
§ 87-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rental within the means of a low-income
household or moderate-income household residing within the housing
region that includes Florence Township, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.1 et
seq., Controls on Affordability.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEFICIENT UNIT — A housing unit that is not decent, safe or sanitary
as further determined through census surrogates or on-site inspection and
does not comply with local codes or other housing standards and is
determined pursuant to the method described in N.J.A.C. 5:92-5.2.
FTFHC — The Florence Township Fair Housing Corporation.
HANDICAPPED HOUSEHOLD — A household having one or more members
who suffer from physical disability, infirmity, malformation or disfigurement
which is caused by bodily injury, birth defect or illness, including epilepsy,
and which shall include, but not be limited to, any degree of paralysis,
amputation, lack of physical coordination, blindness or visual impediment,
deafness or hearing impediment, muteness or speech impediment or
physical reliance on a service or guide dog, wheelchair or other remedial
appliance or device, or from any mental, psychological or developmental
disability resulting from anatomical, psychological, physiological or
neurological conditions which prevents the normal exercise of any bodily
or mental functions or is demonstrable, medically or psychologically, by
accepted clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques.
A. Rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing units that are
improved to code standard are subject to affordability controls for at
least six years;
B. Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standard are subject to affordability controls for at least 10 years; and
C. Low- and moderate-income rental units remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for a period of not less than 20 years.
§ 87-8 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-9
83:243
INCLUSIONARY UNIT — A housing unit within either of the two municipal
construction projects set forth in Florence's Fair Share Plan. As provided in
the plan, both of these developments shall consist entirely of rental units for
low- and moderate-income senior citizen and handicapped households.
INDIGENOUS UNIT — An existing housing unit in Florence Township that
is deficient and is rehabilitated to code standards with funding from the
Florence Township Rehabilitation Program set forth in Florence's Fair
Share Plan. As provided in the plan, eligibility for funding the rehabilitation
of indigenous units shall be limited to occupants or intended occupants that
are low-income households or moderate-income households.
PLAN — The Florence Township Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
which was granted substantive certification by COAH.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSEHOLD — A household meeting minimum age
restriction requirements that are consistent with the Federal Fair Housing
Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., and Chapter 91, Land Development.
§ 87-10. Regulation of sales and rentals.
Every sale and rental of affordable housing units produced in Florence
Township, in compliance with its obligations under the Mount Laurel II
decision, the Fair Housing Act,47 the regulations of COAH, its plan and the
substantive certification granted to its plan by COAH, shall be regulated in
accordance with this article.
§ 87-11. Administration.
The sale and rental of affordable housing units produced in accordance
with Florence's plan shall be administered by the Florence Township Fair
Housing Corporation. Florence Township shall be responsible for carrying
out the plan and shall oversee the FTFHC to ensure the proper
administration of the plan. The responsibilities and funding of the FTFHC
shall be set forth in one or more written agreements between Florence
Township and the FTFHC.
§ 87-12. Affirmative marketing. [Amended 9-9-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-17; 5-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-17]
A. The Township of Florence has a fair share obligation of 171 units, of
which 114 are new construction. This affirmative marketing section
shall apply to all developments that contain low- and moderate-income
housing units.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract income-eligible households of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, for the
purpose of buying or renting affordable housing units. The plan shall
address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11. In addition, the plan
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 87-9 FLORENCE CODE § 87-12
83:244
prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or any other
aspect of affordable housing on the basis of race, color, sex, religion,
handicap, age, familial status/size or national origin. The Township of
Florence is in the housing region consisting of Burlington, Camden and
Gloucester Counties. The affirmative marketing plan is a continuing
program and shall meet the following requirements:
(1) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applicants
for low- and moderate-income housing shall appear in the following
daily regional newspapers: The Burlington County Times, Camden
Courier Post and Gloucester County Times,
(2) The initial advertising of affordable housing must take the form of
at least one press release and one paid display advertisement in
each of the above newspapers. At a minimum, the paid display
advertisement shall include the following: street address of units,
directions to housing units, number of bedrooms per unit, size of
units, sales and/or rental prices of units, income range for
qualifying households, location of the office where application
forms for units can be obtained and the application submitted and
telephone number and office hours for obtaining information and
requesting applications.
(3) Applications must be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
(4) Public service announcements shall be made through the use of the
following radio and/or cable television stations broadcasting
throughout the region: WWJZ (AM radio dial 640), the Mount Holly
Radio Co. station, WGLS (FM radio dial 89.7), WDBK (FM radio dial
91.5), and the Rowan College, College of New Jersey and Camden
County College radio stations.
(5) Announcements, requests for applicants and newspaper articles
may be placed in the following neighborhood-oriented weekly
newspapers, religious publications and organizational newsletters
within Burlington, Camden and Gloucester Counties as needed:
Gazette, Catholic Star Herald, Gloucester County Times,
Bordentown Register News and others.
(6) Affordable housing applications, brochures, signs and/or
announcements regarding the availability of affordable housing
units within Florence shall be forwarded to and posted at the
following large-scale employers within the region: Ready Pac/Club
Chef, Florence Township, Griffin Pipe, Florence Township and
Cumberland Farms, Florence Township.
(7) The following is a listing of community and regional organizations
in Burlington, Gloucester and Camden Counties that will aid in the
affirmative marketing program, with particular emphasis on
contacts that will reach out to groups that are least likely to apply
for affordable housing within the region: Multiple Sclerosis
§ 87-12 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-12
83:245
Association of America, Inc. (MSAA), Affordable Housing Coalition
of Burlington County, Burlington County Community Action
Program (BCCAP), Tri-County Community Action Agency and
Camden County Council on Economic Opportunity.
(8) Affordable housing applications, brochures, announcements and/or
posters will be forwarded to and posted at the following locations:
developer's sales office, Municipal Building and library, Burlington
County Library, Camden County Library and Gloucester County
Library.
(9) Quarterly informational circulars and applications shall be sent to
each of the following agencies for publication in their journals and
for circulating among their members: Boards of Realtors in
Burlington County, Camden County and Gloucester County.
(10) Additional quarterly information circulars and applications shall be
sent to the following nonprofit, religious, governmental, fraternal,
civic and community action agencies in Burlington, Camden and
Gloucester Counties: Moorestown Ecumenical Neighborhood
Development Inc. (MEND), Jersey Counseling and Housing
Development, Inc., Lutheran Social Ministries of New Jersey and
Mount Holly 2000.
(11) The following is a description of the random selection method that
will be used to select occupants of low- and moderate-income
housing: MSAA and BCCAP procedures will be used.
(12)MSAA and BCCAP are the agencies who will administer the
affordable housing units in Florence. MSAA and BCCAP are
responsible for the advertising, income qualifying low- and
moderate-income households, placing eligible households in lowand
moderate-income units upon initial occupancy, continuing to
qualify households for reoccupancy of units as they become vacant
and enforcing the terms of the deed restriction.
(13) Developers, builders and sponsors of low- and moderate-income
housing units may be required by Florence to assist in the
advertising of affordable units in their respective developments in
accordance with the preceding paragraphs. Such advertising is
subject to the approval of Florence Township.
(14) Florence may delegate other specific tasks, such as interviewing
applicants, prescreening households and the like, to a developer,
builder and sponsor, provided that copies of all applications,
income verification documents, sales records and the like of the
low- and moderate-income units are returned to Florence Township
for reporting purposes and to aid with future rentals.
(15) Households who live or work in the housing region of Burlington,
Camden and Gloucester Counties may be given preference for the
affordable housing units within the municipality. Applicants living
§ 87-12 FLORENCE CODE § 87-12
83:246
§ 87-13. Affordability controls.
outside the housing region shall have an equal opportunity to buy
or rent units after applicants living within the region have been
processed. Florence intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
(16) The affirmative marketing plan for new units shall commence 120
days before the issuance of either temporary or permanent
certificates of occupancy. Affirmative marketing shall continue until
all low- and moderate-income housing units are initially occupied.
Affirmative marketing for existing units shall continue on an asneeded
basis for as long as affordable units are deed restricted.
C. The Administrator is hereby designated to act as liaison among COAH,
BCCAP, MSAA and Florence Township. The Administrator will be
responsible for tracking the progress of affordable housing, answering
inquiries regarding affordable housing from the public and COAH and
complying with COAH monitoring and reporting requirements per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 5:93-12.1.
A. Initial rent levels. Initial rent levels of affordable units shall not exceed
the applicable maximums established by COAH.
B. Criteria governing rent levels. The FTFHC shall set and periodically
revise the rent levels for affordable units. Provided that such levels are
within COAH maximums, they may differ for various units on the basis
of number of bedrooms, floor area, location, amenities and any other
relevant factors. Rent levels shall be set in accordance with COAH
regulations.
C. Guideline. The FTFHC shall set rent levels so as not to exceed 30% of
gross monthly household income. The FTFHC may, but is not required
to, include an allowance for utilities as part of the rent. Maximum rent
shall be calculated as a percentage of either the COAH low- or
moderate-income limit, as the case may be, or other standard adopted
by COAH. At least 50% of all rental units shall be affordable to lowincome
households.
D. Rerentals. When establishing rent levels for rerentals, the FTFHC shall
take into account whether a rent increase would raise the rent higher
than a level that tenant can afford.
E. Affordability based on unit size. The rent levels for efficiency units shall
be affordable to one-person households; those for one-bedroom units
shall be affordable to two-person households; and those for twobedroom
units shall be affordable to three-person households.
F. Rent increases. Rents of affordable units may be increased annually
based on the percentage increase in median income for the housing
region in which Florence Township is located, as determined by COAH.
§ 87-12 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-13
83:247
G. Affordability controls for indigenous units. Rehabilitated owneroccupied
single-family units that are improved to code standard shall be
subject to affordability controls for at least six years. Rehabilitated
renter-occupied units that are improved to code standard shall be
subject to affordability controls for at least 10 years. The FTFHC shall
impose such controls by means of restrictions to be incorporated into
the recorded mortgages to the rehabilitated properties, in the form set
forth in the manual adopted by § 87-16 of this chapter.
§ 87-13 FLORENCE CODE § 87-13
83:248
ARTICLE III
Rehabilitation of Deficient Affordable Housing Units
[Adopted 8-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-27]
§ 87-14. Definitions.
As used herein, the terms "affordable," "deficient unit," "fair share plan,"
"indigenous need," "low-income housing," "moderate-income housing,"
"rehabilitated unit," "rehabilitation component" and "restricted" shall have
the meanings set forth in the substantive rules of the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing, N. J. A. C. 5:92-1.3.
§ 87-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to carry out the rehabilitation component of
Florence Township's Fair Share Plan adopted pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. Florence Township has received substantive
certification of its housing element and fair share plan by the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH). Florence's rehabilitation
component was set by COAH at 61 units.
§ 87-16. Rehabilitation program.
There is hereby established a program for the rehabilitation of deficient
units of housing located within Florence Township, as more fully described
in the document entitled "Florence Township Rehabilitation Program
Manual," prepared by Susan C. Kimball, P. P., dated September 1991, last
revised April 28, 1992. As required by the New Jersey Laws of 1946,
Chapter 21, as amended, N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.2, three copies of the aforesaid
manual shall be on file in the office of the Township Clerk and the aforesaid
manual is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. The
aforesaid rehabilitation program shall be implemented within the six-year
period of substantive certification beginning July 1, 1992, and ending June
30, 1998.
§ 87-17. Administration.
The Florence Township Fair Housing Corporation (FTFHC) is hereby
designated to administer the aforesaid rehabilitation program in
accordance with this article and the aforesaid manual. The Mayor is
authorized to enter into an agreement with the FTFHC on behalf of Florence
Township for its services in administering the rehabilitation program for a
period not to exceed six years.
§ 87-18. Applicant funding.
A. Every owner of a deficient unit located within Florence Township,
whether or not such owner actually resides in the deficient unit, may
apply to the FTFHC for funding for the purpose of rehabilitating such
deficient unit to full State Uniform Construction Code compliance. Such
§ 87-14 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-18
83:249
§ 87-19. Funding of program.
§ 87-20. Minimum expenditure.
A minimum of $10,000 per housing unit shall be provided, of which at least
$8,000 per unit shall be allocated to capital costs which shall be averaged
among the 20 units expected to be rehabilitated during the first two-year
application shall be made in accordance with COAH regulations, the
aforesaid manual and whatever regulations the FTFHC may adopt.
B. The applicant shall establish, to the satisfaction of the FTFHC, that it or
the household occupying the unit is a qualified low- or moderate-income
household and that, after rehabilitation of the unit, the applicant will
either reside in the unit or will sell or rent the unit to a low- or
moderate-income household.
C. To the extent feasible, the FTFHC will ensure that a minimum of 50% of
the units rehabilitated (i.e., 31 units) will be occupied by low-income
households.
A. The township shall make funds available for the rehabilitation of
deficient units over a six-year period in accordance with the schedule
set forth in the aforesaid manual. The funds shall be obtained from the
following sources:
(1) Development fees. Fees to be paid to the Florence Township
Housing Trust Fund by developers pursuant to agreements
heretofore made by them with Florence Township and approved by
COAH, and fees collected pursuant to an ordinance reviewed and
approved by COAH.48
(2) Subsidies. Funds provided to Florence Township under the Small
Cities Program, Balanced Housing Program, Neighborhood
Preservation Program, Community Development Block Grant
Program and similar federal, state or county available funding
programs.
(3) Borrowing. Funds obtained by sale of bonds or bond anticipation
notes as previously authorized by ordinance. Such funds are
intended to be a backup source of funds for the rehabilitation
program.
B. The ability of Florence Township to administer the aforesaid
rehabilitation program is not dependent on development fees or
subsidies. However, Florence Township may reimburse itself for
borrowed funds expended for the aforesaid rehabilitation program from
development fees or subsidies subsequently received for such
purposes.
48.Editor's Note: See Article IV of this chapter.
§ 87-18 FLORENCE CODE § 87-20
83:250
period. All rehabilitated units shall meet the requirements of the New Jersey
State Uniform Construction Code and all applicable subcodes.
§ 87-21. Affordability controls.
Every owner-occupied unit rehabilitated pursuant to this article shall be
subject to affordability controls for a minimum of six years after completion
of rehabilitation work. Every rental unit rehabilitated pursuant to this
article shall be subject to affordability controls for a minimum of 10 years
after completion of rehabilitation work. The affordability controls shall
be set forth as restrictions in the recorded deeds to the rehabilitated
properties, in the form set forth in the aforesaid manual.
§ 87-22. Loan recapture.
In the event that an owner-occupied unit is sold while subject to
affordability controls to a purchaser who is not a low-income household
or moderate-income household, as the case may be, all funds expended
pursuant to this article for the rehabilitation of such unit, including pro rata
administrative expenses, shall be paid over at closing to Florence Township,
which shall make such funds available for rehabilitation of another deficient
unit to be occupied by a low-income household or moderate-income
household, as the case may be, provided that such other unit shall be
subject to affordability controls pursuant to this article for a minimum of six
years after completion of rehabilitation work.
§ 87-23. Rental unit restrictions.
In no event may a rental unit be rented to a tenant who is not a low-income
household or moderate-income household during the ten-year affordability
control period. At least half of all units in each bedroom distribution and
half of all rental units shall be available for low-income households. To the
best extent feasible, at least half of all rehabilitated rental units shall be for
low-income households.
§ 87-24. Responsibility for program.
Florence Township shall be responsible for marketing and outreach to
locate units and households eligible for participation in the rehabilitation
program, as well as for implementation of the rehabilitation program, even
though it is administered by the FTFHC.
§ 87-20 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-24
83:251

ARTICLE IV
Affordable Housing Development Fees
[Adopted 11-4-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-32; amended in its entirety
5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 87-25. Purpose.
This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees that are consistent with COAH's
regulations developed in response to P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32 through
38 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Non-Residential Development
Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7). Fees collected pursuant to this
article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing very-low-, low- and
moderate-income housing in accordance with a Court-approved spending
plan.
§ 87-26. Basic requirements.
§ 87-27. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable housing development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement
of property as authorized by Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel
Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990) and the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A.
52:27d-301, et seq., and regulated by applicable COAH Rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality
in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with §§ 1, 5,
and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through N.J.S.A. 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
B. The Township of Florence shall not spend development fees until the
Court has approved a plan for spending such fees (spending plan).
§ 87-25 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-27
83:253
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 87-28. Residential development fees.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within the Township of Florence, all residential developers, except
for developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below and developers of developments that include affordable
housing, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
all new residential development provided no increased density is
permitted. Development fees shall also be imposed and collected
when an additional dwelling unit is added to an existing residential
structure; in such cases, the fee shall be calculated based on the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the property due to the
additional dwelling unit.
(2) When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a
"d" variance granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers
shall be required to pay a "bonus" development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized, except that this provision shall not be applicable to a
development that will include affordable housing. If the zoning on a
site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing
of the variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
developments.
(1) Affordable housing developments and/or developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units, if permitted by ordinance or by agreement with
the Township of Florence, shall be exempt from the payment of
development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of this article and any preceding
ordinance permitting the collection of development fees shall be
exempt from the payment of development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the original approval.
Where site plan approval is not applicable, the issuance of a zoning
permit and/or construction permit shall be synonymous with
preliminary or final site plan approval for the purpose of
determining the right to an exemption. In all cases, the applicable
fee percentage shall be determined based upon the Development
§ 87-27 FLORENCE CODE § 87-28
83:254
§ 87-29. Nonresidential development fees.
Fee Ordinance in effect on the date that the construction permit is
issued.
(3) Improvements or additions to existing one- and two-family
dwellings on individual lots shall not be required to pay a
development fee, but a development fee shall be charged for any
new dwelling constructed as a replacement for a previously
existing dwelling on the same lot that was or will be demolished,
unless the owner resided in the previous dwelling for a period of
one year or more prior to obtaining a demolition permit. Where a
development fee is charged for a replacement dwelling, the
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the new structure as compared to the
previous structure.
(4) Homes replaced as a result of a natural disaster, fire or flood shall
be exempt from the payment of a development fee.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value
of the land and improvements, for all new nonresidential
construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing
structures to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvements and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvements, and such calculation shall be made at the time a
final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required
under this section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to a 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
§ 87-28 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-29
83:255
§ 87-30. Collection procedures.
(2) The 2.5% development fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within the existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and
repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide Nonresidential
Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), as
specified in Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential
Development Certification/Exemption." Any exemption claimed by
a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to the Statewide
Nonresidential Development Fee Act shall be subject to the fee at
such time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and
shall make the payment of the nonresidential development fee, in
that event, within three years after that event or after the issuance
of the final certificate of occupancy for the nonresidential
development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Township of Florence as a lien against the real property of
the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the approving authority or entity shall notify or
direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the
issuance of a construction permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a construction
permit shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
§ 87-29 FLORENCE CODE § 87-30
83:256
construction permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the Township Tax
Assessor shall prepare an estimate of the equalized assessed value of
the development based on the plans filed.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of any
and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on a property
which is subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Township Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
associated with the development; calculate the development fee; and
thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township of Florence fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b. of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Except as provided in § 87-29A(3) hereinabove, 50% of the initially
calculated development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the construction permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at the
time of issuance of the construction permit and that determined at the
time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Township of
Florence. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1, et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the Township of Florence. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
§ 87-30 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-30
83:257
§ 87-31. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1, et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Affordable
Housing Trust Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of
the Township of Florence for the purpose of depositing development
fees collected from residential and nonresidential developers and
proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of a fraction of an
affordable unit, where permitted by ordinance or by agreement
with the Township of Florence;
(2) Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached dwelling
unit development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Florence's affordable
housing program.
C. In the event of a failure by the Township of Florence to comply with
trust fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate
monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the
judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance;
or a failure to implement the approved Spending Plan and to expend
funds within the applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp.
of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (affd 442 N.J. Super.
563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the
Court; or for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of
funds, the Court may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services (LGS), to
direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund shall be expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the extent
practicable, be utilized for affordable housing programs within the
Township of Florence, or, if not practicable, then within the County or
the Housing Region.
§ 87-30 FLORENCE CODE § 87-31
83:258
§ 87-32. Use of funds.
(1) Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting
evidence of such condition(s), and the Court may, after considering
the evidence and providing the municipality a reasonable
opportunity to respond and/or to remedy the noncompliant
condition(s), and upon a finding of continuing and deliberate
noncompliance, determine to authorize LGS to direct the
expenditure of funds in the Trust Fund or impose such other
remedies as may be reasonable and appropriate to the
circumstances.
D. Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be
used to fund eligible affordable housing activities approved by the
Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
may be used for any activity approved by the Court to address the
Township of Florence's fair share obligation and may be set up as a
grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not
limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls; housing
rehabilitation; new construction of affordable housing units and related
costs; accessory apartments; a market to affordable program; Regional
Housing Partnership programs; conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units; green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or
state standards; purchase of land for affordable housing; improvement
of land to be used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements
of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial
assistance designed to increase affordability; administration necessary
for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan; and/or
any other activity permitted by the Court and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of Florence for
past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned on
such fees shall be used to provide affordability assistance to very-low-,
low- and moderate-income households in affordable units included in
the municipal Fair Share Plan. At least 1/3 of the affordability
assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to very-low-income households earning
30% or less of the regional median household income by household size
for Housing Region 5, in which Florence Township is located.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
§ 87-31 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-32
83:259
§ 87-33. Monitoring.
The Township of Florence shall provide annual reporting of Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity to the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local Government
Services or other entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a
copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center and posted on the municipal
website, using forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs. The specific programs to be used for
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of the
regional median household income by household size may include
producing very-low-income units or buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The specific programs to be used for very-low-income
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site, if
permitted by ordinance or by agreement with the Township of
Florence, and funds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls shall be exempt from the affordability assistance
requirement.
D. The Township of Florence may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including its programs for affordability assistance.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultants' fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, prepare a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or administer an affirmative
marketing program or a rehabilitation program.
(1) In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative costs of
the rehabilitation program shall be included as part of the 20% of
collected development fees that may be expended on
administration.
(2) Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with the Court's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
related to appealing a judgment from the Court are not eligible
uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 87-32 FLORENCE CODE § 87-33
83:260
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local
Government Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of all
Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the sources and amounts
of funds collected and the amounts and purposes for which any funds have
been expended. Such reporting shall include an accounting of development
fees collected from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site (if permitted by ordinance
or by agreement with the Township), funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds, rental income from
Township-owned affordable housing units, repayments from affordable
housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with
Florence Township's affordable housing programs, as well as an accounting
of the expenditures of revenues and implementation of the spending plan
approved by the Court.
§ 87-34. Ongoing collection of fees.
A. The ability for the Township of Florence to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with the expiration of the repose period
covered by its judgment of compliance unless the Township of Florence
has first filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the
Court or with a designated state administrative agency, has petitioned
for a judgment of compliance from the Court or for substantive
certification or its equivalent from a state administrative agency
authorized to approve and administer municipal affordable housing
compliance and has received approval of its Development Fee
Ordinance from the entity that will be reviewing and approving the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
B. If the Township of Florence fails to renew its ability to impose and
collect development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of
compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so forfeited shall
be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund"
established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-320).
C. The Township of Florence shall not impose a residential development
fee on a development that receives preliminary or final site plan
approval after the expiration of its judgment of compliance, nor shall
the Township of Florence retroactively impose a development fee on
such a development. The Township of Florence also shall not expend
any of its collected development fees after the expiration of its
judgment of compliance.
§ 87-33 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-34
83:261

ARTICLE V
Required Growth Share Affordable Housing Obligation
[Adopted 1-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2; amended 9-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-21]
§ 87-35. Findings.
The Township Council finds that:
§ 87-36. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Third Round Substantive Rules
promulgated and adopted by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing,
N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:95 et seq., it is hereby declared that the
purpose of this article is to help the Township fulfill its affirmative obligation
to facilitate the provision of affordable housing.
§ 87-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, words and phrases shall have the same meanings
they have pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-1.4, as said provision may from time to
time be amended.
§ 87-38. Uniform affordable housing production obligation based
upon growth share. [Amended 10-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-25]
A. The New Jersey Supreme Court and New Jersey Legislature have
recognized and mandated in So. Burl. Co. NAACP v. Mount Laurel, 92
N.J. 158 (1983) (Mount Laurel II) and the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq. (FHA) that every municipality in New Jersey has an
affirmative obligation to facilitate the provision of affordable housing;
B. The New Jersey Council on Affordable housing (COAH) is the state
administrative agency created pursuant to the FHA vested with primary
jurisdiction for the administration of affordable housing obligations in
accordance with sound regional planning considerations in this state
[N.J.S.A. 52:27D-304(a)];
C. COAH's Third Round Substantive Rules (N.J.A.C. 94-1 et seq.)
implement a growth share approach to affordable housing production
which requires affordable housing to be produced in conjunction with
market-priced residential and nonresidential growth and development
within the Township; and
D. The Township of Florence desires to implement the growth share
policies promulgated and adopted by COAH in its Third Round
Substantive Rules, effective December 20, 2004, in an effort to foster
the production of affordable housing opportunities for qualified lowand
moderate-income households through the third housing cycle
which extends from 2000 to 2014 pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq. and
N.J.A.C. 5:95 et seq.
§ 87-35 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-38
83:263
A. Residential development.
(1) Except as otherwise provided below, any residential development
in any zoning district in the Township proposing eight or more net
new market-rate lots or units shall provide for their growth share
obligation. Said affordable units shall be provided in accordance
with the following:
(a) Where affordable units will be provided on site, residential
development shall set aside 11.1% of the total units for
affordable housing as said term is defined under the Fair
Housing Act of 1985 (FHA), P.L. 1985, c.222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.), and New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH) Rules.
(b) Where affordable units will be provided off site but in the
Township, residential development shall set aside 12.5% of
said market-rate units for affordable housing as said term is
defined under the FHA and COAH rules.
(c) Any residential development that generates a fraction of an
affordable unit shall be required, at the choice of the
developer, to either construct the additional affordable unit or,
alternatively, to make a payment in lieu of construction for that
fraction of a unit per § 87-40D below.
(2) Residential development in any zoning district in the Township
proposing seven or fewer lots or units shall be required, at the
choice of the developer, to either construct one affordable unit or,
alternatively, to pay a proportionate contribution in lieu of
constructing one affordable unit based on a set-aside 11.1%. For
example, the development of four market-rate units may be
addressed by the developer by either constructing one affordable
unit or by making a contribution in lieu of 0.444 of the cost to
provide one affordable unit as provided for in § 87-40D below.
(3) For the purposes of this article, "residential development" shall
include newly constructed market-rate residential units as well as
new residential units created from the conversion of a
nonresidential building to residential unit(s) requiring the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Nonresidential development.
(1) All nonresidential development proposing the construction of net
new floor area in any zoning district shall be required to provide
affordable housing constructed at the ratio of one affordable unit
for every 25 jobs created as a result of the proposed net new
nonresidential floor area. The calculation of the number of jobs and
employment opportunities created shall be in accordance with
Appendix E of N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq., entitled "UCC Use Groups for
§ 87-38 FLORENCE CODE § 87-38
83:264
§ 87-39. Satisfaction of affordable housing production obligation.
[Amended 10-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-25]
Projecting and Implementing Nonresidential Components of
Growth Share."
(2) Nonresidential development creating an obligation of less than 25
jobs or that generates a fraction of an affordable unit shall be
required, at the choice of the developer, to either construct one
affordable unit or, alternatively, to pay a proportionate contribution
in lieu of constructing one affordable unit wherein the denominator
of the fraction shall be the equivalent of 25 jobs by use group. The
calculation of the number of jobs and employment opportunities
created shall be in accordance with Appendix E of N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et
seq., entitled "UCC Use Groups for Projecting and Implementing
Nonresidential Components of Growth Share." For example, an
eight-thousand-square foot addition to a retail use (M use group)
may be addressed by the developer either constructing one
affordable unit or by making a contribution in lieu of 0.32 of the
cost to provide one affordable unit (8,000 square feet/25,000
square feet) as provided for in § 87-40D below.
C. Exemptions. The Township exempts the following development from
satisfying a growth share obligation under the terms of this article:
(1) A house of worship. For the purposes of this exemption, a house of
worship shall not be deemed to include any buildings or structures
that are deemed by COAH to trigger a growth share obligation. An
applicant seeking an exemption under this section shall provide a
diagram of the proposed development indicating all proposed use
groups in accordance with Appendix E of N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq.,
entitled "UCC Use Groups for Projecting and Implementing
Nonresidential Components of Growth Share" for a determination
of the extent of the exemption, if any.
(2) Developments that have been zoned to produce an affordable
housing set-aside or that include only low- and moderate-income
housing units shall be exempt from the growth share obligations of
this article.
(3) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval
from the Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
per the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D et seq.), prior to
the effective date of this section shall be exempt from the growth
share obligations of this article unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the approved plans.
A. The Township Council shall determine the manner in which the
applicant shall satisfy its affordable housing growth share obligation
through the mechanisms permitted in COAH's rules, including on-site
affordable housing production; off-site affordable housing production in
§ 87-38 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-39
83:265
§ 87-40. Compliance mechanisms.
the Township; the purchase of an existing market-rate home(s) at
another location in the community and its conversion to an affordable
price-restricted home in accordance with COAH's criteria, regulations
and policies; participation in gut rehabilitation and/or buy-down/writedown,
buy-down/rent-down programs; payment of a contribution in lieu
of construction; and/or any other compliance mechanism permitted by
COAH's rules set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq. In accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.4(d), COAH's rules do not permit the funding of a
regional contribution agreement (RCA) with funds from a contribution
in lieu of construction.
B. Evidence of an affordable housing compliance mechanism shall be
provided in a proposed affordable housing production plan to the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as well as the Township
Council, at the time of application filing and shall be a condition of all
"completeness" determinations by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
C. The affordable housing production plan shall be reviewed and must be
approved by the Mayor and Township Council for consistency with
COAH rules and regulations, prior to approval of the application by the
appropriate board of jurisdiction.
D. Compliance with all of the terms of the approved affordable housing
production plan as well as COAH's rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq., shall be
a condition of development plan approval and may be covered by
appropriate performance and maintenance guarantees as with any
other required improvement.
A. Construction of affordable housing on site.
(1) Affordable housing units may be provided within single-family
detached buildings, duplex buildings, triplex buildings or
quadriplex buildings designed to resemble as nearly as possible the
single-family homes otherwise being constructed within the
development to accommodate the market units. Duplex, triplex and
quadriplex buildings containing low- and moderate-income housing
units only shall be deemed to be permitted uses in the underlying
zone when created for the purpose of meeting a growth share
obligation on site.
(2) No density increase shall be granted for the construction of the
affordable housing units on site.
(3) All required setbacks, building height, open space requirements
and coverage limits for the zone shall be met on all lots.
(4) All applicable Board of Health and NJDEP regulations for water
supply and sewage treatment shall be met.
§ 87-39 FLORENCE CODE § 87-40
83:266
B. Creation of affordable housing units off site but within the Township.
(1) Applicants electing to create affordable housing units elsewhere
within the Township of Florence may do so with the prior written
approval of the Township Council, and may do so within existing
buildings, whether converted, reconstructed or purchased for buy
down, in any residential zone of Florence Township, as set forth
and regulated herein.
(2) All such units shall meet or shall be improved to meet UCC
requirements and shall be certified to be in standard condition
prior to their conveyance or occupancy.
(3) All required setbacks, building height and impervious coverage
limits for the zone shall be met on the lot, except that existing
setback deficiencies and other nonconformities of the lot and/or
building(s) located thereon may be continued for as long as the
buildings remain on site, without the need for additional variances.
C. Low- and moderate-income split and compliance with COAH rules.
(1) If only one affordable unit is required to be produced pursuant to
this section, said unit shall be made available to a qualified lowincome
individual or household. Where more than one affordable
unit is produced, the designation of units shall be evenly split
between low- and moderate-income individuals and households. If
an odd number of low- and moderate-income housing units are
required to be provided, the majority of the units shall be
designated for low-income individuals or households.
(2) Where there are an insufficient number of affordable units
provided to meet the bedroom distribution requirements of COAH's
rules, the first unit shall be a two-bedroom unit, the second unit
shall be a three-bedroom unit, and the third unit shall be a onebedroom
unit. Otherwise, the bedroom distribution shall be in strict
accordance with COAH's rules.
(3) All affordable units created pursuant to this section shall comply
with COAH's rules pertaining to the phasing, integration, low/
moderate income split, controls on affordability, bedroom
distribution, affirmative marketing, heating source and
administration of the affordable units, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:94-4
and/or as otherwise provided for by COAH's rules.
(4) It shall be the developer's responsibility, at its sole cost and
expense, to arrange for an administering agency approved by
COAH and the Township Council to ensure full COAH compliance
and to timely file such certifications, reports and/or monitoring
forms as may be required by COAH to verify COAH compliance of
each affordable unit.
§ 87-40 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-40
83:267
(5) Residential developments that have been zoned to produce an
affordable housing set-aside or that include only low- and
moderate-income housing units shall be exempt from the growth
share obligations of this article.
D. Payments in lieu of construction.
(1) Unless payments in lieu of constructing an affordable unit are
required as set forth above, payments in lieu of the construction of
affordable housing may be permitted with the agreement of the
Township Council and any such payments shall be based upon a
proportionate share of the total project cost embodied in one or
more pro-forma statements [pro-forma(s)] for the construction of
an affordable housing development elsewhere:
(a) Within the Township of Florence;
(b) Within municipalities located along the Route 130 corridor
which shall be identified as municipalities located within five
miles of Route 130 and within 15 miles of the boundaries of the
Township of Florence; or
(c) Any combination thereof approved by the Township Council
which pro-forma(s) shall be on file in the office of the Township
Clerk.
(2) The payment in lieu of construction to be made by the developer
may be subject to negotiation with the Township based upon the
following considerations: the actual cost of buying down or
subsidizing one or more existing or planned market priced dwelling
units to achieve an average rent level affordable to a household
earning 52.0% of median income; the actual land cost of site(s)
earmarked for off-site affordable housing construction within the
Township of Florence, or reasonable and acceptable offers to
substitute land, site preparation and/or construction services for all
or a portion of the monetary payment otherwise required.
§ 87-40 FLORENCE CODE § 87-40
83:268
ARTICLE VI
Affordable Housing Obligation Time Payments
[Adopted 12-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-28]
§ 87-41. Time schedule acceptable.
Whenever a payment is due to the Township under the provisions of Chapter
87, Article V, of the Florence Township Code for the "required growth share
affordable housing obligation," arising out of the construction of a new
single-family home, to be owner occupied, the Township Council may agree
to accept the payments from the owner over a time schedule. The time
payments shall require the payment of 50% of the obligation prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The balance shall be payable in three
equal annual installments due on the annual anniversary of the date of the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
§ 87-42. Waiver of interest for on-time payments.
If the payments are made when due, there shall be no interest due on the
outstanding balance. If any payment is not made when due, interest shall
accrue at the rate of 8% per annum when the total amount owed is $1,500
or less and at the rate of 18% per annum when the total amount owed is
over $1,500, calculated from the date when the certificate of occupancy was
issued. Interest shall then be charged on any remaining balance due.
§ 87-43. Security.
The obligation to the Township shall be secured by a note and a mortgage
on the subject property. All costs related to the preparation and recording
of the documents shall be the obligation of the property owner.
§ 87-41 GAMES OF CHANCE § 87-43
83:269
Chapter 91
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 12.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 29.
Auctions, markets and casual sales — See Ch.
43.
Blasting — See Ch. 47.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 59.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
79.
Sale or rehabilitation of affordable
housing — See Ch. 87.
Development fees for affordable
housing — See Ch. 87, Art. IV.
Placement of newspaper vending boxes — See
Ch. 100.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Soil removal — See Ch. 120.
Solid waste — See Ch. 122.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 126.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permits — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 131.
Trees — See Ch. 132.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 133.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 140.
§ 87-43 FLORENCE CODE § 87-43
83:270
Part 1
Administrative And General Provisions
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
§ 91-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Development
Ordinance of the Township of Florence, New Jersey."
§ 91-2. Purpose.
There is hereby ordained by the Mayor and Council for the Township
of Florence, New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), a Land Development Ordinance for the following
purposes:
A. To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use or
development of all lands in this Township in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. To ensure that the development of the municipality does not conflict
with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and the preservation of the
environment.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New
Jersey citizens.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
§ 91-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-2
83:271
J. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
K. To encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site.
L. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction consistent
with provisions permitting other residential uses of a similar density in
the same zoning district.
M. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
N. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
O. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan
goals and to compliment municipal recycling programs.
§ 91-2 FLORENCE CODE § 91-2
83:272
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 91-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building or structure located on the same
lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building.
An "accessory building" can be either attached or unattached.[Amended
12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
ADDITION — A combination of materials to form a building, structure or
improvement to a site which changes the exterior appearance of the site.
ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in supporting members of a
building or additions to a structure requiring walls, foundations, columns,
beams, girders, posts or piers or the moving of a structure.
ADJUSTED GROSS ACRE — One acre consisting entirely of developable
land.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Business Administrator or his or her
designee.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment from which minors are excluded,
having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books,
magazines, other written and/or pictorial matter, films or other viewing
materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined herein, or an establishment in which
a segment or section of the premises is devoted to the sale, rental, display
or viewing of that material.[Added 10-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-24]
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE/LIVE ENTERTAINMENT THEATER —
An establishment from which minors are excluded, used for presenting
materials, films, movies, video or live performances, exhibitions, displays,
shows or similar products and services distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation
by patrons. This definition also applies to an establishment which contains
coin-operated devices or booths in which a person may privately or
individually view materials, films, movies, videos or live performances,
exhibitions, shows or similar products and services distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.[Added 10-4-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-24]
ADULT USE — An adult bookstore, adult mini motion-picture/live
entertainment theatre or massage parlor, as defined herein.[Added
10-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-24]
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:273
AGRICULTURE — The growing and harvesting of crops or the raising and
breeding of livestock with accessory buildings incidental to agricultural
uses, but not processing operations.
ALTERATION — Any work done on a site which changes the appearance of
the site.
APARTMENT — A single room, suite or set of rooms occupied as a dwelling.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of
the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32, 40:55D-34 and
40:55D-36.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the municipality unless
a different agency is designated by ordinance when acting pursuant to the
authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
BILLBOARD — Off-site lettered or pictorial advertising.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69.
BUFFERS — The land area within a property or site, used to visibly separate
one use from another or to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances.
Buffers shall be designed as provided for in this chapter.
BUILDING — The combination of materials to form a construction adapted
to a permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The area occupied by all of the buildings on a lot
measured on a horizontal plane around the periphery of the foundation and
included in the area under the roof of any structure supported by columns
but not having any walls, as measured around the outside of the outermost
extremities of the roof above the columns.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — That portion of the lot area located inside the
setback and offset lines, available to be used for placement of a
building.[Added 2-15-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-1]
BUILDING HEIGHT — A vertical distance measured to the highest point of
the building from the average elevation of the finished grade five feet from
the foundation.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.[Added
10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
coastal planning areas, CAFRA centers, CAFRA cores and CAFRA nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:274
CARTWAY — That area of a street within which vehicles are permitted,
including travel lanes and parking areas, but not including shoulders, curbs,
sidewalks or swales. Where there are no curbs, the "cartway" is that portion
between the edges of the paved, or hard surface, width.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate permitting a
developer to demolish or remove a landmark, to construct an addition to
a landmark, to construct a new building or new structure in the Historic
District or to construct, alter or relocate a sign in the Historic District
affecting an existing landmark or historic site.
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a river, stream, brook or spring which
convey water most of the time.49
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission of Florence
Township.
COMMON PROPERTY — The land or water or a combination of land and
water, together with improvements, designed and intended for ownership,
use and responsibility by the tenants and owners of the dwelling units in the
development.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.[Added 10-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-23]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in Part 3, Zoning, of this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONSTRAINT-FREE CIRCLE (CFC) — A circle located entirely within the
building envelope, having a diameter as prescribed by applicable bulk
regulations, that is free from the following constraints: freshwater
wetlands, required freshwater wetland transition areas, existing and/or
proposed easements, stormwater detention/retention basins, areas with
slopes having grades of 25% or more, flood hazard areas or state open
waters, as those terms may be defined in the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq., the Freshwater Wetlands Protection
Act Rules, N.J.C.A. 7.7A-1.1 et seq. and in this Code.[Added 8-4-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-27]
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either
be:[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
A. A county planning agency; or
49.Editor's Note: The former definition of "cluster development," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27.
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:275
DECK — A floor-like unroofed outdoor platform.[Added 3-1-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-1]
DEMOLITION — The razing of any structure or the obliteration of any
natural feature. "Demolitions," as used in this chapter, shall be defined as
demolition removal of an entire structure.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed. [Amended 2-15-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-1]50
DEPARTMENT — Read within the context of the subject matter. For
example, with respect to stormwater and environmental issues,
"Department" means the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, and with respect to transportation and highway issues,
"Department" means the New Jersey Department of Transportation.[Added
10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of
reasonable expectancy, which reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway and the flood
hazard area and of the water surface elevations.
DEVELOPABLE LAND — All lands exclusive of wetlands and wetland
buffers, as certified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy, Office of Freshwater Wetlands.[Amended
12-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-41]
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
50.Editor's Note: The former definition of "density bonus," as amended 12-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-41 and 8-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-28, which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 5-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-5.
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:276
mining or excavation or landfill and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter. In the case of
development of agricultural lands, development means any activity that
requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural
Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC),
and municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.[Amended 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.[Added 10-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-23]
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 58:16A-1 et seq.
DUPLEX — A single-family, semidetached dwelling unit having only one
dwelling unit from ground to roof and only one wall in common with another
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building detached from other buildings for
residence purposes for one family, which has its own cooking, sleeping,
sanitary and general living facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms containing living, cooking, sleeping
and sanitary facilities for one family.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.[Added
10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
ENGINEER or MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — The Township Engineer. "Board
Engineer" means the Planning Board Engineer or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment Engineer, as appropriate.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Town of Florence Environmental
Commission created under the provisions of Chapter 12 of this
Code.[Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:277
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-23]
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage,
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of
household servants. Also, a number of persons, but not exceeding three,
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, though not
related by blood, adoption or marriage, shall be deemed to constitute a
"family."
FENCE — Any artificially constructed barrier of wood, plastic, metal or
cement or any combination thereof or any other manufactured material or
combination of materials, erected for the enclosure of land and/or dividing
one piece of land from another. Fences shall meet the requirements as set
forth in this chapter.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on a
preliminary approved plat, after all requirements, conditions, engineering
plans, etc., have been completed and the required improvements have been
installed or performance guaranties properly posted for their completion.
A plat that receives such "final approval" must have been prepared by a
licensed land surveyor in compliance with all provisions of Chapter 291 of
the Laws of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and is the map which must be
filed with the County Clerk within 95 days after the signing of the plan in
order to make the approval binding. For good cause, the Planning Board
may extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed
190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and flood fringe areas determined
by the Department of Environmental Protection and Energy under Section
3 of the Flood Hazard Area Control Act (P.L. 1979, c. 359). See N.J.S.A.
58:16A-50 et seq.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat area adjoining a channel which has been
or may be hereafter covered by floodwater from the channel.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream and portions of the flood
hazard area adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream.[Amended
12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
FLOOR AREA — The total floor area in a structure measured by using the
outside dimensions of the building at each story. The gross floor area of
units sharing a common wall shall be measured from the center of interior
walls and the outside exterior walls. In residential uses, the gross floor
area shall exclude the area of the garage, attic, open porch or patio, cellar,
utility areas, heating and cooling rooms and all portions of floor area which
have a ceiling height above them of less than 7 1/2 feet. In nonresidential
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:278
structures, the gross floor area shall exclude areas used for utility and
heating and cooling and other mechanical equipment but shall include all
other areas, including cellar and warehousing and storage areas, regardless
of ceiling height.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of the main building
for the parking of the vehicles of the occupant of the lot.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor, as to the exercise of any administrative
or executive functions assigned by the Municipal Land Use Law51 or by
general law; or the Township Council, as to the exercise of any legislative
and investigative functions assigned by the Municipal Land Use Law or by
general law; as the case may be.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A definable group of Tax Map lots which represent
a significant period in the architectural and social history of Florence
Township and because of their unique character can readily be viewed as
an area or neighborhood distinct from surrounding portions of Florence
Township or have a unique character resulting from their architectural
style.
HISTORIC LANDMARK or LANDMARK —
Any real property, such as a building, structure, ruins, foundation,
route, trail, place or object, including but not limited to a cemetery,
burial ground, village area, bicycle railway or a natural object,
configuration, geological feature or formation which:
Is of particular historic, cultural, scenic or architectural
significance to the Township of Florence and in which the broad
cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state or
community is reflected or exemplified;
(1)
Is identified with historic personages or with important events in
the main current of national, site or local history;
(2)
Shows evidence of habitation, activity or the culture of prehistoric
man;
(3)
Embodies a distinguishing characteristic or an architectural type
valuable as representative of a period, style or method of
construction; or
(4)
Represents a work of a builder, designer, artist or architect whose
individual style significantly influenced the architectural history of
the Township of Florence or other areas.
(5)
A.
The designation of a "landmark" shall be deemed to include the Tax
Map lots on which it is located. All "landmarks" shall specifically be
identified within the community facilities plan element of the Township
Master Plan.
B.
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:279
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which have been
formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — The occupation being conducted, in whole or in
part, from a residence or its residential lot as an accessory use.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.[Added
3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1; amended 10-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A tract comprehensively planned for industrial uses,
whether or not the buildings are erected in one development stage or over
a period of time.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description as on a subdivision or record of survey, map or by metes and
bounds for purposes of sale, lease or separate use.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines, but not including any
portion of a street right-of-way. The minimum "lot area" of a lot fronting
on a street proposed to be widened in the adopted Master Plan shall be
the minimum area required for the district in which it is located plus the
additional area needed to anticipate the ultimate widening of the street.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of two or more intersecting streets
where the interior angle of the intersection does not exceed 135º.
LOT COVERAGE — The total of the areas occupied by all buildings,
structures and impervious surfaces on a lot.[Amended 3-1-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-1]
LOT DEPTH — The shortest distance between the front lot line and a line
drawn parallel to the front line through the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance between the side lot lines measured along
the street line. The minimum "lot frontage" shall be the same as the lot
width, except that on curved alignments with an outside radius of less than
500 feet and on culs-de-sac with a radius of more than 50 feet, the minimum
arc distance between the side lot lines measured at the street line shall not
be less than 75% of the required minimum lot width. In the case of a corner
lot, any portion of the lot extending along a street line shall be considered
lot frontage.
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot,
which shall be the same line as the street line for that portion of a lot
abutting a street.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at
setback points on each side lot line an equal distance back from the street
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:280
line. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the minimum required
building setback line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.[Added
10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a "minor
subdivision."
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment whose employees, servants or
agents provide services to its patrons consisting of massage or manipulation
of specified anatomical areas.[Added 10-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-24]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality which has
been duly adopted by the Planning Board as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development not defined as a "major
development."[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than three
lots, including the remaining portion of the original lot, parcel or tract,
fronting on any existing street, not involving any new street or road or
the extension of municipal facilities nor requiring the improvements
enumerated in Articles XIV through XX of this chapter and not adversely
affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master
Plan, Official Map or Part 3, Zoning, of this chapter. The Planning Board
shall reserve the option to require the improvements as set forth in Part
2, Articles XIV through XX, and Part 3 of this chapter in lieu of classifying
an application as a "major subdivision." In computing whether a subdivision
contains not more than three lots, there shall be counted all lots created on
the parcel or portion thereof within four years of the date of submission.
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT — The minor subdivision map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision and which contains all of the information
required by Articles XIV through XX of this chapter, which is be submitted
to the Secretary of the Planning Board for Planning Board appraisal and
which meets the legal requirements of Article XI of this chapter and which,
if approved, shall be filed with the proper recording officer.
MULTIFAMILY BUILDINGS — Buildings where individual dwelling units
share a common outside access. They also share a common yard area, which
is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the building.
"Multifamily buildings" shall contain more than three and not more than 16
dwellings in a single structure.
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:281
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment or the
governing body of the Township of Florence when acting pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.[Amended 12-1-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-32]
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Florence.[Amended 10-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-23]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — A combination of materials to form new
construction, whether installed on, above or below the surface of a lot,
which is intended to be permanent or remain for a period of more than 60
consecutive days.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a compact
form.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONTIGUOUS RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — The clustering of
development, using land in both the AGR Agricultural District and land in
the zoning district designated herein for noncontiguous residential cluster
development of senior housing, with all of the development permitted
between the noncontiguous tracts occurring within and limited to the zone
designated herein for noncontiguous residential development of senior
housing, and with the land in the AGR Agricultural District being reserved
and permanently deed-restricted for agricultural use and/or such public
uses as recreation, open space over and above that needed to meet the
open space requirements of the senior housing development itself, or other
appropriate public use.[Added 9-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-22]
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map and
Building Permit Act, Chapter 434 of the Laws of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 40:55-1:30
et seq.)52 or any prior act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall
52.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:282
be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of the
streets, public parks and playgrounds and drainage rights-of-way shown
thereon.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements made outside the lot lines of
the lot in question, but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which
is the subject of a development application or contiguous portion of a street
or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Located off the property which is the subject of the
development application or off a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such "open space," provided that such areas may
be improved with those buildings, structures, streets and off-site parking
and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural
openness of the land.
OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING — Whenever a commercial or retail use
proposes to provide oversized vehicle parking spaces as part of a site plan,
the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment may approve a plan
that provides for not more than six oversized vehicle parking spaces. The
oversized vehicle parking area shall be landscaped in accordance with a
plan approved by the Planning Board in order to reduce the visual impact of
the oversized vehicles. Whenever a plan is approved that includes provision
for oversized vehicle parking, it shall be a condition of approval that the
owner shall consent to the enforcement of statutes and ordinances relating
to traffic and parking on the site by the Florence Township Police
Department.[Added 5-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11]
PARKING SPACE — An area either within a structure or in the open for the
parking of motor vehicles. The area of a "parking space" is intended to be
of sufficient area to accommodate the exterior extremities of the vehicle,
whether, in addition thereto, wheel blocks are installed within this area to
prevent the bumper from overhanging one end of the parking space. The
width and length of each space shall be measured perpendicular to each
other and shall be as required by the provisions of this chapter, regardless
of the angle of the "parking space" to the access aisle or driveway.
PATIO — A leveled unroofed outdoor surface area, constructed of concrete,
brick, stone, gravel or similar material, for placement of outdoor furniture
such as picnic tables and chairs.[Added 3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — A performance bond, letter of credit,
acceptable escrow agreement or other similar guaranty or surety
agreement approved in substance and in form by the Township Solicitor
and the governing body, including cash in an amount not to exceed 10% of
the total performance guaranty. The amount of the performance guaranty
shall not exceed 120% of the cost of installation of improvements deemed
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:283
necessary or appropriate for the development, including any required offsite
and off-tract improvements.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The official action taken on a preliminary plat,
which determines whether or not the map submitted is in proper form and
meets the established standards adopted for design layout and development
of the subdivision or site plans.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board
for Planning Board consideration and preliminary approval and meeting the
requirements of Part 2 of this chapter.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which any lot or building is used.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — An institution of education whose curriculum is
approved by the New Jersey Department of Education or the New Jersey
Department of Higher Education and not supported primarily by public
funds.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a physician, dentist, psychologist,
lawyer, engineer, accountant, architect, land surveyor or persons providing
similar professional services.
PROPERTY MAP — A map prepared from actual surveys, giving all pertinent
survey data for the outside boundary and all blocks within the subdivision.
It shall also show the locations and dimensions of all streets and show
easements within or contiguous to the property, with deed or dedication
reference, and it shall conform to the detailed regulations as specified in
this chapter.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths or other
recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and
sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:284
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of waters to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Those improvements which are to be used in
common by residents of a subdivision or by the public, whether or not
such improvements are offered for dedication. "Public improvements" shall
include, without limitation, improvements referenced in the Township Code.
improvements depicted or referenced by final site plan approval or as a
condition of a zoning permit, improvements required by law, code, rule or
regulation and improvements agreed to by the owner.[Added 10-1-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-21]
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the municipality, a municipal agency, Board of Education, state
or county agency or other public body for recreational or conservation
purposes.
PUBLIC UTILITIES MAP — A map designed to show all utility easements,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, open drainage channels, water and gas
mains, telephone and electric service trunk lines and railroads and which
conforms to the specifications as outlined in this chapter.
QUORUM — A majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — Boats, campers, trailers and related
vehicles.
REPAIR — Any work done which is not an alteration, addition or the
construction of a new building or structure.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — A number expressing dwelling units per acre
of developable land and excluding wetlands as certified by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy and the required
wetland buffers and required minimum open space pursuant to Part 3 of this
chapter and including streets and easements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total area of a street, watercourse, utility alignment
or other way and within which all improvements and rights of access are
confined.
SANITARY LANDFILL — The area where refuse is deposited, compacted
and covered with clean fill meeting all of the requirements of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, Board of
Regulatory Commissioners and the municipality.
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:285
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
SENIOR HOUSING — A single-family detached residential use that meets
the age restrictions applicable to its permanent residents and complies with
the design standards set forth in the Land Development Ordinance.[Added
9-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-22]
SERVICE STATION — The lands and buildings where motor fuel, lubricants
and miscellaneous accessories for motor vehicles are sold and dispensed
and where services are rendered for engine and mechanical repairs, but
where no vehicular painting and/or body work is done and where no junked
or unregistered motor vehicles are so kept or stored.
SETBACK LINE — A line within any lot, usually marking the limits or a
required yard space, parallel to any street line between which line and the
street line no building or portion thereof may be erected, except as provided
in this chapter. All setbacks from public streets shall be measured from the
proposed right-of-way width as shown on the adopted Master Plan.
SHED — A small-roofed structure designed for storage of tools, lawn and
garden equipment and supplies, firewood and the like. For purposes of this
chapter, the term "shed" shall include a children's playhouse and a domestic
pet shelter.[Added 3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1]
SIGHT TRIANGLE EASEMENT — A triangular shaped portion of land
established at street intersections and driveway intersections in which
nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as
to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the
intersection.
SIGN — Any letter, symbol, pictorial representation, flag or emblem or
combination of these, illuminated or not, which is intended to be seen from
the outside of a building and which is designed to convey a message to
the public concerning the identification of the premises or to advertise the
interests of any private or public firm, person or organization. This includes
all signs other than public information, house numbers or directional signs.
SIGNIFICANT FEATURE — Any feature, natural, architectural, structural,
historical or decorative, which adds to the historic interest or appreciation
of the site or building in more than a nominal fashion or which provides a
focal point for attention.
SILTATION BASIN — A facility through which stormwater is directed and
which is designed to collect silt and eroded soil.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling unit.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
SITE LOCATION MAP — A map that gives the location of the existing
principal roads, built-up areas, nearby shopping centers, all public buildings
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:286
and various zoning districts and is to conform to detailed specifications as
outlined in this chapter.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — All site plans not defined as minor.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan of one or more lots which:
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of specific development plans for a
lot. Whenever the term "site plan approval" is used in this chapter, it shall
be understood to mean review and approval by the Planning Board or, if a
use variance is required, by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and/or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely
covered.[Added 10-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-24]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The fondling or other erotic touching
of covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female
breasts, or any actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse.[Added 10-4-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-24]
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards adopted by ordinance
regulating noise level, glare, earthborne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic
or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic materials, explosive and flammable
matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of
unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may be
reasonably required by the municipality or required by applicable federal or
state laws or municipal ordinances.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy
Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be
the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization
efforts.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the state
development and redevelopment plan's goals and state-wide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-23]
Proposes new development or alterations to structures, not otherwise
exempt from site plan review and approval, involving grading, clearing
or disturbance of less than 5,000 square feet of land area.
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of
off-tract improvement which is prorated pursuant to Section 30 of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42 et seq.).
B.
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:287
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-23]
STORY — That portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor
next above it. A half-story is between a floor and the roof, with a height of
not less than 7 1/2 feet, of clear space above at least 1/3 of the floor area.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the appointment of a
Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats,
and shall include the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this
chapter, "streets" shall be classified as follows:
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS — Those that are used by heavy
through traffic and which permit no access from abutting property.
A.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic; should be excluded from residential areas.
B.
PRIMARY STREETS — Those which are used primarily for heavy local
traffic and through traffic.
C.
SECONDARY STREETS — Those which carry traffic between minor and
primary streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
D.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
E.
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:288
STREET LINE — The edge of the street right-of-way forming the dividing
line between the street and a lot.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION —
SWIMMING POOL — The facilities constructed above or below ground,
having a depth of more than two feet or a water surface of 100 square feet
or more and designed and maintained for swimming purposes. "Swimming
pools" shall include all buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A swimming pool located as
an accessory use to a residence for use by members of the residence and
guests.
MARGINAL SERVICE STREETS — Those which are parallel or adjacent
to controlled access highways, arterial streets or primary streets and
which provide access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
F.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
G.
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites
or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of sale or building development, except that the following divisions
shall not be considered "subdivisions"; provided, however, that no new
streets or roads are involved:
Division of land found by the Planning Board, or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman, to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size.
(1)
(2) Division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Division of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax
Map or atlas of the municipality.
(5)
A.
B. Includes "resubdivision."
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:289
TEMPORARY PORTABLE POOL (including inflatable pools) — Those pools
that are less than four feet in depth, are nonpermanent, contain no support
structure, and are installed no earlier than May 1 and removed no later than
September 30 of each year.[Added 8-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map that shows contours, existing buildings and
other structures, watercourses, wooded areas and locations of test pits or
borings and conforms to the specifications as outlined in this chapter.
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit in a line of three or more attached
dwelling units, with each dwelling unit from ground to roof and having
individual outside access.
TRUCK — Includes a single unit truck as well as the individual units
referred to generally as the tractor, cab, trailer or trailers, all of which,
individually or in any combination, shall be considered to be a truck. This
shall not include pickup trucks, sport-utility vans or other similar fourwheeled
vehicles.[Added 1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-17; amended
5-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11]
TRUCK STOP — Lands and buildings providing services including any of
the following uses: food services, convenience store sales and services,
motor vehicle fueling stations, motels, retail services and with parking for
more than six trucks or other oversized vehicles in excess of 3/4 ton gross
vehicle weight or requiring parking spaces in excess of 10 feet by 20
feet. Any site with up to six parking spaces for trucks or other oversized
vehicles, as accessory to the primary use of the site, shall not constitute a
truck stop. Any site located on US Route 130 may provide parking for not
more than six trucks or oversized vehicles as an accessory to the primary
use, subject to site plan approval. Any site plan that provides for truck or
oversized parking spaces shall include provision for appropriate signage
for the time limit on parking as well as appropriate landscaping for the
site. The owner of the site shall be required to authorize enforcement of
the parking limits, including limits on location, number and time, by the
Township on the site. The parking of any single truck or oversized vehicle
shall be limited to not more than 15 minutes. Any approval of a site plan
shall include provisions, satisfactory to the Planning Board, for monitoring
and enforcement of the parking limitations by the owner. The monitoring
plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the monitoring records
and the availability of those records to the Township for a period of one
year.[Added 1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-17; amended 5-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-11]
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the
New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-3
83:290
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
UTILITY — The services provided to a use, including but not limited to
sewage collection, water supply, gas, electric and telephone.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of Part 3,
Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b, 40:55D-70c and 40:55D-70d.
WAIVERS — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the site
plan and subdivision standards of this chapter.53
WALL — Any artificially constructed barrier of stone, masonry, brick or
cement or combination thereof or any other manufactured material or
combination of materials, not meeting the description of a fence, erected
for the enclosure of land and/or dividing one piece of land from another, or
used to retain an area of land, usually on a grade which is prone to erosion
or slide. A "wall" shall meet the requirements set forth in this chapter.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-23]
YARD — Area extending between the closest point of any building and
a lot line or street line. In an apartment, townhouse, industrial park or
other development where more than one building may be erected on a lot,
yards shall also be the open space extending between structures. All yard
dimensions shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either
a straight street line, lot line or building facade or radially to the point
of tangency of curved lines and facades. The minimum distance between
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), designated centers, cores or nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA centers, cores or nodes;
C. Designated as urban enterprise zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council empowerment
neighborhoods.
D.
53.Editor's Note: See Part 2 of this chapter.
§ 91-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-3
83:291
buildings in developments where there is more than one building on a lot
shall be the sum of the two yards of the structures, and in no event shall two
structures be closer to one another than the sum of both yards.
YARD, FRONT — The area extending across the full width of a lot between
the street line and the building. For corner lots, the yard areas between
the building and both intersecting streets shall be considered front yards.
For apartments, townhouses, industrial parks or other developments where
more than one building may be erected on a lot, the front yard shall
be measured from the designated front of the building to an imaginary
line a designated distance away from the front of the building.[Amended
8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
YARD, REAR — The area extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear lot line and the building. For corner lots, the yard area opposite
the street which is the address of the property shall be considered the rear
yard. For apartments, townhouses, industrial parks or other developments
where more than one building may be erected on a lot, the rear yards
shall be measured from the designated rear of the building to an imaginary
line a designated distance away from the rear of the building.[Amended
8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and being between each side lot line and the closest point of the building.
For corner lots, the yard area to the side of the street which is the address of
the property shall be considered the side yard. For apartments, townhouses,
industrial parks or other developments where more than one building may
be erected on a lot, the side yards shall be measured from the designated
side of the building to an imaginary line a designated distance away from
the side of the building.[Amended 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
ZONING OFFICER — The person appointed under the provisions of Chapter
4, Administration of Government, to enforce this chapter.[Added
12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer, which
is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that
such use, structure or building complies with Part 3, Zoning, or a variance
therefrom duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to this
chapter.[Added 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
§ 91-4. Word usage; construal of time periods.
A. Word usage. Words used in this chapter that are not specifically defined
herein or in general law shall have their ordinary and customary
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
Except as the context may otherwise require:
(1) The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the
future includes the present.
§ 91-3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-4
83:292
(2) The use of masculine pronouns is for convenience only and shall
include reference to both genders.
(3) The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
(4) The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is directory.
(5) The words "writing" and "written" include printing, typewriting and
any other mode of communication using paper, disks, tape or
similar material which is in general use, as well as legible
handwriting.
B. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, but if the last day is a
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
§ 91-4 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-4
83:293

ARTICLE III
Rules and Regulations; Meetings; Hearings
§ 91-5. Rules and regulations.
The governing body, Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
adopt and may amend reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent
with the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.), or this chapter, for the administration of their functions, powers and
duties and shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and may
charge a reasonable fee, as established by § 91-24 of this chapter, for such
copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and amendments thereto shall
be maintained in the office of the Business Administrator.
§ 91-6. Meetings; quorum.
Every municipal agency shall, by its rules, fix the time and place for holding
its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by such
agency. Regular meetings of the agency shall be scheduled not less than
once a month and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack
of applications for development to process. The agency may provide for
special meetings at the call of the Chairman or on request of any two of
its members, which meetings shall be held on notice to its members and
the public in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings
Act, P.L. 1975, c.231 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.), and agency regulations. No
action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present. All
actions shall be taken by a majority vote of a quorum except as otherwise
required by §§ 91-15E, 91-34A, 91-42 and 91-150A(4). Nothing herein shall
be construed to contravene any statute providing for procedures for
municipal agencies.
§ 91-7. Meetings open to public; minutes.
A. All regular meetings and all special meetings of municipal agencies
shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in
accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L.
1975, c. 231 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.), and agency regulations.
B. Minutes of every regular or special meeting of municipal agencies shall
be kept and shall include the names of all persons appearing and
addressing the agency and of the persons appearing by attorney, the
action taken by the agency, the findings, if any, made by it and the
reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
administrative officer. Any interested party shall have the right to
compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a fee as established by § 91-24 of this
chapter for reproduction of the minutes for his use.
§ 91-5 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-8
83:295
§ 91-8. Hearings; decisions.
A. The municipal agency shall hold a hearing on each application for
development or adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
B. The municipal agency shall make the rules governing such hearings.
Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 15 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the administrative officer. The applicant may produce other
documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or
clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
[Amended 2-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
C. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as designated shall
have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c.
38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
D. The testimony of all witnesses relating to the application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Chairman of the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
F. The municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The municipal agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
[Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
G. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development and
shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide
the findings and conclusions through:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the Municipal Land Use Law for action by the municipal
agency on the application for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
municipal agency who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
§ 91-8 FLORENCE CODE § 91-8
83:296
§ 91-9. Contents of notice.
Notice pursuant to §§ 91-10 and 91-11 of this chapter shall state the date,
time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered
and, in the case of notices pursuant to § 91-10 of this chapter, an
identification of the property proposed for development by street address,
if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Township Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at
which any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available
pursuant to § 91-8B of this chapter.
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution.
An action pursuant to Section 5 of the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9), resulting from the failure of a motion to
approve an application, shall be memorialized by resolution as
provided above, with those members voting against the motion for
approval being the members eligible to vote on the memorializing
resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be
a memorialization of the action of the municipal agency and not
to be an action of the municipal agency; however, the date of the
adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision
for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required by
Subsections H and I of this section. If the municipal agency fails
to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as hereinabove
specified, any interested party may apply to the Superior Court in a
summary manner for an order compelling the municipal agency to
reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time,
and the cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall be
assessed against the municipality.
H. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Secretary of the agency
within 10 days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented,
then to his attorney, without separate charge, and to all who request a
copy of the decision for a fee as specified in § 91-24 of this chapter. A
copy of the decision shall also be filed by the agency in the office of the
administrative officer. The administrative officer shall make a copy of
such filed decision available to any interested party for a fee as
specified in § 91-24 of this chapter and available for public inspection at
his or her office during Township business hours.
I. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township. Such publication shall be arranged by the
administrative officer, provided that the applicant may, in any case,
provide for the publication of the decision. The period of time in which
an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the first
publication of the decision, whether arranged by the Township or by the
applicant.
§ 91-8 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-10
83:297
§ 91-10. Notice of hearing on applications for development.
Notice pursuant to Subsections A, B, D, E, F and G of this section shall be
given by the applicant and shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date
of the hearing.
A. Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be
given, except for conventional site plan review pursuant to § 91-45A of
this chapter, except as otherwise required by § 91-61 of this chapter;
minor subdivisions pursuant to § 91-67 of this chapter; or final approval
pursuant to § 91-63, provided that public notice shall be given in the
event that relief is requested pursuant to § 91-33 of this chapter as part
of an application for development otherwise excepted herein from
public notice. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township.
B. Persons to be notified; method of service.
(1) Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection
A of this section shall be given to the owners of all real property as
shown on the current tax duplicate located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing,
provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice
to a condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose
unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal property regime, in
the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above
or below it. In addition, notice of pending applications shall be
given to all public utilities and CATV companies whose property is
within 200 feet of the proposed development and who have
registered to receive notice of major subdivisions or site plans.
Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate or his agent in
charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail
to the property owner at his address as shown on the said current
tax duplicate. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
(2) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
C. Upon written request of an applicant, the administrative officer shall,
within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
§ 91-10 FLORENCE CODE § 91-10
83:298
§ 91-11. Notice of hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of
Master Plan.
The Planning Board shall give:
required to give notice pursuant to Subsection B of this section. The
applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in
such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A sum not to exceed $0.25 per
name or $10, whichever is greater, may be charged for such list.
D. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan adjoining other
county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the administrative officer pursuant to § 91-8B of this chapter.
H. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the municipal
agency holding the hearing on the application for development in the
event that the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to this
section.
A. Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan, and such notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township.
B. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of an adjoining
municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of a
Master Plan involving property situated within 200 feet of such
adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of any such
hearing.
C. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board of:
(1) All hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of the
Township Master Plan at least 10 days prior to the date of the
§ 91-10 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-11
83:299
§ 91-12. Notice deemed complete upon mailing.
Any notice made by certified mail pursuant to § 91-10 and 91-11 of this
chapter shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 91-13. Notice of hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of
development regulations; notice of action regarding Official Map or
capital improvement program.
hearing; such notice shall include a copy of any proposed Master
Plan or any revision or amendment thereto; and
(2) The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan not more
than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment; such notice shall include a copy of the Master Plan or
revision or amendment thereto.
A. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the Clerk
of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of a development regulation involving property situated
within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to
the date of any such hearing.
B. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the County
Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment
of any development regulation at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearings and of the adoption, revision or amendment of the Township
capital improvement program or Township Official Map not more than
30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment. Any
notice provided hereunder shall include a copy of the proposed
development regulation, the Township Official Map or the Township
capital improvement program or any proposed revision or amendment
thereto, as the case may be.
C. Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to be
considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 91-11 FLORENCE CODE § 91-13
83:300
ARTICLE IV
Development Regulations; Appeals
§ 91-14. Filing and maintenance of development regulations.
Development regulations, except for the Official Map, shall not take effect
until a copy thereof shall be filed with the County Planning Board. A
zoning ordinance or amendment or revision thereto which in whole or
in part is inconsistent with or not designed to effectuate the land use
plan element of the Master Plan shall not take effect until a copy of the
resolution required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62a shall be filed with the County
Planning Board. The Secretary of the County Planning Board shall, within
10 days of the date of receipt of a written request for copies of any
development regulation, make such available to the party so requesting
with said Secretary's certification that said copies are true copies and that
all filed amendments and resolutions are included. A reasonable charge may
be made by the County Planning Board for said copies. The Official Map of
the municipality shall not take effect until filed with the county recording
officer.
§ 91-15. Appeals to governing body.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the governing body a final decision
of the Board of Adjustment approving an application for development
pursuant to § 91-150A(4) of this chapter. Such appeal shall be made
within 10 days of the date of publication of such final decision pursuant
to § 91-8 of this chapter. The appeal to the governing body shall be
made by serving the Township Clerk, in person or by certified mail, with
a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor and the name and
address of the appellant and name and address of his attorney, if
represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the governing body only
upon the record established before the Board of Adjustment.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
governing body by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, to
those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to § 91-8H and to the
Board from which the appeal is taken at least 10 days prior to the date
of the meeting. The parties may submit oral and written argument on
the record at such meeting, and the governing body shall provide for a
verbatim recording and transcripts of such meetings pursuant to
§ 91-8F.
C. The governing body shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than 95 days from the date of receipt of the transcript of the
hearing, unless the appellant consents, in writing, to an extension of
such period. The appellant shall arrange for a transcript pursuant to
§ 91-8F, or otherwise, for use by the governing body and shall submit
proof, upon the filing of his notice or appeal or within 10 days thereof,
that he has ordered said transcript. Failure of the appellant to order the
transcript within the above time shall result in dismissal of the appeal.
§ 91-14 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-15
83:301
Failure of the governing body to hold a hearing and conclude a review
of the record below and to render a decision within such specified
period without such written consent shall constitute a decision
affirming the action of the Board.
D. The governing body may reverse, remand or affirm, with or without the
imposition of conditions the final decision of the Board of Adjustment
approving a variance pursuant to Subsection d of Section 57 of P.L.
1975, c. 29l (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d). The review shall be made of the
record made before the Board of Adjustment.
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the governing body shall be necessary to reverse or remand to the
Board of Adjustment or to impose conditions on or alter conditions to
any final action of the Board of Adjustment. Otherwise, the final action
of the Board of Adjustment shall be deemed to be affirmed; a tie vote of
the governing body shall constitute affirmation of the decision of the
Board of Adjustment.54
F. An appeal to the governing body shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the Board from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the governing body, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with such Board, that, by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an
order of the Superior Court on application, upon notice to the Board
from whom the appeal is taken and on good cause shown.
G. The governing body shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant or,
if represented, then to his attorney and to the applicant, without
separate charge, and for a fee, as designated by § 91-24 of this chapter,
to any interested party who has requested it, not later than 10 days
after the date of the decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be
published in the official newspaper of the Township. Such publication
shall be arranged by the administrative officer, provided that the
applicant may arrange such publication if he so desires.
H. Nothing herein shall be construed to restrict the right of any party to
obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction according to law.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 91-15 FLORENCE CODE § 91-15
83:302
ARTICLE V
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 91-16. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The governing body shall enforce this chapter.
B. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this chapter, the Mayor and Council and its agents
or an interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in and about such premises.
C. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this chapter or of any ordinance or other regulation
made under authority conferred hereby, the proper local authorities of
the Township or an interested party, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such
violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land;
or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises. Any person convicted of such violations before a court of
competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed
$1,000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof, and each day shall be deemed a separate violation.55
D. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as or
agent, any land which forms part of a subdivision for which municipal
approval is required by ordinance pursuant to this chapter, such person
shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot
disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation.
E. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain a
civil action for injunctive relief and set aside and invalidate a
conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a certificate of
compliance has not been issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
F. Whenever it shall come to the attention of either the Planning Board or
the Board of Adjustment that action was taken by such Board based
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 91-16 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-16
83:303
upon fraud or misrepresentation by or on behalf of the applicant as to
a material fact, such Board shall have the right to rescind its previous
action and to order revocation of any approval, permit or certificate
theretofore granted upon such fraud or misrepresentation. Such
rescission and revocation shall remain in effect unless and until such
Board shall reinstate such approval following a hearing thereon
granted to the applicant within 10 days of any requests therefor by the
applicant. The rights of a rescission and revocation set forth in this
subsection shall be in addition to the right to proceed under the other
subsections of this section.
§ 91-16 FLORENCE CODE § 91-16
83:304
ARTICLE VI
Certificates and Permits
§ 91-17. Building and use permits.
All building and use permits shall be issued in accordance with the
provisions of the Building Code of the Township of Florence.56
§ 91-18. Conditional use permits.
Application for any conditional use permit as permitted under the provisions
of this chapter shall be made to the municipal agency through the
Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer shall forward the plans
submitted in connection with the application to the municipal agency for
the scheduling of a hearing on the matter. The Administrative Officer shall
forward the plans submitted in connection with the application to the
professional staff for its report thereon as to the application effect on
the comprehensive planning of the Township. The municipal agency may
hold public hearings on the application prior to receipt of the report and
recommendation referred to above, but may not finally act until the
recommendation and report are received. Subject to the above, the
municipal agency shall hear the application in the same manner and under
the same procedure as it is empowered by law and ordinance to hear
such cases and make exceptions to the provisions of Part 3, Zoning. The
municipal agency may thereafter direct the Administrative Officer to issue
such permit if, in its judgment, any one of such cases will not be detrimental
to the health, safety and general welfare of the Township and is deemed
necessary for its convenience. In approving any such application, the
municipal agency may impose any conditions that it deems necessary to
accord the reasonable application of applicable standards as provided in
Articles XIV through XX and may deny any such application but only in
accordance with said standards.
§ 91-19. Temporary use permits.
It is recognized that it may be in accordance with the purpose of the chapter
to permit temporary activities for a limited period of time, which activities
may be prohibited by other provisions of this chapter. If such uses are of
such a nature and are so located that at the time of petition they will:
A. In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land and activities
normally permitted in the zone.
B. Contribute materially to the welfare of the Township, particularly in a
state of emergency, under conditions peculiar to the time and place
involved, then the municipal agency may, subject to all requirements for
the issuance of special permits elsewhere specified, direct the Zoning
Officer to issue a permit for a period not to exceed six months. Such
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 91-17 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-19
83:305
§ 91-20. Certificates of occupancy.
Certificates of occupancy shall be issued in accordance with the procedures
set forth by the Township Council.
§ 91-21. Certificates showing approval.
period may be extended not more than once for an additional period of
six months.
A. New uses. No building shall be occupied or used until such time as a
certificate of occupancy is issued by the Zoning Officer, after
determination that the building, structure or use is in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Existing uses. Upon written request from the owner, tenant, occupant
or purchaser under contract, the Zoning Officer, after inspection, shall
issue an occupancy permit for a use legally existing at the time this
chapter is made effective, certifying the extent and kind of use and any
other such existing use which conforms to the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Change of use. No owner, tenant or other person shall use or occupy
any building or structure after the use of such building or structure is
changed after the passage of this chapter without first procuring an
occupancy permit, provided that an occupancy permit, once granted,
shall continue in effect so long as there is no change in use, regardless
of change in tenancy or occupancy.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which
formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding August 1, 1976,
may apply in writing to the Township Administrative Officer for the
issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has
been approved by the Planning Board. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimensions of the land to be covered
by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
B. The Township Administrative Officer shall make and issue such
certificate within 15 days after the receipt of such written application
and the fee therefor. Said Officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each
certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee
charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his or her office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land" and shall certify:
(1) That there exists in the Township a duly established Planning Board
and that there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of land
adopted under the authority of the Municipal Land Use Law of
1975, Chapter 291.57
§ 91-19 FLORENCE CODE § 91-21
83:306
§ 91-22. Period of approval.
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by any
state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public health
and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health or
welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to proceed
with said development, the running of the period of approval under this
chapter or under any ordinance repealed by this chapter, as the case may
be, shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or
such directive or order is in effect.
§ 91-23. Conditional approval.
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
(3) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided
within the Municipal Land Use Law.58
D. The Township Administrative Officer shall be entitled to demand and
receive for such certificate issued by him a reasonable fee not in excess
of that provided in § 91-24. The fees so collected by the Administrative
Officer shall be paid by him or her to the Chief Financial Officer.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or any other party to protect the public health and welfare
or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health and welfare, the municipal agency shall process such application
for development in accordance with this chapter, and if such application
for development complies with the requirements of this chapter, the
municipal agency shall approve such application, conditioned on
removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the municipal agency, the municipal agency shall, in appropriate
instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
58.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 91-21 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-23
83:307
governmental agency, provided that the municipal agency shall make
a decision on any application for development within the time period
provided in this chapter or within an extension of such period as
has been agreed to by the applicant, unless the municipal agency is
prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of law.
§ 91-23 FLORENCE CODE § 91-23
83:308
ARTICLE VII
Fees
§ 91-24. Fees. [Amended 3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2; 9-3-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-15]
A. General. Fees, as outlined below, are statutorily authorized and are to
cover the administrative costs incurred by the Township in processing
applications. The escrow accounts are to pay the cost of professional
review by the Engineer, Solicitor, planning consultant and other
professionals employed by the municipal agency to review and make
recommendations on an application for development. At the time of
submitting an application to the Administrative Officer, the applicant
shall be required to execute an escrow agreement to cover all
necessary and reasonable costs incurred by the technical and
professional review with the municipal agency in a form approved by
the Solicitor of the municipal agency. The amounts specified below are
estimates, which shall be paid prior to certification of a complete
application. In the event that more than the amounts specified below
are required to pay the reasonable costs incurred, the applicant shall,
prior to being permitted to take the next step in the approval procedure
or, in any event, prior to obtaining occupancy permits for any element of
the project, pay all additional sums required. In the event that the
amounts posted are more than those required, the excess funds shall be
returned to the applicant within 14 days of the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy for the completed project. Prior to the issuance
of an occupancy certificate for any element of the project, the Zoning
Officer shall determine from the Administrative Officer whether there
are sufficient amounts in the escrow fund to pay pending bills. When
additional funds are required, it shall be the obligation of the
Administrative Officer to notify the applicant of the amounts needed
and to notify the municipal agency of any refusal or failure to properly
make any payments required. In addition to these teens, the escrow
agreement may include any additional terms which are agreed to by the
applicant and the municipal agency.
B. Schedule of fees and escrows.
(1) Preliminary site plan review.
(a) Minor site plan.
[1] Application fee: $125.
[2] Professional review escrow account, with a minimum fee
of $1,250.
(b) Major site plan.
[1] Application fee: $300.
§ 91-24 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-24
83:309
[2] Professional review escrow account, per acre or fraction
thereof submitted for review: $125, with a minimum fee of
$5,000.
(2) Final site plan review.
(a) Application fee: $150.
(b) Professional review escrow account, per acre or fraction
thereof submitted for review: $60, with a minimum fee of
$1,000.
(3) Subdivision.
(a) Minor subdivision.
[1] Application fee: $125 per lot resulting from the
subdivision.
[2] Professional review escrow account, per lot or fraction
thereof: $100, with a minimum fee of $800.
(b) Major subdivision/preliminary plat.
[1] Application fee: $300.
[2] Professional review escrow account, per lot: $50, with a
minimum fee of $5,000.
(c) Major subdivision/final plat.
[1] Application fee: $200 per lot resulting from the
subdivision.
[2] Professional review escrow account, per lot: $20, with a
minimum fee of $1,000.
(d) Appeals: $10.
(4) Variances.
(a) Variances sought pursuant to § 91-150A(3) of this chapter as
follows:
[1] Application fee per lot: $75.
[2] Professional review escrow account per lot: $250.
(b) Variances sought pursuant to § 91-150A(4) of this chapter as
follows:
[1] Application fee per lot: $100.
[2] In the case of: [a] an application from a residential
property owner seeking variance relief from development
regulations prior to the installation of any planned
§ 91-24 FLORENCE CODE § 91-24
83:310
improvements, and [b] an application for a variance from
the additional lot coverage provisions of § 91-180A(2)(d),
91-180B(2)(d), 91-189A(4) or 91-189B(4) of the Code,
where the applicant seeks variance relief for development
that exceeds 5% but not more than 10% for the installation
of decks, patios, sheds and/or swimming pools on a
residential lot, and the applicant seeks no other variance
relief pursuant to the Land Development Ordinance, the
applicant shall pay the applicable application fee as well
as a reduced payment of $250 to the Professional Review
Escrow Fund, which will cover all costs for professional
review of the application by the Township. A residential
property owner making an application to the Board to
legalize development work that was not preceded by the
issuance of zoning or construction approvals shall, in
addition to the standard application fee, be further
required to make payment to the professional review
escrow account in an amount determined by the Board,
which will cover the cost of professional review fees for
the application. [Amended 2-20-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
[3] The escrow fee for a use variance application involving a
commercial use or additional residential units shall be
fixed by the Board, but shall not be less than $1,000.
(5) Zone change requests.
(a) Application fee: $100.
(b) Professional review escrow account: $500.
(6) A certificate from the Township Administrative Officer pursuant to
§ 91-17: $10.
(7) Copies of documents as provided by the Open Public Records Act
shall be as provided in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
(8) Application to vacate existing street.
(a) Application fee: $100.
(b) Professional review escrow account: $500.
(9) Request for extension of approval: $250. [Added 8-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-13]
§ 91-24 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-24
83:311

ARTICLE VIII
Planning Board
§ 91-25. Board established; statutory authority.
A Planning Board is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of P.L.
1975, c. 291, Section 14 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23).
§ 91-26. Membership.
§ 91-27. Terms of office.
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to his official
tenure. The terms of the members composing Classes II and III shall be for
one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed
under this chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable
extent, the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the
first four years after their appointment, provided that the initial Class IV
term of no member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the Class IV term of
each such member shall be four years. If a vacancy in any class shall occur
otherwise than by expiration of the Planning Board term, it shall be filled by
appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term.
A. The Planning Board shall consist of seven members. For convenience in
designating the manner of appointment, the membership shall consist
of and be divided into the following classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the municipality, other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor,
provided that the official meets the requirements as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 concerning Class II members.
(3) Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
B. Alternate members. The governing body shall appoint to the Planning
Board not more than two alternate members. Alternate members shall
be appointed by the appointing authority for Class IV members and
shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members of nine-member
Planning Boards as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.2."
§ 91-25 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-28
83:313
§ 91-28. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Any member, other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the Mayor and Council for cause.
§ 91-29. Voting eligibility.
When any hearing before a Planning Board shall carry over two or more
meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one or more meetings
shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that such Board member has available to him a
transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was absent and
certifies, in writing, to the Board that he has read such transcript or listened
to such recording.
§ 91-30. Terms of alternate members; conflicts of interest; voting.
§ 91-31. Officers; employment of other personnel.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee. It may employ
or contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the
Township Solicitor, a professional planner, a professional engineer and
other staff and services as it may deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive
of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its
use.
A. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the
unexpired term only.
B. No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one, be
removed by the governing body for cause.
C. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
§ 91-28 FLORENCE CODE § 91-32
83:314
§ 91-32. Powers and duties.
§ 91-33. Ancillary powers.
A. The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of this chapter and shall
exercise its power accordingly with regard to the following:
(1) The Master Plan pursuant to Article IX.
(2) Subdivision control and site plan review pursuant to Part 2 of this
chapter.
(3) The Official Map pursuant to Article XI.
(4) The Zoning Ordinance, including conditional uses, pursuant to Part
3 of this chapter.
(5) The capital improvements program pursuant to Article X.
(6) Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval pursuant to
§ 91-33.
B. The Planning Board may:
(1) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
(2) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(3) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Mayor or the governing body for the
aid and assistance of the governing body or other agencies or
officers.
A. The Planning Board, when reviewing applications for approval of
subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses, shall have the power to
grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Board of Adjustment, the following:
(1) Variances pursuant to § 91-150A(3) of this chapter.
(2) Direction pursuant to§ 91-44 of this chapter for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(3) Direction pursuant to § 91-42 of this chapter for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to § 91-41 of this chapter.
(4) Variances pursuant to Chapter 79, Flood Damage Prevention, from
flood damage control.
§ 91-32 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-33
83:315
§ 91-34. Referral powers.
§ 91-35. Citizens Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
B. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the
case may be.
A. Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, revision or
amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall make and transmit to the
governing body, within 35 days after referral, a report, including
recommendations concerning the proposed development regulation,
revision or amendment. The governing body, when considering the
adoption of a development regulation, revision or amendment thereto,
shall review the report of the Planning Board and may disapprove or
change any recommendation by a vote of a majority of its full
authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for
not following such recommendations. Failure of the Planning Board to
transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period provided herein
shall relieve the governing body from the requirements of this
subsection with regard to the proposed development regulation,
revision or amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board.
B. Prior to the hearing on adoption of an ordinance providing for Planning
Board approval of either subdivisions or site plans, or both, or any
amendment thereto, the governing body shall refer any such proposed
ordinance or amendment thereto to the Planning Board pursuant to
Subsection A of this section.
§ 91-33 FLORENCE CODE § 91-35
83:316
ARTICLE IX
Master Plan
§ 91-36. Preparation and contents.
A. The Planning Board shall prepare and, after public hearing, adopt or
amend a Master Plan or component parts thereof to guide the use of
lands within the Township in a manner which protects public health and
safety and promotes the general welfare.
B. The Master Plan shall generally comprise a report or statement and
land use and development proposals, with maps, diagrams and text,
presenting, where appropriate, the following elements.
(1) A statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and
standards upon which the constituent proposals for the physical,
economic and social development of the Township are based.
(2) A land use plan element taking into account the other Master Plan
elements and natural conditions, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage,
floodplain areas, marshes and woodlands; showing the existing and
proposed location, extent and intensity of development or land to
be used in the future for varying types of residential, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational, educational and other public
and private purposes or a combination of purposes; and including a
statement of the standards of population density and development
intensity recommended for the Township.
(3) A housing plan element pursuant to Section 10 of P.L. 1985, c. 222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-310), including but not limited to residential
standards and proposals for the construction and improvement of
housing.
(4) A circulation plan element showing the location and types of
facilities for all modes of transportation required for the efficient
movement of people and goods into, about and through the
Township.
(5) A utility service plan element analyzing the need for and showing
the future general location of water supply and distribution
facilities, drainage and flood control facilities, sewerage and waste
treatment, solid waste disposal and provision for other related
utilities.
(6) A community facilities plan element showing the location and type
of educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries,
hospitals, firehouses, police stations and other related facilities,
including their relation to the surrounding areas.
(7) A recreation plan element showing a comprehensive system of
areas and public sites for recreation.
§ 91-36 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-36
83:317
(8) A conservation plan element providing for the preservation,
conservation and utilization of natural resources, including, to the
extent appropriate, open space, water, forests, soil, marshes,
wetlands, harbors, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife and
other natural resources.
(9) An economic plan element considering all aspects of economic
development and sustained economic vitality, including:
(a) A comparison of the types of employment expected to be
provided by the economic development to be promoted with
the characteristics of the labor pool resident in the
municipality and nearby areas.
(b) An analysis of the stability and diversity of the economic
development to be promoted.
(10) A historic preservation plan element:
(a) Indicating the location, significance, proposed utilization and
means for preservation of historic sites and historic districts.
(b) Identifying the standards used to assess worthiness for historic
site or district designation.
(c) Analyzing the impact of each component and element of the
Master Plan on the preservation of historic sites and districts.59
(11) Appendices or separate reports containing the technical foundation
for the Master Plan and its constituent elements.
(12) A recycling plan element which incorporates the state recycling
plan goals, including provisions for the collection, disposition and
recycling of recyclable material designated in Article IV, Recycling,
of Chapter 122, Solid Waste, and for the collection, disposition and
recycling of recyclable materials within any development proposal
for the construction of 50 or more units of single-family residential
housing or 25 or more units of multifamily residential housing and
any commercial or industrial development proposal for the
utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land.
C. The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and
subplan elements projected according to periods of time or staging
sequences.
D. The Master Plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the
relationship of the proposed development of the Township as developed
in the Master Plan to the Master Plans of contiguous municipalities, the
Master Plan of Burlington County and the State Development and
Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant to the State Planning Act, P.L.
1985, c. 398 (N.J.S.A. 52:18A-196 et seq.), and the district solid waste
59.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 91-36 FLORENCE CODE § 91-36
83:318
§ 91-37. Periodic reexamination and report.
management plan of Burlington County required pursuant to the
provisions of the Solid Waste Management Act, P.L. 1970, c. 39 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-1 et seq.).
A. The governing body shall, at least every six years, provide for a general
reexamination of the Master Plan and this chapter by the Planning
Board, which shall prepare a report on the findings of such
reexamination, a copy of which shall be sent to the County Planning
Board and the Municipal Clerks of each adjoining municipality. The sixyear
period shall commence with the adoption or termination of the last
reexamination of such plan and regulations of May 12, 1987. The next
such reexamination shall be completed within six years after May 12,
1987.
B. Such report shall state the following:
(1) The major problems and objectives relating to land development in
the Township at the time of such adoption, last revision or
reexamination, if any.
(2) The extent to which such problems and objectives have been
reduced or have increased subsequent to such date.
(3) The extent to which there have been significant changes in the
assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis for such
plan or regulations as last revised, with particular regard to the
density and distribution of population and land uses, housing
conditions, circulation, conservation of natural resources and
change in state, county and Township policies and objectives.
(4) The specific changes recommended for such plan or regulations, if
any, including underlying objectives, policies and standards, or
whether a new plan or regulations should be prepared.
§ 91-36 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-37
83:319

ARTICLE X
Capital Improvements Program
§ 91-38. Preparation of capital improvements project program
authorized.
§ 91-39. Adoption of program; modifications.
Whenever the Planning Board has prepared a capital improvement program
pursuant to § 91-38 of this chapter, it shall recommend such program to
the governing body, which may adopt such program with any modification
approved by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership
of the governing body and with the reasons for said modification recorded
in the minutes.
A. The governing body may authorize the Planning Board from time to
time to prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of at least six years and amendments thereto.
Such program may encompass major projects being currently
undertaken or future projects to be undertaken with federal, state,
county and other public funds or under federal, state or county
supervision. The first year of such program shall, upon adoption by the
governing body, constitute the capital budget of the Township as
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43 et seq. The program shall classify projects
with regard to the urgency and need for realization and shall
recommend a time sequence for their implementation. The program
may also contain the estimated cost of each project and indicate
probable operating and maintenance costs and probable revenues, if
any, as well as existing sources of funds or the need for additional
sources of funds for the implementation and operation of each project.
The program shall, as far as possible, be based on existing information
in the possession of the departments and agencies of the Township and
shall take into account public facility needs indicated by the prospective
development shown in the Master Plan of the Township or as permitted
by other municipal land use controls. In preparing the program, the
Planning Board shall confer, in a manner deemed appropriate by the
Board, with the Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, other municipal
officials and agencies, the Growth Management Advisory Board and the
School Board. Any such program shall include an estimate of the
displacement of persons and establishments caused by each
recommended project.
B. In addition to any of the requirements in Subsection A of this section,
whenever the Planning Board is authorized and directed to prepare a
capital improvements program, every department, authority or agency
shall, upon inquiries to the Planning Board, transmit to said Board a
statement of all capital projects proposed to be undertaken by such
municipal department, authority or agency during the term of the
program for study, advice and recommendation by the Planning Board.
§ 91-38 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-40
83:321
§ 91-40. Review of projects by Planning Board.
Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of the Master
Plan, the governing body or other public agency having jurisdiction over the
subject matter, before taking action necessitating the expenditure of any
public funds incidental to the location, character or extent of such project,
shall refer the action involving such specific project to the Planning Board
for review and recommendation in conjunction with such Master Plan and
shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until 45 days have
elapsed after such reference without receiving such recommendation. This
requirement shall apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special
district or other authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other
similar public agency, state, county or municipal.
§ 91-40 FLORENCE CODE § 91-40
83:322
ARTICLE XI
Official Map
§ 91-41. Map adopted; statutory authority. [Amended 7-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-19; 9-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-25; 12-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-18; 12-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-30; 12-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-16]
§ 91-42. Issuance of permits for buildings or structures.
For purposes of preserving the integrity of the Official Map, no permit
shall be issued for any building or structure in the bed of any street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to
§ 91-41 of this chapter as shown on the Official Map or shown on a plat
filed pursuant to this chapter before adoption of the Official Map, except
as provided herein. Whenever one or more parcels of land, upon which is
located the bed of such mapped street or public drainageway, flood control
basin or public area reserved pursuant to § 91-41 hereof, cannot yield a
reasonable return to the owner unless a building permit is granted, the
Board of Adjustment may, in a specific case, by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board, direct the issuance
of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of such mapped street,
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to § 91-41 hereof, which will, as little as practicable, increase the cost of
opening such street or tend to cause a minimum change to the Official
Map, and the Board shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition of
granting the permit so as to promote the health, morals, safety and general
welfare of the public. Sections 91-152 through 91-155 of this chapter shall
apply to applications or appeals pursuant to this section.
§ 91-43. Building lot to abut street.
No lot shall be created by approval of a subdivision application and no
permit for the erection of a building or structure shall be issued unless
A. There is hereby adopted, pursuant to the provisions of Section 23 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32), a document known as the “Official
Map of the Township of Florence,” prepared by Dante Guzzi
Engineering Associates, dated July 1, 1999, and revised November 9,
2011.
B. The Official Map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the
location and width of streets and public drainageways and the location
and extent of flood-control basins and public areas, whether or not such
streets, ways, basins or areas are improved or unimproved or are in
actual physical existence. Upon receiving an application for
development, the Township may reserve for future use the aforesaid
streets, ways, basins and areas in the manner provided by applicable
laws of the State of New Jersey and the Code of the Township of
Florence.
§ 91-41 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-43
83:323
the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or structure.
Such street shall have been duly placed on the Official Map or shall be an
existing state, county or municipal street or highway or a street shown upon
a plat approved by the Planning Board or a street on a plat duly filed in
the office of the County Clerk of Burlington County prior to the passage
of this chapter or its predecessor or any prior law which required prior
approval of plats by the governing body or other authorized body. Before
any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been certified to be
suitably improved to the satisfaction of the governing body, or such suitable
improvement shall have been assured by means of a performance guaranty
in accordance with standards and specifications for road improvements
approved by the governing body as adequate with respect to the public
health, safety and general welfare of the special circumstances of the
particular street.
§ 91-44. Variances.
Where the enforcement of § 91-43 hereof would entail practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship or where the circumstances of the case do not
require the building or structure to be related to a street, the Board of
Adjustment may, upon application or appeal, vary the application of § 91-43
hereof and direct the issuance of a permit, subject to conditions that will
provide adequate access for fire-fighting equipment, ambulance and other
emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and safety and
that will protect any future street layout shown on the Official Map or a
general circulation plan element of the Municipal Master Plan pursuant to
§ 91-36B(4) of this chapter. Sections 91-152 through 91-155 of this chapter
shall apply to applications or appeals pursuant to this section. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment may not grant relief from street improvement
requirements for lots yet to be created as a result of subdivision approval.
§ 91-43 FLORENCE CODE § 91-44
83:324
Part 2
Subdivision Of Land; Site Plan Review
ARTICLE XII
Application Requirements
§ 91-45. Approval required.
§ 91-46. Application submission and contents; review.
The applicant shall submit his complete applications for subdivision, site
plan or conditional use approval to the Administrative Officer, who shall
note the date of receipt on the application form. The time for the Board's
review shall not begin to run until the application has been determined to be
complete. Unless the applicant is informed, in writing, by the Administrative
Officer within 45 days after submission of the application that it is
incomplete, specifying the items needed to render the application complete,
said application shall be deemed complete as of the 46th day after receipt
by the Administrative Officer. The applicant may rely on the checklist
adopted by § 91-55 of this chapter.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 28, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-37), approval of subdivision plats by resolution of the Planning
Board shall be required as a condition for the filing of such plats with
the office of the Burlington County Clerk. Approval of site plans by
resolution of the Planning Board shall be required as a condition for the
issuance of a building permit and certificate of occupancy for any
development or change of use, except that subdivision or individual lot
applications for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings and
accessory buildings, such as private garages, tool houses and private
greenhouses incidental to residential uses shall be exempt from such
site plan review and approval, provided that the resolution of the Board
of Adjustment shall substitute for that of the Planning Board whenever
the Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction over a subdivision or site plan
pursuant to § 91-156B of this chapter.
B. Each application for subdivision approval, where required pursuant to
Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), and each application
for site plan approval, where required pursuant to Section 8 of P.L.
1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Burlington County Planning Board for review and approval as
required by the aforesaid sections, and the approving authority shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board by its failure to
report thereon within the required time period.
C. No application for development will be considered complete until the
applicant has calculated and delineated the area of wetlands based
upon a wetlands delineation approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy.
§ 91-45 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-47
83:325
§ 91-47. Applications for development approval.
Every application for development approval shall include the following:
§ 91-48. Subdivision plot plans for applications for minor
subdivision approval.
In addition to the requirements of § 91-47, every application for minor
subdivision approval shall include 10 copies of a subdivision plot plan on
which all of the following is set out:
A. Three properly completed site plan, subdivision and/or conditional use
information forms.
B. The required fee as per § 91-24 of this chapter.
C. Proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent.60
D. An environmental impact statement (EIS).
E. Wetlands delineation or letter of exemption by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy.
A. A survey made by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor at a scale not
less than one inch equals 100 feet.
B. A locator map at a scale no less than one inch equals 2,000 feet,
showing all road intersections within 500 feet or the nearest
intersection, whichever is the most distant.
C. All structures and wooded areas within the tract and on adjoining
properties within 100 feet.
D. All lot lines and names of owners of lots adjoining the tract. If any
variance is required, show the information for all lots within 200 feet of
the site.
E. Streets, easements, watercourses and rights-of-way, both existing and
proposed, within the tract.
F. Utilities and drainage, both existing and proposed, within the tract.
G. Any extension of off-tract improvements necessitated by the proposed
development.
H. A general indication of drainage flow by the use of arrows.
I. Location, type and number of existing and proposed drives.
J. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
60.Editor's Note: See also Article II of Chapter 129, Taxation.
§ 91-47 FLORENCE CODE § 91-48
83:326
§ 91-49. Site plan or subdivision plot plans for applications for
minor or major site plan approval or major subdivision approval.
In addition to the requirements of § 91-47, every application for minor or
major site plan approval or major subdivision approval shall include 25
copies of a site plan or subdivision plot plan consisting of one or more sheets
on which all of the following is set out:
K. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number.
L. Route numbers of all county roads.
M. Existing zoning of the tract and the bulk requirements.
N. General delineation of floodplain or restricted areas.
O. The area of the Federal Flood Hazard Zone, if applicable, or a notation
that it is not applicable.
P. A statement of the proposed use of the site.
Q. Names and addresses of the record owner of the lands to be subdivided.
A. The scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
B. Date of preparation, North arrow, graphic scale, state highway number,
county route number and street names.
C. The name of the land development and the municipality in which it is
located.
D. The name and addresses of the owner and the developer of the property
as well as the name, address, title and seal of the person preparing the
plan, maps and accompanying data.
E. Certificate that the applicant is the owner of the land or has authority to
act as agent for the owner, setting forth names and addresses of both.
F. Area for the date and substance of each revision.
G. The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date, reference
meridian and graphic scale.
H. Acreage of the tract to the nearest tenth of an acre.
I. Contours at two-foot intervals, except where the slope exceeds 15% in
which case contour intervals may be five feet for those areas, to
determine the general slope and natural drainage of the land and the
high and low points of all proposed new streets. All elevations shall be
based on the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
J. A key location map of the land development area at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 2,000 feet. This shall show the entire site area and
lots contiguous to it which are in the same or related ownership as the
land development.
§ 91-48 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-49
83:327
K. A locator map showing all road intersections within 500 feet or the
nearest intersection, whichever is the most distant.
L. All structures, wooded areas within the tract and adjoining the tracts
and all trees greater than or equal to six inches in diameter within the
tract.
M. All lot lines and names of owners of lots within 200 feet of the site.
N. All adjacent block and lot numbers.
O. All political boundary lines.
P. Existing lot lines to be eliminated.
Q. A clear statement of the use proposed.
R. Signature blocks for the Board Chairperson and Secretary.
S. County highway route numbers.
T. An indication of drainage conditions and directions of water flow on the
side of the road(s) opposite the subdivision.
U. Zoning district(s).
V. Location of all existing utilities.
W. The location and extent of all easements, along with a statement of the
use and owner thereof.
X. A soil erosion and sediment control plan, pursuant to the requirements
of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
Y. All existing or proposed storm sewer drainage systems within or
adjacent to the land development, showing size, type, location and
profile of lines, ditches, manholes, inlets, drywells and detention basins,
plus all supporting design.
Z. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sanitary sewers, storm sewers and the
drainage structures) showing feasible connections to existing or any
proposed utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or
sewage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be
approved by the appropriate local, county or state agencies.
AA. Drainage area map and drainage calculations.
BB. Lands to be dedicated or reserved for public use shall be clearly
indicated.
CC. The location, size and nature of all existing and proposed roads within
and abutting the land development. If additional right-of-way is to be
dedicated to the County of Burlington, a note stating "additional rightof-
way is to be dedicated to Burlington County for road-widening
§ 91-49 FLORENCE CODE § 91-49
83:328
purposes" shall appear on the plan, or to the municipality if a road is
under its jurisdiction.
DD. Where work is to be done in the Township right-of-way, a detailed plan
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 30 feet, showing the layout of
any intersection, including driveways, to a Township road. This plan
shall show the following:
(1) Existing elevations of the center line and the edge of the existing
pavement of the road every 25 feet, to extend 100 feet beyond the
property line or intersection pavement transition.
(2) Proposed elevations of the curb gutter and top of the curb every 25
feet along the road at the stations established in Subsection I
above.
(3) Half cross sections of every 50 feet and at critical points along the
road and spot elevations at the center line, edge of pavement and
proposed curbline along the road.
EE. Standard details, i.e., proposed inlets, curbs, headwalls and manholes,
and typical cross sections, i.e., streets, channels and retention/
detention basins.
FF. Cross sections of watercourses at an appropriate scale.
GG. Methods used to stabilize slopes and control erosion and siltation for
ditches, streams or brooks, and the location and general extent of
wooded areas, bodies of water and other physical features.
HH. Boundaries of floodplains of water bodies, if defined, within the land
development. Where defined, these should correspond to the floodway
and the flood hazard areas commonly designated by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, although other
approved criteria may be used where these are lacking.
II. The area of the Federal Flood Hazard Zone, if applicable, or a notation
that it is not applicable.
JJ. When a natural waterway traverses or borders the tract for which
approval is being sought, the subdivider must submit to the Planning
Board either a copy of a stream encroachment permit issued by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
approving the alignment, easements and design of the waterway or
evidence that said plans do not require Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy approval. In those instances where a state
stream encroachment permit is required, a copy of the plans with the
approval of the Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
endorsed thereon must be filed with the Secretary of the Board.
KK. A copy of the protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
§ 91-49 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-49
83:329
§ 91-50. Applications for preliminary subdivision approval.
Every application for preliminary major subdivision approval shall provide
(in addition to the information required in § 91-49) the following:
LL. Test borings to the water table or a depth of 10 feet, whichever is lesser,
to show information on ground conditions (soil types), depth to seasonal
high water and water table, with the minimum to be one test for each
10 acres and one test for each type of soil on the tract or as determined
by the Board. Preferably test borings shall be taken between February 1
and May 31. The date and location of the test borings shall be shown on
the plat.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas, including the zoning of the subdivision and the
adjacent areas.
B. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
C. A statement of the number of lots and minimum zoning requirements.
D. Existing and proposed streets, sidewalks and lot layout with dimensions
showing that portion proposed for development in relation to the entire
tract.
E. Lot grades to indicate the drainage pattern.
F. A typical cross section of the proposed sidewalks.
G. Profiles and typical cross sections of proposed streets.
H. Utility and drainage plans.
I. Any extension of off-tract improvements necessitated by the proposed
development.
J. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A 4:24-39 et seq.
K. The location of a recycling center(s).
L. A municipal services and utilities impact statement analyzing the
probable impact on municipal services, including:
(1) Feasibility of providing potable water to the site to meet the
required demand for intended use without degrading either all or a
portion of the entire system. Consideration shall be given to the
adequacy of the existing storage and distribution system.
(2) Stormwater management calculations.
(3) Feasibility of conveying and treating the sewage generated by the
proposed development within the existing Township system.
§ 91-49 FLORENCE CODE § 91-50
83:330
§ 91-51. Applications for final subdivision approval.
Every application for final subdivision approval shall include the following:
§ 91-52. Applications for preliminary site plan approval.
Every application for preliminary site plan approval shall provide (in
addition to the information required in § 91-49) the following:
(4) Schools.
(5) Police and fire protection.
(6) Roads and traffic.
(7) Sanitation, trash disposal and recycling.
(8) Supporting data to show how conclusions were determined.
A. All information required for preliminary subdivision approval revised to
show all conditions of preliminary approval.
B. A plan complying with the requirements of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.
C. An executed sewer and water agreement.
A. The location, elevation, type and size of all existing or proposed curbs,
sidewalks, driveways, fences, landscaping, retaining walls, parking
space areas and off-street loading areas, together with the dimensions
and layouts of all of the foregoing on the site in question.
B. The type and number of driveways.
C. Existing and proposed signs, lighting standards, utility poles and trees
of six-inch caliper and larger, measured five feet above ground, over the
entire tract, except in heavily wooded areas.
D. A statement of the proposed number of units.
E. Preliminary plans for the elevations and locations of structures,
parking, lighting, loading, signs and landscaping.
F. Existing and proposed structures and uses including the shortest
distances between buildings and lot lines.
G. An indication of those buildings to remain and those to be removed.
H. Building elevations.
I. Building coverage and impervious coverage in acres or square feet and
percentage of lot coverage.
J. All setback lines.
§ 91-50 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-52
83:331
K. Intent for water and sewer treatment.
(1) Show any existing wells and/or septic systems.
(2) Show proposed septic systems and/or well locations.
(3) Show proposed public water and/or sewer connections.
(4) When septic systems are proposed, supply boring and percolation
test results.
(5) Supply one boring for each acre if soil maps indicate that the
seasonal high water table may exceed ordinance standards for
buildable lots.
L. Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements within the
adjoining tract.
M. Full landscaping details in accordance with the standards of this
chapter including:
(1) Location of wooded areas.
(2) Buffers.
(3) Location and identification of existing vegetation outside of wooded
areas.
(4) An indication as to whether existing vegetation is to remain or to be
removed.
(5) A planting schedule.
N. Lighting details.
O. Freestanding sign details showing location and dimensions.
P. Circulation and parking details.
(1) Sight triangles at intersections.
(2) Driveways and aisles.
(3) Parking spaces.
(4) Ingress and egress.
(5) Loading.
(6) Sidewalks.
(7) Curbs.
(8) Handicapped parking and curb cuts.
(9) Improvement details for the above.
§ 91-52 FLORENCE CODE § 91-52
83:332
Q. The location of a recycling center(s).
R. Each site plan shall have the following information shown thereon or
annexed thereto:
(1) Building and use plan. This plan shall show the size, height,
location, arrangement and use of all existing and proposed
structures and signs, including the proposed total building
coverage in acres or square footage as well as the percent of the lot
coverage, with an architect's scaled elevations of the front, side
and rear of any structure and sign to be erected or modified to the
extent necessary to apprise the Planning Board of the scope of the
proposed work. Any existing structures on the site shall be
identified either to remain or to be removed. A written description
of the proposed use and operations of the building, including the
number of employees or members of nonresidential buildings; the
proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
employees on each shift; expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic;
emission of noise, glare, vibration, heat, odor, air and water
pollution; safety hazards; and anticipated expansion plans
incorporated into the building design, shall be included. Floor plans
shall be submitted.
(2) Circulation plan. This plan shall show access streets and street
names, acceleration and deceleration lanes, curbs, aisles and lanes,
access points to public streets, sight triangles, traffic
channelization, easements, fire lanes, driveways, number and
location of parking and loading spaces, loading berths or docks,
pedestrian walks and all related facilities for the movement and
storage of goods, vehicles and persons on the site, and including
lights, lighting standards, signs and driveways within the tract and
within 100 feet of the tract. Sidewalks shall be shown from each
entrance/exit along expected paths of pedestrian travel, such as
but not limited to access to parking lots, driveways or other
buildings on the site, and across common yard areas between
buildings. Plans shall be accompanied by cross sections of new
streets, aisles, lanes driveways, sidewalks and bikeways. Any
expansion plans for the proposed use shall show feasible parking
and loading expansion plans to accompany building expansion.
(3) Landscaping plan. This plan shall show existing and proposed
wooded areas, buffer areas, including the intended screening
devices and buffers, grading at two-foot contour intervals inside
the tract and within 50 feet of its boundaries, seeded or sodded
areas, ground cover, retaining walls, fencing, signs, recreation
areas, shrubbery, trees and other landscaping features. These
plans shall show the location and type of man-made improvements
and the location, species and caliper of plant material and trees to
be located on the tract. All portions of the property utilized by
buildings or paved surfaces shall be landscaped, utilizing
combinations such as landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area,
§ 91-52 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-52
83:333
ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing foliage and the
planting of coniferous and/or deciduous trees as in the shade tree
list set forth by the Township61 in order to maintain or reestablish
the tone of the vegetation in the area and lessen the visual impact
of the structures and paved areas. Lawn seed or sod or ground
cover areas shall be established on a minimum of four inches
of topsoil. Topsoil shall be clean of debris and of good quality.
Grasses shall be from a seed mix of predominantly bluegrass and
be relatively free of noxious weeds. All plant types shall be
approved. Consideration shall be given to exposure, drainage,
maintenance and pollutants, such as salt. The established grades
and landscaping on any site shall be planned for aesthetic,
drainage and erosion control purposes. The grading plan, drainage
facilities and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion
and siltation, as well as assuring that the landscaping and
environmental plan conform to requirements of any other
reviewing agency.
(4) Facilities plan. This plan shall show the existing and proposed
locations of all drainage; open space; common property; fire, gas,
electric, telephone, sewerage and water line locations; and solid
waste collection and disposal methods, including proposed grades,
sizes, capacities and materials to be used for facilities installed by
the applicant. Installations by utility companies need only show
their sizes and locations on the plan. All easements acquired or
required on the tract and across adjacent properties shall be
shown, and copies of legal documentation that support the granting
of an easement by an adjoining property owner shall be included.
The method of sanitary waste disposal shall be shown. All proposed
lighting shall be shown, including the direction, angle, height and
reflection of each source of light. All utilities shall be installed
underground. All required state and federal approvals for
environmental considerations shall be submitted prior to the site
plan approval. Drainage facilities shall include facilities to comply
with the stormwater runoff provisions of this Part 2 of this chapter.
(5) A municipal services and utilities impact statement analyzing the
probable impact on municipal services, including:
(a) Feasibility of providing potable water to the site to meet the
required demand for intended use without degrading either all
or a portion of the entire system. Consideration shall be given
to the adequacy of the existing storage and distribution
system.
(b) Stormwater management calculations.
61.Editor's Note: See § 91-82 of this chapter.
§ 91-52 FLORENCE CODE § 91-52
83:334
§ 91-53. Applications for final site plan approval.
Every application for final site plan approval shall provide the following:
§ 91-54. Distribution of applications.
The Administrative Officer shall distribute the site plan, subdivision and/
or conditional use application for review and report and, where required,
approval as follows:
§ 91-55. Adoption of instructions and checklists. [Amended
2-15-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-1]
The following instructions and checklists of application submission
requirements are hereby adopted as part of this chapter:62
(c) Feasibility of conveying and treating the sewage generated by
the proposed development within the existing Township
system.
(d) Schools.
(e) Police and fire protection.
(f) Roads and traffic.
(g) Sanitation, trash disposal and recycling.
(h) Supporting data to show how conclusions were determined.
A. All information required for preliminary site plan approval revised to
show all conditions of preliminary approval.
B. An executed sewer and water agreement.
A. The municipal agency planner or landscape architect.
B. The municipal agency engineer.
C. The municipal agency solicitor.
D. The Florence Township Shade Tree Commission.
E. Such other public officers as may be designated by the municipal
agency.
A. General instructions for applications to the Planning Board and Zoning
Board, dated May 18, 1993.
B. Checklist, minor subdivision applications, dated November 1994.
C. Checklist, minor site plan applications, dated May 18, 1993.
62.Editor's Note: The instructions and checklists are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 91-52 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-55
83:335
D. Checklist, major subdivision applications, dated November 1994.
E. Checklist, major site plan applications, dated May 18, 1993.
F. Checklist, variance applications, dated May 18, 1993.
§ 91-55 FLORENCE CODE § 91-55
83:336
ARTICLE XIII
Review and Approval
§ 91-56. Reservation of land.
A. Before approving a subdivision or site plan, the municipal agency shall
require that streets, public drainageways, flood control basins and
public areas designated for reservation on the Master Plan or Official
Map must be shown on the plat in locations and sizes suitable to their
intended uses. The municipal agency may reserve the location and
extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown on the plat for a
period of up to one year after the approval of the final plat or within
such further time as may be agreed to by the developer. Unless during
such period or extension thereof the Township shall have entered into a
contract to purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according
to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such
streets, ways, basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land for
private use in accordance with applicable development regulations. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to streets and roads, flood
control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the subdivision
of land development and required for final approval.
B. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation, provided that determination of such fair market value
shall include but not be limited to consideration of the real property
taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan
approval, as the case may be, caused by the reservation.
C. Upon the submission to the municipal agency of an application for
development showing development proposed for an area reserved on
the Official Map or Master Plan, the Secretary of the municipal agency
shall notify the governing body, in writing, of such application and that
the municipal agency intends to grant approval for said development in
the reserved area unless the governing body notifies the municipal
agency prior to the date for final approval that it intends to reserve the
area in question and will provide compensation to the developer for
such reservation. Said notice of intent to reserve shall be in the form of
a resolution by the governing body. The Mayor and Council shall
thereupon proceed either to reach an agreement with the developer as
to the amount of compensation to be paid for such reservation or
negotiate a purchase price for said reserved area. Upon the Mayor and
governing body arriving at the amount to be paid the developer by way
§ 91-56 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-56
83:337
§ 91-57. Off-tract improvements.
Before final approval of a subdivision or site plan, the municipal agency may
require, in accordance with the standards of this chapter and an adopted
circulation, utility service, public facilities and/or open space plan, as shown
on the Official Map, the installation, or the furnishing of a performance
guaranty in lieu thereof, of any or all of the following off-tract improvements
which are necessary or appropriate for the protection of the public interest
by reason of the development's effect on land other than the developer's
property: street improvements, water system, sewerage, drainage facilities
and easements therefor.
of compensation for reservation or purchase, said amount shall be
deposited in escrow for the benefit of the developer.
A. Essential off-tract improvements.
(1) In cases in which a development has no direct access to a public
street, improved and meeting the standards of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34
and 40:55D-35, the municipal agency may, nevertheless, grant plat
approval if otherwise meeting the requirements of this chapter if
the developer shall acquire, improve and dedicate to the Township
such street between the development and an existing improved
public street as shall be approved by the municipal agency and the
Mayor and governing body. Such off-tract connections shall be
subject to the provisions of this Article as if they were required
improvements for the development. The dedication thereof shall be
subject to approval of the Township Solicitor as to form. The
provisions of this section shall be applicable only upon the request
of the developer.
(2) In cases in which surface or other drainage waters are to be
diverted from the proposed development into other drainage
facilities, ditches or stormwater systems or onto other lands or onto
any street or roadways and it appears that such off-tract facilities
are not adequate to accommodate the additional waters from the
site of the applicant or the volume in which the water from the site
of the applicant will be discharged or that the changes in grade on
site or diversion of surface waters therefrom will be likely to cause
damages to other properties or facilities so that provision is
required to extend or enlarge or create publicly controlled
drainage facilities off tract, and the need for such additional,
enlarged and/or new off-tract facilities is occasioned by the needs
of the applicant and the proposed development, and that the costs
of such additional, enlarged or new facilities will not be an
unreasonable burden upon the applicant if borne solely by the
applicant in the light of the relationship of such costs to the entire
project of the applicant, the municipal agency may, nevertheless,
grant final approval if the developer shall acquire, improve and
dedicate to the Township such enlarged, additional or new
drainage facilities, as the case may be, as shall be approved by the
§ 91-56 FLORENCE CODE § 91-57
83:338
municipal agency and the Mayor and governing body. Such offtract
drainage improvements shall be subject to the provisions
of this Article as if they were required improvements within the
development. The dedication thereof shall be subject to approval
of the Township Solicitor as to form. In lieu of the developer's
performing such off-tract drainage work, the developer and the
Mayor and governing body may enter into an agreement for such
work to be performed by the Township or its contractors at the
costs of the developer. The provisions of this section shall be
applicable only upon the request of the developer.
B. Determination of off-tract improvements by municipal agency. Where
the municipal agency shall determine that off-tract improvements
would be essential to the development, as set forth in Subsection A(1)
and (2) above, and particularly where the off-tract improvements would
be required to be made as a local improvement by the Township, with
the costs thereof to be assessed against all properties, including the
property of the developer specially benefited thereby, then the
provisions of this subsection shall apply as follows:
(1) At such time during the processing of the development application
as the desirability of such off-tract improvements shall become
apparent to the municipal agency, but in no event beyond the time
for the action on the preliminary plat, the municipal agency shall
refer the matter of off-tract improvements to the Mayor and
governing body, with recommendations to the Mayor and
governing body with regard thereto.
(2) If the Mayor and governing body agrees that the matter should be
considered, then the Township Engineer or other authority
retained by the Mayor and governing body for such purpose shall
determine the nature of the off-tract improvements required or
likely to be required in the area, including the following:
(a) The needs created by the applicant's proposed on-site
construction or work.
(b) The then-existing needs in the area, notwithstanding any work
of the applicant.
(c) The reasonable anticipated improvements or foreseeable work
on other lands in the area.
(3) Said Engineer or other authority shall determine the total
estimated costs of such estimated work, including all costs which
would be included in any local improvement ordinance which said
Township would be authorized to adopt for said project and
including construction costs, engineering costs, costs of any
easement or right-of-way acquisition, legal and advertising costs,
contingencies and bonding and assessment costs.
§ 91-57 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-57
83:339
(4) Said Engineer or other authority shall further determine from the
nature of the area and the nature of the work and estimated costs
the anticipated amount that the lands of the applicant would be
expected to be assessed under local improvement procedures
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-21 et seq., as the same may be amended
and supplemented from time to time.
(5) The Engineer or other authority shall report to the Mayor and
governing body the scope of the recommended project, the
estimated total costs, as computed under Subsection B(3) above,
and the estimated share of the subdivider, as computed under
Subsection B(4) above.
(6) Based upon the report of the Engineer or other authority, as
aforesaid, and the recommendations of the municipal agency, the
Mayor and governing body shall determine whether to undertake
such off-tract improvements or portions thereof as a local
improvement, the costs of which will be specially assessed against
properties benefited thereby in proportion to and not in excess of
the benefits received, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.
(7) If the determination of the Mayor and governing body shall be that
the governing body will not adopt such ordinance for the making of
such improvements as a local improvement, the final development
layout shall be designed accordingly, and the municipal agency
shall base its further proceedings upon such determination.
(8) If the determination of the Mayor and governing body shall be that
the governing body shall proceed to adopt such local improvement
ordinance, it shall proceed in the following manner:
(a) If sufficient Township funds are available for the initial
appropriation required for said ordinance, the governing body
may proceed to appropriate such funds and adopt such
ordinance, and all subsequent proceedings for the making and
for the assessment of the costs of the off-tract improvements
shall be in accordance with such ordinance and the aforesaid
statutes of New Jersey and the final development layout shall
be compatible with the off-tract improvements, and the
municipal agency shall proceed accordingly.
(b) If sufficient Township funds are not available for the initial
appropriation required for said ordinance, the Mayor and
governing body may determine the anticipated amount that the
lands of the applicant would be expected to be assessed,
accepting the recommendations of the Township Engineer or
other authority under Subsection B(4) above or making its own
determination as to such estimated amount.
[1] The amount so determined by the Mayor and governing
body shall then be deposited by the applicant with the
Township Chief Financial Officer prior to final approval of
§ 91-57 FLORENCE CODE § 91-57
83:340
the development and prior to introduction of such local
improvement ordinance.
[2] Such deposit shall be made concurrent with an agreement
between the applicant and the Township concerning the
uses of same, which shall include the following
stipulations:
[a] That said funds shall be used by the Township solely
for the construction of such off-tract improvements as
specified in said agreement and for the other expenses
incidental thereto, as more particularly set forth in
Subsection B(3) above, and the acquisition of any
easements or right-of-way in connection therewith.
[b] That such deposit may be appropriated by the
Township, with other funds of the Township, toward
the accomplishment of such purposes and, in that
connection, may be commingled with such other funds
so appropriated and may be expended by the
Township in connection with such purposes.
[c] That if such deposit is not used by the Township within
a specified time agreed upon by the applicant, said
funds shall be returned to the applicant.
[d] That, upon completion of the work by the Township or
its contractors, the properties specially benefited by
such improvement shall be assessed as provided by
law, including the property of the applicant.
[e] That such deposit of the applicant shall be credited
against the assessment made upon the applicant's
property, whether or not the applicant is then the
owner thereof.
[f] That if such deposit shall have been less than the
amount ultimately assessed and confirmed against
such property, then the then owner or owners of said
property shall pay the difference between the deposit
and such assessment, or if the deposit shall exceed the
amount so assessed and confirmed, the excess shall be
refunded to the applicant, without interest.
(c) In any case where, although the off-tract improvement may not
be found to be the type of essential off-tract improvements as
defined in Subsection A(1) or (2) hereof, said off-tract
improvements are found by the municipal agency to be
advisable and important to the sound development of the site
and the governing body has concurred in said findings and has
determined to proceed in accordance with Subsection B(8)
hereof, particularly Subsection B(8)(b)[1] and [2] above, but
§ 91-57 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-57
83:341
§ 91-58. Proposed vacation of existing street.
§ 91-59. Establishment and maintenance of open space.
the developer is unwilling to make such deposit as specified
thereunder, then, and in that event, there shall be no final
approval of said development until funds become available
for the initial appropriation required to adopt the local
improvement ordinance.
(d) The determination of the availability of Township funds for
appropriation to a local improvement ordinance, as provided in
Subsection B(8)(b) and (c) above, shall be in the sole discretion
of the governing body.
(9) The determination of the governing body as to whether to proceed
toward the adoption of a local improvement ordinance under
Subsection B(7) or B(8) above shall be made as soon as practicable
after referral by the municipal agency, but, in any case, the
governing body shall make such determination within a sixty-day
period, or within such time as extended, the municipal agency may
proceed as if the governing body had determined that it would not
adopt such local improvement ordinance.
A. Any applicant for development whose plans show a proposed vacation
of an existing street shall include with his application to the municipal
agency a notice to Township Council of intent to request vacation of the
street. The notice shall be on a form provided by the Clerk of the
municipal agency. Any application for development showing a proposed
street vacation that does not include the aforesaid notice shall be
deemed incomplete.
B. The municipal agency shall condition preliminary approval of any
application for development showing a proposed street vacation on the
vacation of such street by formal action of Township Council.
C. Prior to making application for final land use approval, an applicant
proposing vacation of a street shall apply to the Township Council for
vacation of the street and shall amend the final plans in accordance
with any ordinance Council may adopt on vacation of the street. Such
application to Council shall be made on a form provided by the Clerk of
the municipal agency, shall be accompanied by the appropriate
application fee and professional review escrow, and shall include a legal
description of the street proposed for vacation. An application for final
land use approval that proposes vacation of a street that is not made in
accordance with this section shall be deemed incomplete.
A. The Township may, at any time and from time to time, accept the
dedication of land for public use and maintenance or any interest
therein required to be set aside, designated and reserved for the use
and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
§ 91-57 FLORENCE CODE § 91-59
83:342
neighboring such land as a condition of approval of planned unit
development, planned unit residential development or residential
cluster, but such dedication shall not be required by the municipal
agency.
B. The developer shall provide for an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any open space for the benefit of owners or residents of
a development if said open space is not dedicated to the Township. Such
organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open
space by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of such
development, and thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved
nor dispose of any of its open space without first offering to dedicate the
same to the Township.
C. In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space
in reasonable order and condition, the governing body may serve
written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of the
development, setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said
notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be
cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 but not less than seven
days of the notice. At such hearing, the governing body may modify the
terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable
extension of time, not to exceed 65 days, within which they may be
cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not be cured within said 65 days or any
permitted extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
open space and maintain the same for a period of one year, may enter
upon and maintain such land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest
in the public any rights to use the open space except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the expiration
of said year, the governing body shall, upon its initiative or upon the
request of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance
of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to
such organization and to the owners of the development, to be held by
the governing body, at which hearing such organization and the owners
of the development shall show cause why such maintenance by the
Township shall not, at the election of the Township, continue for a
succeeding year. If the governing body shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said open space in
reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said open
space at the end of said year. If the governing body shall determine
such organization is not ready and able to maintain said open space in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion, continue to
maintain said open space during the next succeeding year, subject to a
similar hearing and determination in each year thereafter. The decision
of the governing body in any case shall constitute a final administrative
decision, subject to judicial review.
§ 91-59 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-59
83:343
§ 91-60. Preliminary approval; waiver of site plan approval;
amendment of application; informal review.
D. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed pro
rata against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed value at the
time of imposition of the lien, and the cost shall become a lien and tax
on said properties and be added to and be a part of the tax to be levied
and assessed thereon and enforced and collected, with interest, by the
same officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
A. Site plans.
(1) Upon the submission to the Administrative Officer of a complete
application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and 10
dwelling units or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer, except that if the application for site plan approval also
involves an application for relief pursuant to§ 91-33 of this chapter,
the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
95 days of the date of the submission of a complete application to
the Secretary of the Planning Board or within some further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan of
more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling units, or for a
conditional use approval, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval of the site plan and/or approval of the
conditional use within 95 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. Subdivisions.
(1) Upon the submission to the Secretary of the Planning Board of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, other
than a minor subdivision as defined in § 91-67 of this chapter, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer, except that if the application
for subdivision approval also involves an application for relief
pursuant to§ 91-33 of this chapter, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the
Planning Board or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant.
(2) Upon the submission of a complete application for a subdivision of
more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission
§ 91-59 FLORENCE CODE § 91-60
83:344
§ 91-61. Public notice of certain site plans required.
Public notice shall be given by all applicants for major site plan approval. A
public notice is not required for minor site plan applications.
§ 91-62. Rights conferred under preliminary approval.
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer.
C. Failure of the Planning Board to reach a decision within the specified
time periods or extensions thereof shall result in the approval of the
subdivision and/or site plan and/or conditional use as submitted.
D. The Planning Board may waive site plan approval requirements if it
finds, after application and hearing, that the construction or alteration
or change of occupancy or use does not affect existing circulation,
drainage, relationships of buildings to each other, landscaping,
buffering, lighting and other considerations of site plan review. An
applicant requesting a waiver of site plan approval shall submit
building plans and other drawings and information sufficient to enable
the Planning Board to make a informed decision as to whether the
waiver should be granted. The applicant shall pay the fees set forth for
minor site plans in § 91-24.
E. If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application
for development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed
development complies with this chapter, grant preliminary subdivision
or site plan approval.
F. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a developer to
submit a sketch plat to the Planning Board for informal review, and
neither the Planning Board nor the developer shall be bound by any
discussions or statements made during such review, provided that the
right of the developer at any time to submit a complete application for
subdivision or site plan approval shall not be limited by his submission
of a sketch plat, and the time for the Planning Board's decision shall not
begin to run until the submission of a complete application.
A. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan, except as
provided in Subsection B of this section, shall confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a three-year period from the date of the
preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and off-tract
§ 91-60 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-62
83:345
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, existing natural
resources to be preserved on the site; vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, parking and loading, screening, landscaping and
location of structures; and exterior lighting, both for safety reasons
and streetlighting, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Township from modifying by ordinance, such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relates to public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan.
(3) That on or before the expiration of preliminary approval the
applicant may apply for and the municipal agency may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for an area of 50 acres or more,
the municipal agency may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
A(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time, longer than three years,
as shall be determined by the municipal agency to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, economic conditions and
the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter, and the municipal agency may thereafter grant, an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the municipal agency to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval and the potential number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
C. Standards for granting final approval in sections. Unless an applicant
shows good cause why less restrictive standards should apply, the
municipal agency shall require the following standards to be met for
granting final approval to a section or sections of the preliminary
subdivision plat or site plan: [Added 5-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-9]
(1) The gross area of land to be developed shall not be less than 40
acres;
(2) Each section shall not be less than 25 acres in area and, in the case
of a subdivision, shall contain not fewer than 50 building lots;
(3) Not more than 4 sections shall be approved;
§ 91-62 FLORENCE CODE § 91-62
83:346
§ 91-63. Final approval.
§ 91-64. Exceptions from requirements; simultaneous review and
approval.
(4) All infrastructure (streets, curbs, sidewalks, water and sewer lines,
drainage facilities and utility service) required to serve the
development within a section shall be included within that section;
and
(5) Each section shall be designed both so as to stand alone in the
event that development of the entire tract is not completed, and so
as to be integrated into the development of the entire tract and
adjoining tracts related to it.
A. The municipal agency shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established by this chapter for final
approval, the conditions of preliminary approval and, in the case of a
major subdivision, the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, P.L.
1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9), provided that, in the case of a planned
development, the reviewing body may permit minimal deviations from
the conditions of preliminary approval necessitated by change of
condition beyond the control of the developer since the date of
preliminary approval without the developer being required to submit
another application for development for preliminary approval.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer of the
municipal agency or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Failure of the municipal agency to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval of the application for final
approval as submitted, and a certificate of the Secretary of the
municipal agency as to failure of the municipal agency to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other required evidence of approval.
C. A complete application for final approval shall consist of the information
listed in § 91-53.
A. The municipal agency, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions for the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review and approval of this chapter if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
B. The municipal agency, when acting upon an application for preliminary
site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from
§ 91-62 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-64
83:347
§ 91-65. Effect of final approval.
the requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and
within the general purpose and intent of this chapter if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
C. The municipal agency shall have the power to review and approve or
deny conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with the review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application to the municipal agency or the municipal agency's
being required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for
action by the municipal agency, whether it is for subdivision,
conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of
a conditional use is requested by the developer pursuant to this
subsection, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to
the request for such conditional use.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
§ 91-62 of this chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval,
provided that, in the case of major subdivision, the rights conferred by
this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the
time period provided in § 91-68 of this chapter. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval and, in the case of
a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required in § 91-68 of this
chapter, the municipal agency may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year, but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the granting of
final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval
pursuant to § 91-62 of this chapter for the section granted final
approval.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit development
or planned unit residential development or residential cluster of 50
acres or more or conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or
more, the municipal agency may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection A of this section for such period of time longer than two
years as shall be determined by the municipal agency to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The
developer may apply for thereafter, and the municipal agency may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the municipal agency to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
§ 91-64 FLORENCE CODE § 91-65
83:348
§ 91-66. Performance and maintenance guaranties; surveyor's
certification.
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
A. Before the recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final
site plan approval, or as a condition of a zoning permit pursuant to
§ 91-33 of this chapter, the municipal agency may require and shall
accept, in accordance with the standards adopted by this chapter for
the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract
improvements, the following:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the Township
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including
streets; grading; pavement; gutters; curbs; sidewalks;
streetlighting; shade trees; surveyor's monuments, as shown on the
final map and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.); water mains; culverts; storm sewers;
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal; drainage
structures; erosion control and sedimentation control devices;
public improvements of open space; and, in the case of site plans
only, other on-site improvements and landscaping. The Township
Engineer shall review the improvements required by the municipal
agency which are to be bonded and itemize their cost. Said
itemization shall be the basis for determining the amount of the
performance guaranty and maintenance guaranty required by the
municipal agency. The Township Engineer shall forward his
estimate of the cost of improvements to the applicant within 30
days of the date of receipt of a request sent by certified mail for
said estimate.
(2) Maintenance guaranty. [Amended 10-1-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-21]
(a) The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty, to be posted with
the governing body for a period not to exceed two years after
final acceptance of the improvement in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement shall be required
for all public improvement projects. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will
own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are
covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required for such
utilities or improvements.
(b) A two-year maintenance bond shall be required for projects
with the following improvements:
§ 91-65 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-66
83:349
[1] Any public improvements:
[2] Buffering and landscape;
[3] Public safety improvements relating to fire, traffic and
pedestrian safety:
[4] Stormwater systems that link to or impact off-site
facilities;
[5] Water supply systems that provide firesafety or are
directly connected to the Township water system:
[6] Improvements that impact the public safety, health and
welfare of the Township residents.
(c) Upon completion of improvements in a good and workmanlike
manner and in accordance with all rules, regulations,
standards, specifications and ordinances of the Township of
Florence, the Township will accept the improvements subject
to the filing of as-built drawings, and not require the need to
post a maintenance bond for certain improvement projects.
The Township Engineer and the Township Water and Sewer
Engineer shall have the discretion to determine whether a
maintenance bond is required to be posted for projects
pertaining to improvements on private property where the
total cost of improvements does not exceed $500,000. When
rendering his decision, the Township Engineer and/or the
Township Water and Sewer Engineer shall consider the impact
the improvements have on the public health, welfare and safety
of the Township residents. Each improvement project will be
reviewed on an individual basis for the need to post a
maintenance bond as recommended by the Township Engineer
and/or the Township Water and Sewer Engineer and approved
by Township Council. The Township Engineer and/or the
Township Water and Sewer Engineer shall continue to review
each improvement project on an individual basis in order to
determine the estimate of the cost of improvements for
purposes of the performance guaranty.
B. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
governing body, by resolution, when portions of the improvements have
been certified by the Township Engineer to have been completed. The
time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be established by the
governing body by resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Township may,
§ 91-66 FLORENCE CODE § 91-66
83:350
§ 91-67. Minor subdivisions.
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete
such improvements.
D. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Township Administrator, of the completion of
said improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
Engineer. Thereupon, the Township Engineer shall inspect all of the
improvements and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the
governing body, indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection
of the improvements, with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If
partial approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected
shall be set forth.
E. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Township Engineer and
shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of
said report and the action of said municipal agency with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial approval
is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty, except for the improvements not yet approved.
Failure of the governing body to send or provide such notification to the
obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from
all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty.
F. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the municipal
agency may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements.
H. During the construction of any building, no construction shall continue
beyond the foundation of the building until such time as the developer
or person constructing the building shall provide a certification to the
Township of Florence from a licensed surveyor that the building under
construction has been properly located in conformance with the
approved site plan or, in the case where no site plan approval was
required, in conformance with the setback lines governing the
premises.
A. The municipal agency shall waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if the Subdivision Committee of the
municipal agency appointed by the Chairman finds that the application
for development conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision" in
§ 91-66 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-67
83:351
§ 91-68. Recording and filing major subdivision plats.
§ 91-3 of this chapter. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to
be final approval of the subdivision by the municipal agency, provided
that the municipal agency or said Subdivision Committee may condition
such approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements
pursuant to Articles XIV through XX of this chapter.
B. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the
municipal agency or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Failure of the municipal agency to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval, and a certificate
of the Secretary of the municipal agency as to the failure of the
municipal agency to act shall be issued to the applicant on request, and
it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
municipal approval unless, within such period, a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.
141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9), or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording
officer, the Township Engineer and the Township Tax Assessor. Any such
plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the
application for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the
Planning Board may accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing
Act, provided that if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision
as provided herein by plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform to
the provisions of said Act.
D. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor
subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided herein.
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless, within such period, the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The
municipal agency may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
B. Final approval of a major subdivision shall be evidenced by affixing to
the plat the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the municipal
agency or a copy of the certificate of the Secretary to the municipal
agency indicating that the approving authority failed to reach a
decision on the subdivision application within the prescribed time. The
§ 91-67 FLORENCE CODE § 91-68
83:352
§ 91-69. Transfer and/or sale of land prior to final approval
prohibited; penalty.
§ 91-70. Certificates of approval.64
Certificates of approval shall be required as provided in § 91-21.
§ 91-70.1. Conditional approvals. [Added 5-5-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-9]
signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the municipal agency shall
not be affixed until the developer has posted the guaranties required
pursuant to § 91-66 of this chapter.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
Township approval is required by this chapter, such person shall be
punishable as provided in § 91-16D, and each lot disposition so made
may be deemed a separate violation.63
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain a
civil action for injunctive relief and to set aside and invalidate any
conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a certificate of
compliance has not been issued in accordance with § 91-70 of this
chapter.
A. Conditions precedent.
(1) Whenever any application for development is approved subject to
specified conditions intended to be fulfilled before the approval
becomes effective, such conditional approval shall lapse and
become null and void unless all specified conditions, other than
those contemplated by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-22b, are fulfilled within 190
days of the date of conditional approval.
(2) Proof that applications have been filed with all other agencies
having jurisdiction over any aspect of the application for
development shall forthwith be filed with the municipal agency.
(3) The fulfillment of all other conditions precedent shall forthwith be
reported, in writing, to the municipal agency, which may cause
such reports to be verified in an appropriate manner. Only upon
fulfillment of all conditions shall any subdivision map or site plan be
signed or any required building permit, occupancy permit or zoning
permit be issued.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 91-68 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-70.1
83:353
(4) When all conditions have been fulfilled with respect to any minor or
major subdivision, applicant shall, within 30 days of the fulfillment
of all such conditions, submit his deed or map for signature in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47 or 40:55D-54 or any such
approval shall lapse and be of no force and effect; provided,
however, that the applicant may, for good cause shown, obtain an
extension either before or after the lapse of such thirty-day period
within the reasonable exercise of the municipal agency's judgment.
B. Conditions subsequent.
(1) Whenever any application for development is approved subject to
conditions, which by their terms are incapable of being fulfilled or
are not required to be fulfilled prior to the final approval of the
application, the performance of which are not guaranteed by bonds
or securities of any type, failure to fulfill any such condition within
6 months from the date of adoption of the resolution memorializing
the final approval of the application for development shall be
grounds for issuance of a stop-work order by the enforcing official
and the withholding of any zoning permit, certificate of occupancy
or any other approval until such condition or conditions are
fulfilled.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
municipal agency from specifying a longer period of time within
which any specific condition must be fulfilled, or from granting,
upon application not requiring public notice, an extension of time
for good cause shown.
(3) The fulfillment of all conditions shall be reported, in writing, to the
municipal agency which may cause such reports to be verified in an
appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall
any subdivision map or site plan be signed or any required building
permit, occupancy permit, zoning permit or other required
approval be issued.
(4) For purposes of calculating the time period within which conditions
must be fulfilled, such time periods shall commence from the date
on which the resolution of memorialization was adopted.
§ 91-70.1 FLORENCE CODE § 91-70.1
83:354
ARTICLE XIV
Design Specifications
§ 91-71. Applicability.
These specifications shall govern the installation and construction of
improvements in all sections of developments whose preliminary plat has
not received final Township approval prior to the effective date of the
chapter, and to all construction work hereafter performed on previously
approved final plats where adherence to the new specifications will not
impose an unnecessary hardship by reason of a prior commencement of
such construction, prior commitments of contracts or prior delivery of
materials.
§ 91-72. Word usage.
Wherever in these design specifications the term "Engineer" is used, it shall
refer to and designate the Engineer duly authorized by Florence Township
to supervise the construction of the improvements contemplated herein, or
his duly appointed assistant or representative, or the Florence Township
Director of Public Works who shall have the same authority as the Engineer.
§ 91-73. Roads.
§ 91-74. Sidewalks. [Amended 2-18-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-3;
4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07; 8-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
A. Right-of-way radii. At intersections where either road or both roads are
within the Township road system the right-of-way lines should be
connected with a curve having a minimum radius of 25 feet tangent to
each right-of-way line.
B. Angle at intersections. Street or road intersections shall be at right
angles wherever possible, and intersections of less than 60º, measured
at the center line of streets, shall not be permitted.
C. Alignments. In the spacing of streets, consideration will be given to the
location of existing intersections on both sides of the development.
Streets which connect with the Township road system from opposite
sides of a Township road will not be offset, except where conditions
otherwise prevent such alignment. If conditions require the streets to
be offset, they shall be separated by at least 125 feet between their
center lines.
D. Grading. The minimum practical grades shall be maintained on streets
connecting with Township roads on the approaches to the intersection
and shall conform to § 91-79.
E. Curb radii. At intersections the minimum curb radii shall be 25 feet.
Radii beyond this minimum may be recommended by the municipal
agency engineer.
§ 91-71 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-74
83:355
A. Findings. The Township of Florence has determined that the provision
of sidewalks along all streets, highways and roadways is essential to
public safety for pedestrian traffic and to keep pedestrian traffic out of
the roadways and off any shoulders. In order to accomplish the goal of
having a network of sidewalks, developers of property should be
required to provide sidewalks along all streets, highways and roadways.
A reasonable alternative should be available for those exceptional
circumstances where the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment determines that sidewalks cannot reasonably be provided.
B. Requirements.
(1) The Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
require the installation of sidewalks along all streets, highways and
roadways within the Township, as provided herein, together with
appropriate landscaping and uniform grading, as a condition of
land development approval.
(2) Sidewalks shall be required for all major subdivisions and major
site plans within the Township and for all subdivisions and site
plans along Route 130.
(3) If an applicant is unable to provide sidewalks because of an
exceptional physical or practical difficulty resulting from the
characteristics of the subject property or surroundings, or because
piecemeal installation of sidewalks would not promote public
safety, the Planning Board or Zoning Board may waive, in whole or
in part, the requirement to provide sidewalks on the property
which is the subject of a pending application for land use approvals.
When the Board determines that such a waiver is appropriate, then
the Board shall require the developer to substitute a payment in
lieu of providing sidewalks into the Florence Township Sidewalk
Trust Fund for that portion of sidewalk which has been waived.
(4) There is hereby established the Florence Township Sidewalk Trust
Fund, which shall be a dedicated fund to be used solely for the
installation of sidewalks, pedestrian paths, and bicycle paths within
the Township of Florence as the Township Council may determine
to be appropriate. Nothing in this section shall be considered as
intended to restrict the combination or aggregation of Sidewalk
Trust Fund moneys with other moneys from other sources, such as
public or private grants, for the purpose of constructing sidewalks,
pedestrian paths, and bicycle paths within the Township of
Florence.
(5) Notwithstanding the approval of a waiver and payment, the
developer shall be required to provide dedication of the area where
the sidewalk would have been installed to the Township, so that the
Township may install the sidewalks at some later date.
(6) The payment in lieu of providing sidewalks shall be calculated as
120% of the Township Engineer's estimate of the cost of the
§ 91-74 FLORENCE CODE § 91-74
83:356
§ 91-75. Drainage requirements and stormwater management.
[Amended 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2365]
construction of the sidewalks, which has been waived by the
reviewing Board.
(7) In determining whether a sidewalk waiver and payment in lieu
should be approved, the reviewing Board shall consider not only
physical limitations, but also the potential for difficulty and delay in
obtaining regulatory approvals from outside agencies.
(8) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) Concrete sidewalk specifications. Sidewalks shall be
constructed with Class C. air-entrained, Portland cement
concrete. The concrete proportion shall consist of one part
Portland cement, two parts sand and four parts crushed stone
or washed gravel and constructed to a thickness of not less
than four inches. Where the sidewalk crosses over a driveway,
it shall be six inches.
(b) Alignment and grade. Alignment and grade is to be determined
by the established or existing grade in the area and approved
by the municipal agency engineer.
(c) Transverse expansion joints. Transverse expansion joints, 1/2
inch wide, shall be provided at intervals of not more than 20
feet and shall be filled with prefabricated, bituminous, cellulartype
joint filler.
(d) Longitudinal joints. Longitudinal joints, 1/4 inch wide, shall be
provided between curbs and abutting sidewalks and shall be
filled with premolded, bituminous-type joint filler.
(e) Transverse surface grooves. Transverse surface grooves shall
be cut in the sidewalk between expansion joints at intervals
equal to the sidewalk width.
(f) Slope. The standard slope of the sidewalk or sidewalk area
shall be 1/4 inch per foot rising from the top of the curb.
(g) Type of finish. The finish shall be made with a wood float,
followed by brushing with a wet soft-hair brush to a neat and
workmanlike surface. All edges shall be neatly rounded to 1/4
inch.
(h) Width. The minimum width of a sidewalk shall be four feet. In
non-urban areas, the sidewalk shall be separated from the
curbline by a minimum grass strip of four feet and, desirably,
eight feet.
A. Scope and purpose.
§ 91-74 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:357
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low-impact
techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive
site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being
placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source
control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 91-3.
(3) Applicability.
(a) This section shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
[1] Nonresidential major developments; and
[2] Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Florence Township.
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or section, In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and general welfare. This section is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law except that, where any provision
of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
65.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance indicated that any person who erects,
constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains or uses any building, structure or land in
violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in § 1-10.
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:358
B. Definitions. The definitions set forth in § 91-3 shall be applicable in this
section, unless a modified definition applicable to stormwater
management has been adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection as part of the Stormwater Management
Rules, in which case the definition enacted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection shall be applicable. Words or
phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have
in common usage and to give the most reasonable application.
C. General standards.
(1) Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major development
shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality standards in Subsection D. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the
design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet
these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into
the design.
(b) The standards in this section apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in
receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge.
The standards do not apply to new major development to the
extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or
water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
(c) Stormwater management measures shall be required for minor
developments, and shall be developed to address erosion
control and stormwater runoff.
NOTE: Alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater
recharge, stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of
major development projects as would be provided under the
standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with Subsection J.
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:359
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7).
(a) The construction of an underground utility line provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an above-ground utility line provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7) may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis,
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of Subsection D(6)
and (7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7), existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7) that were not
achievable on site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:360
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Subsection D(6) and (7) shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
Subsection D(5) into the design. The applicant shall identify
the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for
engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate
any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection D(5)(b) below into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
[4] Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed.
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading.
[6] Minimize soil compaction.
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy Subsection D(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:361
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)[9][b]
above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see Subsection D(5)(c)[3] below.
[1] Grates.
[a] Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or
another ground surface to collect stormwater from
that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
[i] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[ii] A different grate, if each individual clear space in
that grate has an area of no more than seven
square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches
across the smallest dimension.
[b] Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:362
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection D(7)(a) are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could
not pass through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection D(7)(a); or
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
Subsection D(6) and (7) shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an
equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the
reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G, or found
on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:363
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations at Subsection E either:
[i] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain 100% of the
average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
[ii] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from preconstruction to postconstruction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the urban redevelopment
area, or to projects subject to Subsection D(6)(a)[2][c]
below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[i] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored, or applied, areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities," as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:364
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[ii] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
Source materials include, but are not limited to,
raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that
are exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high-water
table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation
of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient
of the groundwater recharge area.
[e] Subsurface stormwater retention/detention systems
shall be designed to provide adequate access
structures for inspection and cleaning. Such systems
shall not be located on municipal property or within a
municipal right-of-way.
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection E,
complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site,
postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and one-
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:365
hundred-year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, tenand
one-hundred year storm events are 50%, 75% and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the
postconstruction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed.
The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood
hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damages below the point
of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(6)(a)[3][a],
[b] and [c] above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets
the definition of major development at Subsection B shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of
this section and any applicable Soil Conservation District
guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control.
For the purposes of this section, "agricultural development"
means land uses normally associated with the production of
food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the postconstruction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:366
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 1 05 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G, or found
on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The
BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed
in Subsection G. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on
the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall
be provided to the Department at the following address:
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:367
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall
utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B =(AXB)/100, where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater wetland 90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See Subsection F(3)
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in Subsection D(6) and (7).
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection G.
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:368
(g) In accordance with the definition of "FW1" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established
along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated
HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for the
protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession is provided.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where the applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:369
"Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,"
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a 95% TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) has been approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan
shall be the applicable special water resource protection
area requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in Subsection D(7)(h)[1][a]
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:370
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan
allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Subsection D(7) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
E. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 -
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
Subsection E(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at Subsection E(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to
the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover
(if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:371
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 -
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may
be employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New
Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available
from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/ or at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
F. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas;
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal highwater
table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone),
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:372
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of
one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches.
In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(4).
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and
corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to
meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at Subsection H.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates
are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
G. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection G(1)(a) and (b) below,
which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street,
P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609)
777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:373
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone
number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained
from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540.
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306.
(c) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625, (609) 292-5540.
H. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape
provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six-inch spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:374
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes of this Subsection H(2)(c), "escape provisions"
means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or
other features that provide easily accessible means of egress
from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in Subsection H(3) a freestanding outlet
structure may be exempted from this requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall
be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six
feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/
2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent
water surface. See Subsection H(4) for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. If
the basin will ultimately be dedicated to the municipality,
the maximum slope shall not be steeper than five
horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or
exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management
basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:375
appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or Department)
that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public
safety.
(4) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management
basin.66
I. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this section, the applicant shall submit
all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at Subsection I(3) below as part
of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision
or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit six copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with Subsection I(3) of this section.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval.
(a) The applicant's site development project shall be reviewed as a
part of the subdivision or site plan review process by the
municipal board or official from which municipal approval is
sought. That municipal board or official shall consult the
engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements
have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
(b) A stormwater management plan that incorporates an outfall to
any municipally owned storm sewer system, or that will be
ultimately dedicated to the Township, shall be subject to
review and approval by the Township Engineer, as well as the
appropriate Board Engineer.
(3) Checklist requirements. The following information shall be
required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
The topographic base map of the site shall extend a minimum
of 200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet or greater, showing two-foot
contour intervals. The map as appropriate may indicate the
66.Editor's Note: Said illustration is on file in the Township offices.
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:376
following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep
slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters,
wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate buffer
strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high ground-water elevations. A written description
of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Subsection I(3)(c) and (d) are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:377
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in Subsection D
of this section.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure. A minimum of two soil test pits shall be required
for each proposed stormwater management basin and/or
recharge area. Soil test pits must be scheduled and
witnessed with the Township Engineer.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection J.
(h) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official
or board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the Township engineer, waive submission of
any of the requirements in Subsection I(3)(a) through (f) of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship
on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
J. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review as in Subsection A(3) of this
section shall comply with the requirements of Subsection J(2) and
(3).
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-75
83:378
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association)
as having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate
a stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in
a residential development or project, unless such owner or
tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection J(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsection J(2)(f) and (g) above.
(i) The requirements of Subsection J(2)(c) and (d) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
§ 91-75 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-75
83:379
§ 91-76. Soil erosion and sediment control.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. All projects shall be built in a manner to control soil erosion. The
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey shall be
the reference used in the development of soil erosion and sediment
control plans.
B. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be reviewed by the
municipal agency and certified by the Burlington County Soil
Conservation District.
§ 91-75 FLORENCE CODE § 91-76
83:380
ARTICLE XV
Required Improvements
§ 91-77. Conformance required.
Any application for development shall conform to the following
requirements and principles of land design as well as with other ordinances
of the Township.
§ 91-78. General standards.
Any applicant for development shall demonstrate conformance to design
and performance standards that will encourage sound development
patterns within the Township and with this chapter. The streets, drainage
rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds, scenic sites,
historical sites and flood control basins shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be considered in the approval of developments. In accordance
with good development design practices, extreme deviations from
rectangular lot shapes and straight lot lines shall not be allowed unless
made necessary by special topographical conditions or other special
conditions acceptable to the Board. All improvements shall be installed in
and connected with existing facilities or installed in required locations to
enable future connections with approved systems or contemplated systems
and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
§ 91-79. Streets.
A. All development shall be served by paved public streets with an allweather
base and pavement with an adequate crown. The arrangement
of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be such as
to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets and should
conform to the topography as far as practicable.
B. When a new development adjoins land capable of being subdivided,
suitable provisions shall be made for optimum access from the
remaining or adjoining tract to existing or proposed streets.
C. Local streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic.
D. In all residential zones, all development bounded by any arterial,
primary or secondary street shall control access to the streets by having
all driveways intersect minor streets. In addition, that portion of the
development abutting the arterial, primary or secondary street right-ofway
shall either be planted with nursery grown trees to a depth of not
more than 25 feet from the right-of-way line and for the full length of
the development so that a six-foot-tall buffer will exist between the
development and the highway or, where topography permits, create
earthen berms at a sufficient height to establish a buffer between the
development and the highway. Berms shall not be less than five feet in
height, and they shall be stabilized by ground cover and trees to
§ 91-77 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-79
83:381
prevent soil erosion. All trees shall meet the requirements set forth in
§ 9l-82. Driveway entrances to arterial, primary or secondary streets
shall be prevented as much as possible. Where the size, shape, location
or some other unique circumstances may dictate no other alternative
than to have a driveway enter an arterial, primary or secondary street,
the lot shall provide on-site turnaround facilities so that it is not
necessary to back any vehicle onto an arterial, primary or secondary
street. All lots requiring reverse frontage shall have an additional 25
feet of depth to allow for the establishment of the buffer outlined in
this subsection, unless such buffers are established in a reserve strip
controlled by the Township or by Burlington County.
E. In all development, the minimum street right-of-way shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall be in accordance with the following
schedule. In addition, where required by any state or county rule or
regulation, where any arterial, primary or secondary street intersects
with any street, the right-of-way and cartway requirements shall be
increased by 10 feet on the right side of the street approaching the
intersection for a distance of 300 feet from the intersection of the
center lines. The minimum street right-of-way shall be as follows:
Street Class
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Width Between
Curbs
(feet)
Controlled access
highways
As provided by New Jersey Department of
Transportation
Arterial As provided by New Jersey Department of
Transportation
Primary 90 50
Secondary 64 40
Minor 56 36
Marginal, service and
alleys
As required by the
municipal agency
F. No development showing reserve strips controlling access to streets or
another area, either developed or undeveloped, shall be approved
except where the control and disposal of the land comprising such
strips has been given to a public body.
G. In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing Township
streets that do not conform to widths as shown on either the Master
Plan or Official Map or the street width requirements of this section,
additional land along both sides of the street sufficient to conform to the
right-of-way requirements shall be anticipated in the development
design. The additional widening may be offered to the Township for the
location, installation, repair and maintenance of streets, drainage
facilities, utilities and other facilities customarily located on street
rights-of-way and shall be expressed on the plat as follows: "Street
§ 91-79 FLORENCE CODE § 91-79
83:382
right-of-way dedicated to the Township of Florence." This statement on
an approved plat shall in no way reduce the subdivider's responsibility
to provide, install, repair or maintain the facilities in the area dedicated
by the provisions of this section or as shown on the plat or as provided
for by any maintenance or performance guaranty. If the development
is along one side only, one-half ( 1/2) of the required extra width shall
be dedicated. For a major subdivision or site plan, that portion of the
existing street or road adjoining or included within a subdivision or site
plan shall be improved, including excavation, grading, gravel base and
surfacing, in accordance with the road improvement standards of this
section.
H. Longitudinal grades on all minor streets shall not exceed 10% nor 4%
on arterial, primary and secondary streets. No street shall have a
longitudinal grade of less than one-half of one percent ( 1/2 of 1%).
Maximum grades within intersections shall be 4%. The slope of the
cartway from the center line to the curbline or edge of the paving shall
be 2%. Where the cartway is banked to facilitate a curve in the street
alignment, the slope toward the curbline or shoulder shall conform to
accepted engineering practices.
I. Intersecting street center lines shall be as nearly at right angles as
possible and in no case shall they be less than 60º at the point of
intersection. The curblines shall be parallel to the center line.
Approaches to all intersections shall follow a straight line for at least
100 feet, measured from the curbline of the intersecting street, where
possible. No more than two street center lines shall meet or intersect at
any one point. Streets intersecting another street from opposite sides
shall not be offset unless, measuring from the point of intersection of
the street center lines, the two intersections shall be spaced a sufficient
distance to permit a minimum of two lot depths between the two street
rights-of-way, but not less than 125 feet between center lines. Any
development abutting an existing street shall be permitted not more
than one new street every 800 feet within the boundaries of the tract
being subdivided on the same side of the street. In the spacing of
streets, consideration shall be given to the location of existing
intersections on both sides of the development. Intersections shall be
rounded at the curbline to a curb radius of 25 feet for all street
classifications. In the spacing of streets, consideration shall be given to
the location of existing intersections on both sides of the development.
J. There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference herein Section
8.04 of the Burlington County Land Development Review Resolution,
entitled "Road and Driveway Intersections," including Paragraphs
8.04-1 and 8.04-2, "Sight Distances of the County Land Development
Review Resolution." Tables of said resolution are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference.
K. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial, primary and secondary streets. When connecting
street lines deflect in any direction from each other at any one point,
§ 91-79 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-79
83:383
they shall be connected by a curve with a radius conforming to standard
engineering practice so that the minimum sight distance within the
right-of-way shall be 500 feet for a primary or secondary street and 800
feet for an arterial street.
L. All changes in grade where the difference in grade shall be connected
by a vertical curb having a length of at least 50 feet for each 2%
difference in grade or portion thereof providing minimum sight
distances of 350 feet for a minor street, 500 feet for a primary or
secondary street and 800 feet for an arterial street.
M. Dead-end and cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Dead-end streets and cul-de-sac streets are permitted when an
applicant can demonstrate to the approving authority that such can
be built without adverse impact to public safety, overall project
design or the ability of the Township to perform municipal services.
(2) Dead-end streets of a permanent nature, where provision for the
future extension of the street to the boundary of the adjoining
property is impractical or impossible, or of a temporary nature,
where provision is made for the future extension of the street to the
boundary line of adjoining property, shall provide a turnaround at
the end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than 80 feet with a
curbline radius of 70 feet. The arc of the turnaround shall be
tangent to the right street line of the associated street. The return
radius of the curbline shall be a minimum of 45º.
(3) There shall be provided an easement within each cul-de-sac for the
storage of snow from street snowplowing operations. The easement
shall have a minimum area of 250 square feet and minimum
dimensions of 20 feet along the curbline and 10 feet radial to the
curbline. No drives to the adjoining lots shall be permitted within
the limits of the easement. No drainage inlets shall be permitted
within the easement or the adjacent curbline.
(4) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, provisions shall be
made for removal of the turnaround and reversion of the excess
right-of-way to the adjoining properties when the street is
extended. A bond in an amount determined by Township Engineer
and satisfactory to the governing body shall be posted to guarantee
the removal and restoration.
(5) A dead-end street should serve no more than 14 lots.
N. Street names.
(1) The names of new streets must be approved by the Township
Council.
(2) The developer or individual seeking approval of a street name or
renaming shall make application to the Clerk of the Township of
§ 91-79 FLORENCE CODE § 91-79
83:384
Florence, on an application form approved by the governing body.
The application shall require the developer or individual to sign
the application and obtain approval of the local postmaster. In
addition, the application must contain the approving signature of
the Florence Township Chief of Police and the Florence Township
Fire Official.
(3) The application shall contain a statement that the governing body
of the Township of Florence shall not be bound by any street
namings that are part of sales agreements or any other agreements
between the landowners and the developers or individual seeking
the street naming.
(4) Applications seeking the approval of street names in a development
shall be submitted to and have approval from the Township Council
prior to the developer receiving final subdivision approval.
(5) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate in spelling or phonetic sound as to be confused with the
names of existing streets within the areas served by all zip codes in
the Township of Florence. The continuation of an existing street
shall have the same name.
(6) Prior to approving the name of a street which is deemed by the
Township Council to have historical significance, the Township
Council shall refer the matter to the Florence Township Historic
Preservation Commission for their review and approval. Failure of
the Historic Preservation Commission to transmit its report to the
Township Council within 60 days of referral shall be deemed as
approval of the proposed street name. The naming of streets in
honor of individuals should be given as posthumous tributes.
Preference should be given to individuals who have provided
dedicated service to the good of the community during their
lifetime. When the name of a living individual is offered as the name
of a street, that street name must be approved by a vote of 2/3 of
the full membership of the Township Council.
(7) Any resolution approving the name of a street in honor of an
individual shall set forth the reasons why that individual is being so
honored.
(8) Whenever an individual makes application for the renaming of an
existing road, the individual making the application shall be
required to publish the notice of the application and the time and
place of the hearing thereon in the official newspaper of the
Township of Florence at least 10 days in advance of the date when
the Township Council will consider the application and conduct a
public hearing. In addition thereto, the individual making the
application shall provide notice of the application and the time and
place of the hearing thereon by certified mail to the owners of all
real property abutting the street which is proposed to be renamed.
§ 91-79 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-79
83:385
(9) The renaming of a street must be approved by a two-thirds vote of
the full membership of the Township Council.
O. Township streets shall be constructed in accordance with the following
standards and specifications:
(1) General. All materials, equipment and methods of construction
shall conform to the latest Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation, as amended and supplemented. Each stage of the
construction must be approved by the Township Engineer prior to
commencing the next stage. The Engineer shall be notified at least
one working day prior to the start of any stage.
(2) Subgrade. The subgrade shall be in a proper finished condition
conforming to the proper line and grade and free of any soft spots
or other deficiencies. The subgrade shall be tested by running a
roller of a weight at least equal to that to be used in the paving
operation over the entire subgrade. If the deformation of the
subgrade is excessive, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the
subgrade must be stabilized in a manner satisfactory to the
Engineer. Adequate underdrains shall be constructed where the
normal groundwater level is within two feet of the surface of the
subgrade.
(3) Subbase course. If the subgrade has a CBR value of 20 or greater,
as determined by the American Society for Testing and Materials
Method for Bearing Ratio of Laboratory Compacted Soils (ASTM
Designation D 1883), no subbase course is required. Subgrade soils
of Type A-1, A-2-4 and A-2-5 of the American Association of State
Highway Officials Classification System for Soils (AASHO
Designation M 145) will not normally require a subbase course.
Subgrade soils of other types will normally require a subbase
course of Soil Aggregate Type 2, Class A or B, with a minimum
thickness of four inches, to provide the required CBR value.
(4) Base course. All minor streets shall have a bituminous stabilized
base course, Mix I-2, four inches thick or, in the alternative, six
inches and two inches of bituminous stabilized base course of
dense graded aggregate, Mix I-2. All collector and arterial streets
shall have a bituminous stabilized base course, Mix I-2, five inches
thick or, in the alternative, six inches of dense graded aggregate
base course and three inches of bituminous stabilized base course,
Mix I-2.
(5) Surface course. The surface course shall not be constructed until
one year after the completion of the base course unless authorized
by the Township Engineer. However, temporary paving shall be
placed around all manholes, valve boxed, inlets and so forth
immediately after the construction of the base course. The surface
course for all minor streets shall be a one-and-one-half-inch
§ 91-79 FLORENCE CODE § 91-79
83:386
§ 91-80. Street signs.
Street signs shall be metal on metal posts in accordance with Township
standards. The location of the street signs shall be determined by the
Planning Board, but there shall be at least two street signs furnished at each
four-way intersection and one street sign at each T-intersection. All signs
shall be installed free of visual obstruction.
§ 91-81. Curbs and gutters.
§ 91-82. Shade trees.
For all land development devoid of major trees, along collector streets of
a development and along proposed roads and rights-of-way where natural
compacted layer of bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-5.
Where the alternative base course cross section is used, the
thickness of the surface course shall be two inches. The surface
course for collector and arterial streets shall be bituminous
concrete surface course, Mix I-5, three inches thick.
(6) Test cores. Prior to the construction of the top course, but at least
six months after the construction of the base course, one core
sample for each 2,000 square yards of paving shall be taken at
points designated by the Township Engineer. The contractor shall
cut the cores with a coring machine, jackhammer or other means
approved by the Engineer. One core from every 10,000 square
yards shall be analyzed by an approved testing laboratory and the
results submitted to the Township Engineer. Any deficiencies shall
be corrected prior to the construction of the top course.
A. Concrete curb with gutter or concrete curb shall be installed along
every street within the development and at intersections with Township
roads, county roads and state highways. The standard curb section to
be used shall not be more than 20 feet in length and shall be set in
accordance with approved lines and grades, and radius curbs shall be
formed in an arc segment in a smooth curve. Chord segments are
prohibited. Concrete curbs shall be 6 inches by 8 inches by 18 inches
with a six-inch exposed curb face on all streets using concrete having a
twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,500 pounds per square inch
and shall be air-entrained. All concrete shall have a slump of no greater
than five inches in accordance with testing procedure outlines in ASTM
C143-58, Standard Method of Test for Slump of Portland Cement
Concrete. Calcium chloride is limited to one percent for winter
protection.
B. (Reserved)67
67.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, concerning single-family residential construction
which does not require municipal agency approval, was repealed 2-18-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-3.
§ 91-79 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-82
83:387
woods are not present and where, due to construction, the entire right-ofway
is cleared, the following provisions shall apply:
A. Trees shall be planted along both sides of the street within the right-ofway
between the sidewalk and curbline in accordance with an approved
landscape plan.
B. Street trees shall be planted at distances in accordance with the
following interval schedule:
Mature Tree Size
(feet)
Planting Interval
(feet)
Large trees (over 40) 50 to 70
Medium-sized trees (30 to 40) 40 to 50
Small trees (to 30) 30 to 40
C. When the spacing interval exceeds 40 feet, small ornamental trees can
be spaced between the larger trees. If a street canopy effect is desired,
trees may be planted closer together, following the recommendations of
a certified landscape architect. The trees shall be planted so as not to
interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements or
streetlights. Tree location, landscape design and spacing plan shall be
approved by the approving authority as part of the landscape plan after
review and recommendation by the Florence Township Shade Tree
Commission.
D. At intersections, trees shall not be located closer than 30 feet from the
intersection of the street right-of-way lines, except when the standards
increase the distance for sight.
E. The caliper of the trees shall be two and one-half (2 1/2) inches
measured 12 inches above the ground. The standing height shall be a
minimum of 10 feet. All trees shall be brought to the site balled and
burlapped or other acceptable means, free from insects and disease and
true to species and variety.
F. Stripping trees or filling more than six inches around trees shall not be
permitted unless it can be shown that construction requirements
necessitate these actions, in which case those lots shall be replanted
with trees to reestablish the tone of the area and to conform to adjacent
lots.
G. Dead or dying trees which have been transplanted by virtue of the
requirements of this section shall be replaced by the developer during
the next recommended planting season.
H. There shall be a minimum of three deciduous shade trees, not including
street trees, per lot for all residential developments where the site is
devoid of trees (such as farmland developments) or at the discretion
§ 91-82 FLORENCE CODE § 91-82
83:388
and recommendation of the municipal agency when adequate shade or
canopy has not been provided naturally.
I. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect
and include a planting schedule which describes the quantity, common
name, botanical name, size and comments for each species.
J. Ornamental trees need not have straight trunks, but must conform in
other respects with the provisions for trees and tree plantings outlined
in this section.
K. Street tree plans shall include a graphic tree-planting detail which shall
address the following:
(1) The thinning of branches and foliage by 1/3. The leader shall not be
cut.
(2) The staking of a deciduous tree by three stakes. The minimum size
of stakes shall be two by three (2 x 3) inches.
(3) The support of a tree shall be a double strand of 12-gauge wire. A
tree shall be protected from injury due to wire by a rubber hose or
acceptable equal.
(4) The trunk shall be protected by a tree wrap.
(5) A tree shall be mulched with three inches of approved organic
material.
(6) A three-inch saucer shall be constructed around the planting area.
(7) The top of the burlap shall be untied and removed.
(8) The ball shall rest on compacted soil.
(9) The diameter of the hole shall be two feet larger than the diameter
of the ball.
L. Species and varieties of deciduous trees recommended for planting on
Township streets and buffer areas shall be as follows:
(1) Class A, shade trees.
(a) Columnar trees for limited planting along narrow streets shall
not be planted between the curb and sidewalk. These trees
shall be as follows:
[1] Acer rubrum f. columnare.
[2] Acer rubrum "Scanlon" (Plant Patent 1722).
(b) Broad oval.
[1] October Glory red maple, Acer rubrum, "October Glory."
[2] Japanese Zelkova, Zelkova serrata.
§ 91-82 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-82
83:389
[3] Willow oak, Quercus phellos
[4] Littleleaf Linden, Tilia cordata.
[5] London plane, Platanus acerifolia.
[6] Sweetgum, Liquidambar styraciflua.
[7] Chinese scholar, Sophora japonica, "Regent."
[8] European beech, Fagus sylvatica.
[9] Ash, Fraxinus americana.
(c) Globe shaded trees.
[1] Red maple, Acer rubrum, clonal selection.
[2] Thornless and seedless locusts, Gleditsia triacanthos
inermis, "Morraine," "Shade Master" and "Continental."
(d) Spreading branched trees.
[1] Red oak, Quercus borealis.
[2] Scarlet oak, Quercus coccinea.
[3] Bur oak, Quercus macrocarpa.
[4] Maidenhair tree, Gingko biloba, male only.
(2) Class B, flowering trees.
(a) Amelanchier canadensis, Shadblow or Sarivs tree.
(b) Cercis canadensis, Redbud.
(c) Chionanthus virginicus, Fringe tree.
(d) Crataegus oxyacantha superba, Crimson cloud hawthorn.
(e) Crataegus phaenopy rum, Washington hawthorn.
(f) Crataegus toba, Toba hawthorn.
(g) Malus baccata, Siberian crab.
(h) Malus hopa, Hopa crab.
(i) Malus pink perfection (Plant Patent 2912) new hybrid crab.
(j) Prunus kwansan, Kwansan cherry.
(k) Pyrus calleryana bradford, Bradford pear.
(3) Class C, conifers.
(a) Douglas Fir.
§ 91-82 FLORENCE CODE § 91-82
83:390
§ 91-83. Monuments.
Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and
shall be placed in accordance with the statute and indicated on the final
plat.
§ 91-84. Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers.
All such installations shall be properly connected with an approved system
and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development. The Township may require easements or rights-of-way of
sufficient width along drainage and utility courses for vehicular access and
maintenance needs.
§ 91-85. Public utilities.
All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities system
where one exists. For all major subdivisions and site plans the developer
shall arrange with the servicing utility for the underground installation of
the utility's distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as a part of its tariff as the same are then on file with the State
of New Jersey Board of Regulatory Commissioners, and the developer shall
provide the Township with three copies of a final plat showing the installed
location of these utilities. Lots which abut existing streets where overhead
electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service connections have
heretofore been installed may be supplied with electric and telephone
service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the
utility's overhead lines shall be installed underground. In the case of
existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or an extension of
service or other such condition occur as a result of the development and
necessitate the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such
replacement or relocation shall be underground. An installation under this
subsection to be performed by a servicing utility shall be exempt from
the provisions of Article XIII, § 91-66, requiring performance guaranties
and inspection and certification by the Township Engineer. Where natural
foliage is not sufficient to provide year-round screening of any utility
apparatus appearing above the surface of the ground other than utility
poles, the applicant shall provide sufficient live screening to conceal such
apparatus year round. On any lot where, by reason of soil conditions, rock
formations, wooded area or other special condition of land, the applicant
deems it a hardship to comply with the provisions of this subsection, the
applicant may apply to the Planning Board for an exception from the terms
of this subsection in accordance with the procedure and provisions of
Article XIII, § 91-66. Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception,
(b) White Pine.
(c) Austrian Pine.
(d) Colorado Spruce.
§ 91-82 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-85
83:391
the alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid
locations along horizons, avoid clearing swaths through tree areas by
selective cutting and a staggered alignment by planting trees in open areas
at key locations to minimize the views of the poles and alignments, by
following rear lot lines and other interior locations and similar design and
location considerations to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines.
§ 91-86. Lakes.
Any lake constructed to provide waterfront lots for residential development
shall have an average depth of water not less than eight feet from May 1 to
September 1 of each year.
§ 91-87. Streetlighting.
A. Whenever this chapter requires the installation of electric utility
installations underground, the applicant shall provide for the
installation of underground service for streetlighting.
B. Streetlighting standards of a type and number approved by the
municipal agency engineer shall be installed at all street intersections
and elsewhere as deemed necessary by the municipal agency.
C. Lighting.
(1) Each applicant for development plan approval shall provide
adequate lighting to ensure safe movement of persons and vehicles
and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall be of a type
approved by the municipal agency. Directional lights shall be
arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties.
(2) Each applicant for development plan approval shall provide within
the limits of practicability and feasibility, lighting consistent with
conservation of energy and use of renewable energy sources.
(3) The intent is to provide guidelines and not rigid standards which
may be used for design of the lighting systems subject to possible
adjustment which may be dictated by special specific site
conditions.
(4) For minor site plans and wherever appropriate at the discretion of
the municipal agency engineer for developments with insignificant
impact with reference to lighting, the developer may submit a
sample of the actual fixture and lighting proposed for review and
approval by the municipal agency.
D. Illumination levels.
(1) The maintained footcandles of illumination recommended are as
indicated in the following table:
§ 91-85 FLORENCE CODE § 91-87
83:392
Type
of Area
Minimum
Intensity
(footcandles)
Average
Intensity
(footcandles)
Uniformity
Ratio*
Residential area
parking
0.2 0.5 17:1
Shopping center
parking
0.8 1.0 10:1
Mall parking 0.8 2.0 16:1
Site lighting 0.2 0.5 20:1
Industrial/
commercial
area parking
0.5 1.0 15:1
Entrance and exit
roads
** 0.5 10:1
Notes:
* Uniformity ratio = maximum/minimum.
** To be determined by level of illumination at travel roadway.
(2) The illumination levels recommended shall be attained by use of
the minimum number of poles that will provide relatively uniform
illumination. High uniformity ratios which deter or prevent visual
adaption shall be avoided.
E. Luminaires.
(1) Sharp cutoff-type luminaires are recommended for the best
approach to lighting parking areas and shall be of the type that can
be provided with sharp cutoff deflectors or refractors where
required to shield light from the luminaire at angles less than the
set cutoff degree angle above nadir (from the vertical). The
shielding angle shall be selected to minimize discomforting glare to
an observer's eyes from the light source at an angle below the set
cutoff. Shielding shall also be employed to prevent spillover of
undesirable light to adjoining property.
(2) The use of high-pressure sodium luminaires is encouraged. Lowpressure
sodium luminaires will be considered if isolated industrial
areas remote from residential and commercial zones where they
will not be visible from the traveled way.
(3) General illumination of the exterior of buildings, including the roof,
is discouraged. Objectionable spill, to the exterior, of bright and
glaring interior building light shall be avoided by the use of lowbrightness
lenses on interior lighting.
§ 91-87 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-87
83:393
F. Light pollution or light intrusion.
(1) The maximum cutoff angle shall be used to shield light source glare
and unwanted light from adjacent properties and motorists
approaching on bounding roads and highways.
(2) Adequate shielding shall be employed to protect properties, streets
and highways from the glare of such illumination, including
luminaires for illuminating entrances and driveways for parking
areas.
(3) Conflicts with lighting of adjacent (parking areas) properties shall
be avoided. For example, if one or more adjacent areas with
established lighting systems are using mercury-vapor lamps, the
submitted area shall conform to the same lamp type, but not
necessarily the same type luminaire. However, other HID (high
intensity discharge) lamps may be considered when there's ample
reason for employing such lamps and ample proof that a suitable
method can be employed to reduce color conflict.
G. Mounting height. The maximum mounting height of pole-mounted
luminaires shall be 35 feet except in mall parking areas. Malls will be
considered individually, based upon the total overall lighting design.
H. Security lighting. All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and
driveways shall be illuminated for safety and security reasons from
sunset to sunrise.
I. Information to be submitted. The following shall be submitted for
review and approval of all lighting systems:
(1) Site plan showing existing and proposed street lights within 100
feet of the property area to be lighted, location of all poles and
luminaires, illumination levels using photometric curve plotting or
point-by-point grid showing foot candles of illumination at each
point.
(2) Type of luminaires, including manufacturer's data.
(3) Type and wattage of lamp, including manufacturer's data.
(4) Mounting height of luminaire.
(5) Photometric data and isofootcandle curves of the luminaire and
lamp proposed. Photometric data shall be from an independent
testing laboratory. Photometric curves shall be drawn to the same
scale as the site plan scale and shall show maintained foot candle
levels of illumination.
(6) Type of pole and manufacturer's data. Applicants are encouraged
to use wooden or bronze-colored aluminum poles in keeping with
the architecture of the building and surrounding areas.
§ 91-87 FLORENCE CODE § 91-87
83:394
§ 91-88. Bikeways.
§ 91-89. Blocks.
(7) Pole base and foundation design and details. Anchor bolts shall be
in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
(8) Included with photometric and luminaire data shall be data on:
(a) Light source corrections.
(b) Lamp life lumen depreciation factor.
(c) Coefficient of utilization.
(d) Luminaires dirt depreciation factors.
(e) Maintenance factor correction.
A. Bikeways may be required at the discretion of the approving authority,
depending upon the probable volume of bicycle traffic, the
development's location in relation to other populated areas or its
location with respect to any overall bike route planning adopted by the
Board. Bicycle traffic should be separated from motor vehicle and
pedestrian traffic as much as possible.
B. Bikeways should generally not exceed a grade of 3% except for short
distances. They should be a minimum of six feet wide for one-way travel
and 10 feet wide for two-way travel. Minimum width for bikeways built
in locations other than along streets is 10 feet. Bikeways shall have a
minimum four-inch base course of course aggregate base course or soil
aggregate base course, Designation I-5, on an approved subgrade and a
bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-2, two inches thick.
Bikeways designated for one-way travel shall only be located along
streets.
A. Block length, width and acreage within the block's boundary roads shall
be sufficient to accommodate the size lot required in that zoning district
by Part 3, Zoning, and to provide for convenient access, circulation
control and traffic safety.
B. Blocks over 1,000 feet long in residential areas shall be discouraged,
but where they are used, pedestrian crosswalks or bikeways between
lots may be required in locations deemed necessary by the Planning
Board. They shall be at least 10 feet wide and be straight from street to
street. Blocks over 1,500 feet in residential areas shall be prohibited.
For commercial and industrial uses, block lengths shall be sufficient to
meet area and yard requirements for such uses and to provide proper
street access and circulation patterns.
C. Block end planting. In cases where lot and block design results in
undesirable sighting down rear property lines from block ends, a
landscape screen of evergreen trees not less than six feet in height shall
§ 91-87 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-89
83:395
§ 91-90. Landscaping.
be provided as block ends by the developer. The screen shall be a
minimum of 30 feet in length and centered on the rear property line
and at six feet from the edge of sidewalk. The screen shall not effect
any sight triangles.
A. A landscaping plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect shall be
provided. Landscaping shall be integrated into building arrangements,
topography, parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall
include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals,
plants, sculpture, art and the use of building and paving materials in an
imaginative and aesthetic manner.
B. Regulations.
(1) Natural topography and vegetation. The applicant shall use natural
topography and vegetation where possible. Large parking areas
are not to be stripped of vegetation without requiring reseeding or
replanting of all unpaved areas.
(2) Saving of trees. Every attempt shall be made by applicants to save
existing trees even at the loss of parking spaces. Clumps of trees
should be saved over single trees. Care should be taken by the
municipal agency to properly evaluate site clearing proposals
recognizing that wild trees often do not survive when their habitat
is drastically altered. Where loss of trees is suggested, replacement
should be required.
(3) Slopes. Slopes in excess of 3:1 shall be avoided unless necessitated
by unusual site limitations. All slopes shall be stabilized in a
manner acceptable to the municipal agency engineer.
(4) Parking areas in front of buildings. Parking lots located in front of
buildings shall be landscaped to separate them from adjacent
roadways.
(5) Screen areas and buffers. Tall dense screens are required along
nonpenetrable side lines, and rear property lines where
commercial or industrial parking areas abut residences or
residential zones. Evergreens such as, but not limited to, white
pine, Austrian pine, Canadian hemlock, Servian spruce, arborvitae
and upright yews may be used, provided that they meet specified
height requirements. All screening and buffering shall be in
accordance with the buffering and screening section of this
chapter.68
(6) Driveways. The areas adjacent to the driveways shall be planted
with low plants or grass. Appropriate low plants include but are not
68.Editor's Note: See § 91-91 below.
§ 91-89 FLORENCE CODE § 91-90
83:396
§ 91-91. Buffers and screens.
limited to, butterfly bush, Sargent juniper, inkberry, Japanese
barberry or shrubby cinquefoil.
(7) Other required landscaped areas. Where a development plan
indicates raised walkways between opposing rows of cars, areas at
the end of bays or, where proposed or required by the municipal
agency, specific planting islands are indicated, these areas shall be
landscaped. Planting strips may be as narrow as five feet, with a
fifteen- to twenty-foot width most desirable. All should be raised
and protected by permanent concrete curbing.
(8) Natural setting. In proposing a landscaping plan, an applicant shall
take care, and the municipal agency in reviewing shall require, that
a natural setting consistent with prevailing community standards
be preserved. Recognizing that a major community asset lies in the
preservation of the natural condition of property, all efforts in the
area of landscaping shall be exercised to provide consistent
landscaping proposals with existing foliage.
A. Buffer areas and screening shall require site plan approval and are
required along all lot lines and street lines which separate a townhouse,
apartment or nonresidential use from either an existing residential use
or residential zoning district. Buffer areas shall be developed in an
aesthetic manner for the primary purpose of screening views and
reducing noise perception beyond the lot. Buffer widths shall be
measured horizontally and perpendicular to lot and street lines. No
structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be
permitted in a buffer area. The location and design of buffer areas are
intended to provide flexibility in providing effective buffers and screens.
The location and design of buffers and screens shall consider the use of
the portion of the property being screened; the distance between the
use and the adjoining property line; the difference in elevations; the
type of buffer, such as dense planting, existing woods, a wall or fence;
buffer height; buffer width; and other combinations of man-made and
natural features. The buffer shall be designed, planted, graded,
landscaped and developed with the general guideline that the closer a
use or activity is to a property line or the more intense the use, the more
effective the buffer area must be in obscuring light and vision and
reducing noise beyond the lot.
B. Buffer content and location.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, buffers shall be a minimum of 15 feet
wide. Buffers shall be designed, planted, graded and landscaped to
provide an aesthetically pleasing separation of uses. In meeting
this standard, the applicant may employ one or more of the
following:
(a) Fencing or wall screening in landscaped areas.
§ 91-90 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-91
83:397
(b) Evergreen tree or shrubbery screening in a landscaped area.
(c) A landscaped berm.
(2) If in the judgment of the municipal agency any of these alternate
provisions will not provide sufficient buffers for the portion of the
site proposed, the municipal agency may require the development
plan to be modified to show the extension of the buffer area,
require that the proposed alternatives be landscaped differently or
be relocated until, in the municipal agency's judgment, they
provide the desired buffering effect.
C. Buffer material and natural foliage. All buffer areas shall be planted and
maintained with either grass or ground cover together with a screen of
live shrubs or scattered planting of live trees, shrubs or other plant
materials. The preservation of natural wooded areas shall be an
integral part of all development plans. Natural wooded areas located
along a boundary with a residential zone district (including AGR Zone)
shall be integrated into the required buffer area, provided that the
growth is of a density and the area has sufficient width to serve the
purpose of a buffer. Additional plantings may be required by the
municipal agency to establish an appropriate tone for an effective
buffer. [Amended 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-7]
D. Screening.
(1) Screening shall be provided within buffer strips as required
elsewhere in this chapter so as to provide a year-round visual or
partial acoustical barrier to conceal the view or sounds of various
utilitarian operations and uses from the street or adjacent
properties.
(2) Screening shall be so placed that at maturity it will not be closer
than three feet to any street or property line.
(3) All plants for screening shall be of a species common to the area, be
of balled and burlapped nursery stock, and be free of insects and
disease. All landscape plans submitted shall contain the following
note and language: "All plant material not surviving for a period of
two years shall be replaced with the same or equivalent size
species." Buffered screen plantings shall be broken at points of
vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to assure a clear-sight
triangle at all street and driveway intersections.
(4) Screening shall consist of the following materials:
(a) Solid masonry. A solid masonry wall not less than six feet above
ground level.
(b) Solid fencing. A solid fencing, uniformly painted or of a
naturally durable material such as cedar, cypress or redwood,
not less than six feet above ground level and open to the
§ 91-91 FLORENCE CODE § 91-91
83:398
§ 91-92. Fences. [Amended 7-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-9; 8-15-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-15]
ground to a height of not more than four inches above ground
level.
(c) Shrubbery.
[1] Low type shrubbery screening may be used in and around
parking areas, roadway or accessways where sight
distances for vehicular and pedestrian traffic are a prime
consideration. Shrubbery shall be a minimum of three feet
high when planted and be of such density as will obscure,
throughout the full course of the year, the glare of
automobile headlights emitted from the premises.
[2] All other shrubbery for screening shall be a minimum of
five feet high at the time of planting.
[3] Dense hedges of shrubbery planted at a maximum of 30
inches on center may be used.
(d) Trees. Trees for screening shall be evergreens having a
minimum height of five feet above the ground when planted.
Trees shall be placed five feet on centers in a single row or five
feet on centers in two or more staggered rows with a five-foot
separation between rows. Evergreens may be supplemented
with deciduous trees having a minimum ten-foot height at time
of planting with a minimum caliper of two inches.
A. No fence shall be erected within the municipality unless the owner of
the premises or his representative has first obtained a zoning permit.
B. All fences shall be of quality materials and installed in a good
workmanlike manner. All fences shall be maintained by the owner.
C. Exemptions. The following fences shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section, relative to permit, fees, construction or
materials:
(1) Fences accessory to farm operations, except that the exemption
shall not extend to that percentage of farm property set aside for
residential purposes as delineated upon the property record cards
of the Township.
(2) Fences accessory to any public facility, park, playground or school
premises.
D. Regulations for fences in residential zones.
(1) No fence shall be erected unless the property owner shall have
obtained a zoning permit certifying that the fence is in accordance
with all applicable zoning regulations. No zoning permit shall be
§ 91-91 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-92
83:399
issued unless the applicant has filed the application provided by the
Zoning Officer and has attached to the application a survey of the
property on which shall be shown the specific location, height and
design of the proposed fence.
(2) No fences shall be allowed in the front yard, which shall, for the
purposes of this provision, mean the area between the front wall of
the building and the street.
(3) For residential properties which are located on a "corner," which is
defined as having frontage on two separate streets, there shall not
be any fences in the "primary front yard," which, for the purposes
of this provision, shall be defined as the area along the street which
serves as the postal address for the property. A fence, not
exceeding 72 inches in height above ground level, may be erected
along the "secondary street frontage," which, shall for the purposes
of this provision, shall be defined as the area along the street which
does not serve as the postal address for the property. Any fence
along the secondary street frontage shall be located no closer to
the street than one foot from the right-of-way line or the sidewalk,
whichever is farther from the paved portion of the street along the
secondary street frontage. No fence on a corner property shall be
placed or constructed of materials which, in the determination of
the Chief of Police, would create a safety hazard by obstructing the
view of vehicular traffic at the intersection.
(4) For residential properties, other than those located on a corner,
fences not exceeding six feet in height above the ground level may
be erected between the front building line to the side property lines
and to the rear of the property (rear yard). They may be of solid
construction.
(5) No fence shall be located within any alley shown on any plan unless
permission has been granted by resolution of the Township Council
and subject to any conditions established by the Township Council.
(6) No permit shall be denied for a fence which will be located in a
utility easement area, provided that no fence shall be erected
within a drainage swale or where the fence would obstruct the flow
of water in the easement area. The responsibility for removing and
replacing any fence constructed in a utility easement area shall be
on the property owner and, there shall be no liability on the utility
holding the easement where the fence is removed in order to
provide access to the easement area in accordance with the terms
of the easement.
(7) Fences shall be installed with the finished side of the fence facing
the outward perimeter of the property, with all supporting
appurtenances on the inside of the barrier.69
§ 91-92 FLORENCE CODE § 91-92
83:400
E. Regulations for fences on nonresidential properties. [Amended
12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-26]
(1) Fences located on nonresidential properties shall be subject to site
plan approval.
(2) The front yard setback for a fence located on a nonresidential
property shall be the building setback line.
(3) Fences shall not be more than eight feet in height.
(4) Fences shall be installed with the finished side of said fence facing
the outward perimeter of the property, with all supporting
appurtenances on the inside of the barrier.
F. Regulations for electronic pet containment fences and systems. [Added
6-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1470]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BURIED ELECTRONIC PET CONTAINMENT FENCE — For the
purposes of this chapter, "buried electronic pet containment fence"
shall be defined as a means by which a signal is transmitted to a
pet-worn device which produces a noise, pulse, or shock to the pet
when nearing the location of a buried wire or other transmitting
material which acts as a predefined invisible border location of
a property. NOTE: The pet-worn device is a conditioning tool
intended to deliver unpleasant consequences to getting too near
the predefined invisible border.
CENTRALIZED ELECTRONIC PET CONTAINMENT SYSTEM —
For the purposes of this chapter, "centralized electronic pet
containment system" shall be defined as a means by which a radio
signal is transmitted a user-defined radius through the air from
a device located in or on a building or residence to a pet-worn
device which produces a noise, pulse, or shock to the pet when
nearing the limits of the radio signal. NOTE: The pet-worn device
is a conditioning tool intended to deliver unpleasant consequences
to getting too near the predefined outer limits of the radio signal
range.
(2) Pet containment fences and systems using buried wires or
proximity transmitters shall be permitted by this chapter as
specified herein.
(3) Buried electronic pet containment fences.
69.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(8), prohibiting more than one fence on any common
property line or within 24 inches of any existing fence, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-22.
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
§ 91-92 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-92
83:401
(a) A zoning permit, and any other permits as may be necessary by
the Township Code, state, county or federal regulations, is
required before any buried electronic pet containment fences
can be installed in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
(b) Wiring and materials used as a means of transmitting
electronic signals or pulses shall:
[1] Not be located any closer to the primary street frontage of
a property than the existing front setback of the principal
structure or in a case where the front yard is greater than
25 feet in depth, the point of containment is permitted to
be installed at the twenty-five-foot setback from the front
property line.
[2] Not be located any closer to a secondary street frontage of
a property than six feet from the municipal, county or state
right-of-way, or a minimum of six feet from the edge of a
pedestrian sidewalk, whichever is farthest from the
roadway.
[3] Not be located any closer to adjacent property lines than
three feet when no physical fence or barrier is present
along such adjacent property line.
[4] Be permitted to be installed at a point no closer than two
feet from the edge of an active municipal alley.
(4) Centralized electronic pet containment systems.
(a) No zoning permit is required for centralized pet containment
systems.
(b) The configuration of transmitting devices and the signal
strength shall be such that the device shall:
[1] Not allow a pet to get any closer to the primary street
frontage of a property than the existing front setback of
the principal structure or in a case where the front yard is
greater than 25 feet in depth, the point of containment is
permitted to be installed at the twenty-five-foot setback
from the front property line.
[2] Not allow the pet to get any closer to a secondary street
frontage of a property than six feet from the municipal,
county or state right-of-way, or a minimum of six feet from
the edge of a pedestrian sidewalk, whichever is farthest
from the roadway.
[3] Not allow the pet to get any closer to adjacent property
lines than three feet when no physical fence or barrier is
present along such adjacent property line.
§ 91-92 FLORENCE CODE § 91-92
83:402
§ 91-93. Grading and filling.
[4] Not allow the pet to get any closer than a point no closer
than two feet from the edge of an active municipal alley.
(5) Any property that utilizes an electronic pet containment fence or
system must display informational signage along the perimeter of
the property at the location where the barrier is designed to halt
the movement of the pet being contained. Such signage must be
legible, durable, and readily identifiable to pedestrians passing
near the property where the pet is contained. The sign must be a
minimum of 70 square inches in area. The sign lettering must be of
contrasting color as compared to the background color. The
number of signs installed must be sufficient so there is no more
than 25 feet between a point along the frontage and the nearest
sign.
G. Upon discovery of an alleged violation of this section, the Zoning Officer
shall serve written notice, either by personal service or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of the fence and/or the owner or
lessee of the property where the fence is located, ordering the fence to
be brought into conformity with provisions of this chapter, or its
removal, within 30 days of the date of the notice. The notice shall
include notification that if the fence is not brought into conformity or
removed within such time, a summons and/or complaint will be issued.
H. Any buried electronic pet containment fences and centralized
electronic pet containment systems, as defined in this chapter, that
lawfully existed prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 2019-14 are
hereby permitted as a grandfathered use. Any subsequent change to
those electronic pet containment fences or centralized electronic pet
containment systems will void the grandfather provision and require
the owner and/or lessee of the subject property to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. [Added 6-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-14]
A. The regulations of grading and filling promote the protection of
environmental interests and protect the rights of adjacent property
owners. All grading and filling operations are to be closely reviewed to
protect the interests stated.
B. All lots where fill material is deposited shall have clean fill or topsoil
deposited, which shall be graded to allow complete surface draining of
the lot into local storm sewer systems or natural drainage courses. No
regrading of a lot shall be permitted which would create or aggravate
water stagnation or a drainage problem on the site or on adjacent
properties or which will violate the provisions regulating soil erosion
and sediment control, soil removal or floodplains contained in this
chapter. Grading shall be limited to areas shown on approved site plans
or subdivisions. Any topsoil disturbed during approved excavation and
grading operations shall be redistributed throughout the site.
§ 91-92 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-94
83:403
§ 91-94. Height restrictions.
Mechanical equipment, chimneys and structures which house or enclose
such accessory features may be permitted to be erected above the
maximum height in any zoning district, except where the following
conditions shall control:
§ 91-95. Lot requirements.
§ 91-96. Utility easements.
Easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility installation
may be required in large-scale developments. Such easements shall be at
least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the utility companies
A. Not more than 15% of roof coverage.
B. Not more than 25% of the building height.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of Part
3, Zoning.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or
radial to street lines.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved, paved public street at least 50
feet in width. Through lots with frontage on two streets will be
permitted only under the following conditions:
(1) Where the lot abuts an arterial, primary or secondary street.
(2) Where the length of the lot between both streets is of a length that
future division of the lot into two lots is improbable.
(3) Where access shall be to one street only, which street shall be the
one with the lower traffic function, and the portion of the lot
abutting the other street shall be clearly labeled on the plat and in
any deed that street access is prohibited.
D. Where extra width has either been dedicated or provided for widening
of existing streets, lots shall begin at such new street line and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as poor drainage conditions or flood
conditions or where percolation tests or soil logs show the ground
conditions to be inadequate for proper on-lot sewage treatment, rock
formations, slopes in excess of 25% or similar circumstances, the
municipal agency may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval
of such lots. If approval is withheld, the Board shall give its reasons,
notify the applicant and enter its action in the minutes and on each
denied lot on the plat.
§ 91-94 FLORENCE CODE § 91-96
83:404
or Township departments concerned and, to the fullest extent possible, be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
§ 91-97. Preservation of natural resources.
Natural resources, such as trees, brooks, swamps, hilltops and views, shall
be preserved whenever possible. On individual lots, care shall be taken
to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and the landscape
treatment of the area.
A. Existing trees. To the fullest extent possible, existing trees shall be
preserved by the developer. Special consideration shall be given to the
layout of lots and the position of dwellings on the lots to ensure that
existing trees are preserved. Special precautions shall also be taken to
protect existing trees during the process of grading lots and roads.
Where any land other than streets is to be dedicated to public use, the
developer shall not remove any trees or topsoil from the site or change
the site in any way without written permission from the municipal
agency after review and comment by the Florence Township Shade
Tree Commission.
B. Watercourses. Where a development is traversed by a natural lake,
pond or stream, the boundaries or alignment of said watercourse shall
be preserved and shall conform substantially with the natural
alignment or boundary.
C. Unique physical features. Unique physical features such as historic
landmarks, rock outcroppings, hilltop lookouts and similar features
shall be preserved if possible. The municipal agency may, after proper
investigation, withhold approval of the lotting of such area or areas.
D. Buffer strips may be required on all wooded tracts around the
perimeter or rear of the development. Such buffer strips, however, may
be used in calculating the area of individual lots. On individual lots, care
shall be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and
the landscape treatment of the area.
E. Replacement of destroyed trees. In the event that any tree which is
shown on a site plan or subdivision plan as required to be preserved is
destroyed, cut down, removed or killed during development of the
property and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Zoning
Officer, in consultation with the Shade Tree Commission, may issue a
written order to the owner of the property directing that the tree,
including the stump, shall be entirely removed and replaced with one or
more trees of equivalent landscape value as determined in accordance
with the current International Shade Tree Evaluation Chart. The
replacement tree shall have a diameter of not less than two inches
measured at a point four feet above the top of the root ball and shall be
planted in accordance with this Code. The number of replacement trees
shall be based on the diameter of the destroyed tree measured four feet
above the ground, with one replacement tree to be provided for each 12
§ 91-96 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-97
83:405
§ 91-98. Conservation easements.
§ 91-99. Fire-fighting facilities.
On the recommendation of the Fire Official, where streams or ponds exist
or are proposed on lands to be subdivided, facilities shall be provided to
draft water for Township fire-fighting purposes that are usable all seasons
of the year. This shall include access to a public street suitable for use by
fire-fighting equipment and construction of or improvements to ponds, dams
or similar on-site developments, where feasible. Such facilities shall be
inches or part thereof of diameter of the destroyed tree. The order
shall specify a reasonable time within which the tree removal and
replacement shall be done. Any replacement tree that does not survive
for one year or one full growing season, whichever is longer, after
planting shall be replaced in kind. At the time that a replacement
tree is planted, the owner of the property shall furnish a maintenance
guaranty conditioned upon survival of the tree for a period of one year
or one full growing season, whichever is longer, in the amount of $200
per replacement tree. [Added 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
F. Treatment of injured trees. In the event that any tree which is shown on
a site plan or subdivision plan as required to be preserved is injured
during development of the property and prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, such tree shall be promptly treated in
accordance with accepted tree care practices. [Added 8-4-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-27]
A. Where the Master Plan or Official Map of the Township delineates
floodplains and other critical areas, floodplains and conservation
easements shall be delineated on the plat. The removal of trees and
ground cover in a conservation easement or floodplain shall be
prohibited, except for the following purposes:
(1) The removal of dead or diseased trees.
(2) Limited thinning of trees and growth to encourage the most
desirable growth.
(3) The removal of trees to allow for structures designed to impound
water or in areas to be flooded in the creation of ponds or lakes.
B. These areas shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats and
shall be shown in such a manner that their boundaries can be
accurately determined. The boundary line of any easement shall be
mounted at its intersection with all existing or proposed street lines.
Such easement dedication shall be expressed on the plat as follows:
"Conservation easement granted to the Township of Florence as
provided for in the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the Township of
Florence."
§ 91-97 FLORENCE CODE § 91-99
83:406
constructed to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer and in accordance
with the Insurance Service Organization's recommended standards.
§ 91-100. Water supply.
§ 91-101. Sanitary sewers.
If a public sewerage system is available to the tract, the applicant shall
construct facilities in such a manner as to provide adequate sewerage
within the subdivision to transport all sewage from each lot and the total
development to the treatment and collection systems. Where a proposed
treatment and collection system has been approved by the municipal
authority and the system will be accessible to the proposed subdivision, the
subdivider shall install dry sewers designed to tie into the proposed facility
upon its completion.
A. Where public water is available to the tract, the applicant shall arrange
for the construction of water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot or dwelling unit within the
subdivision or development. The entire system shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the Township,
county or state agency having approval authority and shall be subject to
its approval. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity
and sustained pressure.71
B. Where public water is not available, water shall be provided by on-site
wells. Such wells shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements and standards of the Township or state agency having
jurisdiction.
71.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 140, Water and Sewers.
§ 91-99 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-101
83:407

ARTICLE XVI
Environmental Impact Statements
§ 91-102. Intent.
The intent of the environmental impact statement (EIS) requirement is to
provide to the municipal agency a basis for making determinations in order
to protect its delicately balanced physical and biologically active land areas,
given the fact that major portions of the Township are environmentally
sensitive and stand to suffer adverse environmental effects without proper
control if uncontrolled land use patterns take place. It is therefore,
recognized that in order to promote land uses which promote the public
health, safety and welfare, protect public and private property and are
reasonably consistent and compatible to the natural laws governing the
physical, chemical and geological environment of the Township,
environmental impact statements shall be required to protect the
environmental conditions naturally existing in the Township. It is with this
intent that this Article is established.
§ 91-103. When required.
§ 91-104. Preparation and contents.
A. An environmental impact statement is required for:
(1) Every major subdivision involving 10 or more new lots which is
proposed for the purpose of any kind of development, present or
future.
(2) Every major site plan submission.
B. The environmental impact statement shall accompany the initial
submission of a major application.
A. Preparation. The environmental impact statement should be prepared
using an interdisciplinary approach. The qualifications of the person(s)
who prepared each of the various elements of the statement shall be
identified in a separate section of the EIS. References shall be cited
throughout the statement as appropriate and listed fully using a
consistent standard format.
B. Format. The environmental impact statement shall be bound or in a
loose-leaf binder and submitted on eight-and-one-half-by-eleven-inch
paper. Each major section of the statement shall be clearly identified
and shall begin on a separate page. All maps, plans and aerial
photographs included in the statement shall specify a north point,
graphic scale, date of preparation, source of information and, where
appropriate, boundary lines. Maps, plans and aerial photographs
submitted in each major section of the statement shall be at appropriate
scales to facilitate comparative analyses and assessments of
environmental impacts.
§ 91-102 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-104
83:409
C. Contents. The EIS shall contain the following elements, as specified
below:
(1) Cover page. The cover page shall indicate:
(a) That the document is an EIS for (state name or title of
application).
(b) The name of the proposed facility.
(c) Its location within the Township.
(d) The name, address and telephone number of the person who
prepared the EIS.
(e) The date of preparation of the EIS.
(2) Summary. A "one-page" summary containing the following
elements shall be placed at the beginning of the EIS:
(a) A brief description of the proposed facility, including its
location.
(b) Summary of major beneficial and adverse environmental
impacts of the proposed facility.
(c) Summary of major alternatives considered.
(d) Township, county, state and federal approvals required for the
proposed facility, if any.
(3) Table of contents. The EIS shall contain a table of contents
indicating the page numbers of the major sections and subsections.
(4) Inventory. The applicant shall succinctly describe the existing
environmental conditions of the site and surrounding region in
sufficient detail to assist in the location and design of the facility,
provide a basis for the applicant's assessment of the probable
beneficial and adverse impacts of the proposed facility and enable
the Township to make the findings for permit approval. General
inventory requirements for each facility as required herein.
(5) Project description. The applicant shall succinctly describe what he
proposes to do, and where and how he proposes to do it, during
construction and operation of the facility. The project description
shall include written text and graphic materials, including a site
plan which may contain much of the project description
information. General project description requirements for each
facility type as required herein.
(6) Unavoidable adverse environmental impact. The applicant shall
describe probable adverse environmental impacts of the facility
that cannot be avoided, including irretrievable commitments of
§ 91-104 FLORENCE CODE § 91-104
83:410
§ 91-105. Review process and time schedules.
The same schedule and conditions applicable to the full site plan
requirements shall also apply to a submitted EIS.
§ 91-106. Inventory elements.
resources, which shall be listed in the order of their relative
magnitude.
(7) Techniques to minimize adverse environmental impacts. The
applicant shall describe the steps he will take to minimize or avoid
adverse environmental impacts during the facility's construction,
operation or removal, both at the site and in the surrounding
region. The applicant's program for ascertaining and verifying the
accuracy of the environmental assessment of the facility and the
actual effects of project construction shall also be described.
(8) Alternatives.
(a) The applicant shall identify, describe and analyze alternatives
to all of the proposed facility and any part of the proposed
facility, including the alternatives of no facility, alternative
sites, alternative uses of this site and postponing construction.
(b) The discussion of alternatives shall include an evaluation of
alternatives that might avoid or minimize some or all of the
probable adverse environmental impacts of the project. The
costs and benefits of the alternatives shall be analyzed and
presented. Reasons for the acceptability or nonacceptability of
each alternative shall be given. For residential and sewerage
facilities, the presentation of alternatives may include a brief
narrative and accompanying sketch plans.
(9) Other required licenses, permits and approvals. The applicant shall
list all known licenses, permits and other approvals required by
Township, county, state or federal law for the construction and
operation of the proposed facility. The status of each shall be
identified.
(10) Documentation. The applicant shall prepare a reference list using a
consistent standard format of all published materials, reports,
manuscripts or other written sources of information on the facility,
its site and surrounding region consulted and employed in the
preparation of the environmental impact statement. A separate
reference list of all government agencies and individuals that either
provided information orally and by letter or coordinated the EIS
shall be prepared, with the dates and locations of all meetings
specified. The documentation section shall also indicate the
person(s) that prepared each major section and subsection of the
EIS, including their qualifications.
§ 91-104 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-106
83:411
A. General site location map. The site of the proposed facility shall be
located generally on a United States Geological Survey Map of the
Township.
B. Site location map and existing site conditions. A site location map shall
be provided consistent with the standards established for site plan
submission set forth in Article XII. Existing site conditions which may
hinder or prevent development such as delineated wetlands, surface
water bodies and slopes of 15% or more shall be presented in the
mapped format as well as the written format specified below.
C. Existing regional conditions. The existing and proposed supply of and
estimated need for the specific facility the applicant proposes to
construct shall be described for the relevant surrounding region, which
shall be interpreted to mean at least the county. These regional
conditions may be mapped if appropriate.
D. Geology and soils. A map and text shall identify and describe the
physical features of the site, including, but not limited to:
(1) Soil types, as classified and mapped by the Cooperative Soil Survey
as conducted by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture in cooperation with the New Jersey
Experiment Station, Cook College, Rutgers University, and the
State Soil Conservation Committee, New Jersey Department of
Agriculture (SCS-USDA), where available, or alternative soil types
if SCS-USDA data is unavailable.
(2) A soils data chart with descriptions indicating the following
information for each soil type identified within the site in
Subsection D(1) above:
(a) Drainage class.
(b) Permeability class.
(c) Seasonal high-water table.
(d) Foundation limitations.
(e) Agricultural land capacity class.
(f) Erosion potential.
(g) Septic tank suitability, if appropriate.
(h) Trafficability (dust hazard).
(i) Depth of and name of the first geologic formation named on
New Jersey Geologic Map, Atlas Sheet 40, or equivalent
documentation, including pre-quaternary deposits.
(j) Degree of acidity and alkalinity of the soil [pH of five point five
(5.5) or lower and pH of eight point five (8.5) or higher].
§ 91-106 FLORENCE CODE § 91-106
83:412
(3) Engineering soil classification, as mapped by SCS-USDA.
(4) An engineering design characteristics chart indicating the
following information for each engineering soil classification within
the site in Subsection D(3) above:
(a) Limitations of soils for road cuts and fills.
(b) Road alignment characteristics.
(c) Limitations of soil for embankments.
(d) Pavement support characteristics.
(5) The location, nature and thickness of any areas containing landfill
materials on and within 200 feet of the site, a description of the
landfill materials, and the appropriate beginning and cessation
dates of landfill activities.
(6) Potentially valuable mineral, gravel or other subsurface resources
of the site shall be identified.
E. Hydrology. A topographic map of the site and its surroundings to a
distance of 200 feet, with contour intervals consistent with those
required for site plan submissions and accompanied by appropriate text
shall identify and describe the following items:
(1) Surface water.
(a) Existing natural and man-made watercourses, including
drainageways, swales and water control structures, on and
within 200 feet of the site, with their location, width, slope,
capacity and direction of flow.
(b) Flood hazard areas or floodprone areas with cross section of
watercourses at an appropriate scale and at appropriate
intervals along the watercourse, showing extent of floodplain,
top of bank, normal water level and bottom elevation.
(c) Existing lakes or ponds within or adjacent to the site, with
location, extent and water level elevation.
(d) Existing storm drainage systems, including storm sewers,
drainage ditches and retention or detention basins, on or
adjacent to the site, with location, extent, capacity and
direction of flow.
(e) Existing stormwater runoff from the project site and upstream
watershed areas and calculations used to determine same.
(f) Existing slope analysis, with slopes of zero to one percent (0% -
1%), two to four percent (2% - 4%), five to nine percent (5% -
9%), ten to fourteen percent (10% - 14%) and 15% or more
delineated;
§ 91-106 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-106
83:413
(2) Groundwater.
(a) Aquifer recharge areas.
(b) Apparent direction of groundwater movement based upon
surficial topography monitoring or potable water well data if
available;
(c) Yields of existing wells within one-half ( 1/2) mile of the site,
including description of aquifer(s) being utilized.
F. Vegetation. A map and text shall identify and describe the vegetation of
the site, including but not limited to, the following items:
(1) The vegetation types present, indicating the major species by
scientific and common name. Where applicable, both overstory and
understory species should be included.
(2) The acreage and percent of total area represented by each type.
(3) Data for forest types shall include average diameter breast high
(measured at 4.5 feet above ground level), diameter range and
basal area for the overstory trees.
(4) Species or specimen trees unique because of scarcity, size,
historical significance or endangered shall be indicated.
(5) Wetlands as determined through actual field delineation should be
described. A wetlands delineation report prepared by a qualified
individual per the requirements of the New Jersey Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act72 may be included as an Appendix to this
environmental impact statement. Alternatively, a statement from a
qualified individual as to the absence of wetlands, if applicable,
should be provided.
G. Wildlife. A map and text shall identify and describe the wildlife of the
site (indicated by their common and scientific names), including but not
limited to the following items:
(1) The species of wildlife (mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians or
aquatic organisms) present or which could be affected by the
proposed project and the amount and quality of their associated
habitat.
(2) Any areas within the proposed site which are critical to the life
cycle of any species of wildlife should be discussed.
(3) Those species of wildlife classified as threatened or endangered by
the appropriate state or federal agencies.
H. Water quality.
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 91-106 FLORENCE CODE § 91-106
83:414
(1) Surface waters. A water quality inventory of such water bodies
directly affected by the proposed facility shall be prepared utilizing
existing authoritative sources of information. The classifications of
such affected water bodies, their water quality standards and their
status in meeting the established water quality standards shall be
described. Existing restrictive uses of these water bodies shall be
identified. The need to present additional data shall be based upon
the relative sensitivity of the water body affected.
(2) Groundwater. Where groundwater is to be utilized for potable
water supplies, the water quality inventory shall include those
parameters established for prevailing drinking water standards
and any water quality standards established for groundwater.
I. Water supply. The existing and proposed potable water supply system
available to the site shall be identified and described in maps and text,
indicating:
(1) Source of supply.
(2) Adequacy of supply, including current and anticipated maximum
water demands within the entire service area, as available by the
owner of said supply.
(3) Pressure and volume of water available.
J. Sewerage system. The existing and proposed sewerage system
available to the site shall be identified and described in maps and text,
indicating:
(1) Availability of existing facilities, including status of sewer
connection ban, if any;
(2) The adequacy of existing facilities, including:
(a) Design capacity, type of treatment provided and location of
outfall.
(b) Current flows, including average monthly during highest
month and highest twenty-four-hour flow).
(c) Outstanding commitments to accept additional flows from
other projects.
(d) Water quality standards and effluent limitations.
(3) Where individual septic tanks are proposed, indicate:
(a) Location of registered or licensed water supplies within 500
feet of the project.
(b) Field data describing results of soil borings, percolation test
and seasonally high ground water table conditions, with
specific locations of (including the dates of these tests). Soil
§ 91-106 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-106
83:415
borings shall be classified by the Unified Soil Classification
System.
K. Air quality. The existing air quality of the site and its surrounding region
shall be evaluated and described, using monitoring data collected by
and available from the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy. The applicant may also monitor the existing air
quality, or estimate air quality utilizing other sources of information.
L. Energy. The energy supplies available for delivery to the site shall be
estimated, with types of energy, points of origin and means of
transmission and delivery described and located. The percent of
existing supply presently utilized shall be identified and, if applicable,
differences in seasonal demands shall be indicated.
M. Public services. Existing public and private services relevant to the
proposed facility and available at the site and its surrounding region
shall be described and located. Such services shall include, but not be
limited to police and fire protection, first aid and ambulance services,
health services, solid waste and garbage services, public and private
educational facilities and commercial facilities.
N. Outdoor recreation. A map and accompanying text shall identify the site
and locate and describe the types and quantities, physical accessibility
and availability for public use of recreation facilities and services within
two miles of the site, including, but not limited to, the following:
waterways, wetlands, marinas, boat docks and launching platforms,
playgrounds, parks, forests, natural areas, tennis courts, swimming
pools, bikeways, etc. The extent of existing use and of unused capacity
of these facilities shall also be indicated.
O. Transportation. The existing and known proposed transportation
system available to the site and its surrounding region shall be
described and located on a map at an appropriate scale. The highway
and road network, other forms of public and private, individual and
mass transportation, frequencies, volumes, peak periods and routes
shall be identified. The relationship between places of employment and
residential areas in the region shall be discussed.
P. Historical and cultural resources. The social, economic and community
history of the site and its relevant surrounding region shall be
described. Areas and sites of archeological, architectural,
anthropological and historic significance, including those proposed for
nomination or included in the National State Register of Historic
Places, shall be identified, described and located on a map. An
awareness of both above and below ground cultural resources, if any,
should be reflected in this section, which should include a synopsis of
the effort and method that is the basis for this awareness.
Q. Aesthetics. The existing visual character and scenic attributes of the
built and natural environment of the site and its relevant surrounding
§ 91-106 FLORENCE CODE § 91-106
83:416
§ 91-107. Review.
Upon receipt of the application, the Administrative Officer shall forward the
environmental impact statement to the Environmental Commission and the
appropriate reviewing board engineer. The above-mentioned Commission
and engineer shall review the applicant's environmental impact statement
and shall report its comments within 30 days of the date of submission
to the municipal agency. The municipal agency or the Environmental
Commission may require the opinion of the municipal agency engineer in
its review of the environmental impact statement. Fees for the costs of such
consultation above shall be paid by the applicant in accordance with § 91-24
of this chapter. Copies of the environmental impact statement will be on file
and available for inspection in the office of the Administrative Officer.
§ 91-108. Approval or disapproval; waivers.
region, including common and significant views and vistas to and from
the site, shall be described and depicted graphically, as appropriate.
R. Demographic, social and economic conditions. A general demographic
profile of the municipality and county in which the proposed facility is
located shall be prepared, including data on the age, family income and
occupation distribution of the population, as well as recent
demographic trends. The relevant general social and economic
problems and opportunities of the site and its relevant surrounding
region, including housing considerations, municipal and county
government revenues and expenditures, employment and property
values and the relevant legitimate economic aspirations of the
inhabitants of the area shall be discussed.
S. Hazardous materials. Any known or suspected deposits of man-made
regulated hazardous materials, including hazardous wastes, such as
contaminated soil, above or below ground oil storage tanks or
abandoned chemical storage facilities, shall be described. The applicant
shall specify whether such deposits are to be removed from the site in
compliance with applicable Department of Environmental Protection
and Energy rules and regulations.
A. Upon completion of all reviews and public hearing(s), the municipal
agency shall either approve or disapprove the environmental impact
statement as a part of its underlying function with respect to its review
of the development. In reaching a decision, the municipal agency shall
take into consideration the effect of applicant's proposed development
upon all aspects of the environment as outlined above as well as the
sufficiency of the applicant's proposals for dealing with any immediate
or projected adverse environmental effects.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board may, at the request
of the applicant, waive the requirement for an environmental impact
statement if sufficient evidence is submitted to support a conclusion
that the proposed development will have a slight or negligible
§ 91-106 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-108
83:417
environmental impact. Portions of such requirement may likewise be
waived upon a finding that the complete report need not be prepared in
order to evaluate adequately the environmental impact of a particular
project.
§ 91-108 FLORENCE CODE § 91-108
83:418
ARTICLE XVII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 91-109. General standards.
The applicant shall provide for proper pedestrian and vehicular traffic
movement within and adjacent to the site. The municipal agency shall
ensure that all parking spaces are usable and safely and conveniently
arranged. The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be
reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire
protection, and the impact of the facilities on adjacent building and land.
§ 91-110. Access to lots.
§ 91-111. Access to parking and loading spaces.
Individual parking and loading spaces shall be served by internal, onsite
driveways designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and
from each parking and loading space without requiring the moving of
any other motor vehicle and shall be dimensioned as outlined in § 91-114
hereof. Where the angle of parking is different on both sides of the aisle or
driveway, the larger aisle width shall prevail.
§ 91-112. Buffers.
Parking and loading areas for commercial and industrial uses shall be
buffered from adjoining streets, existing residential uses or any residential
A. Access drives shall be limited to a maximum of two to any street, and
their center lines shall be spaced at least 65 feet apart. Each access
drive shall:
(1) Handle not more than two lanes of traffic.
(2) Be at least 50 feet or one-half ( 1/2) the lot frontage, whichever is
less, but need not exceed 200 feet from the street line of any
intersecting street.
(3) Be at least 20 feet from any property line.
B. When the width of a property along any one street exceeds 500 feet in
length, one access drive may be permitted for each 250 feet of property
frontage. The width of the curb cut shall be determined by the type of
traffic to be handled and the limitation to no more than two lanes of
traffic. Driveways with widths exceeding 24 feet shall be reviewed by
the municipal agency giving consideration to the width, curbing,
direction of traffic flow, radii of curves and traffic lane dividers. Curbing
shall be either depressed at the driveway or have the curbing rounded
at the corners, with the access drive connected to the street in the same
manner as another street.
§ 91-109 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-112
83:419
zoning district in accordance with the buffer and screening requirements of
this chapter.73
§ 91-113. Curbing.
Off-street parking and loading areas may be required to have concrete or
Belgian block curbing around the perimeter of the parking and loading
areas and to separate major interior driveways from parking spaces.
Curbing may also be installed within the parking or loading areas to define
segments of the parking or loading areas. Concrete wheel blocks may be
located within designated parking or loading spaces. All curbing shall be
located in conjunction with an overall drainage plan. Curbing installed at
locations requiring pedestrian or bicycle access over the curbing shall be
designed with breaks in the curb height with ramps from the street grade
to the sidewalk. The breaks shall be either opposite each traffic lane or no
less frequent than one every 65 feet along the curb.
§ 91-114. Minimum dimensions.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be 10 feet wide and a minimum of 20
feet in length, except that a minimum of one space but not less than 5%
of all spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide, located in one area,
designed as parking for the handicapped and located so that access
does not require wheeling or walking behind parked cars.
B. Drive aisle widths in parking lots shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
Parking Spaces Ten Feet Wide
Angle of Parking
One-Way Aisle
(feet)
Two-Way Aisle
(feet)
90º 22 25
60º 18 22
45º 15 22
30º 12 22
Parallel 12 22
C. Off-street loading spaces shall have 15 feet of vertical clearance and
shall be designed in accordance with the following schedule:
73.Editor's Note: See § 91-91 of this chapter.
§ 91-112 FLORENCE CODE § 91-114
83:420
§ 91-115. Drainage.
All parking and loading shall have drainage facilities installed in accordance
with good engineering practice as approved by the municipal agency
engineer. Where subbase conditions are wet, springy or of such nature that
surfacing would be inadvisable without first treating the subbase, these
areas shall be excavated to a depth of six inches to 12 inches below the
proposed finished grade and filled with a suitable subbase material as
determined by the Township Engineer. Where required by the Engineer a
system of subsurface drains shall be constructed beneath the surface of the
paving and connected to a suitable drain. After the subbase material has
been properly placed and compacted, the parking area surfacing material
shall be constructed.
§ 91-116. Approval of surfacing as part of the site plan approval.
§ 91-117. Landscaping for parking and loading areas.74
Landscaping in parking and loading areas shall be shown on the
landscaping plan. Trees shall be staggered or spaced so as not to interfere
with driver vision, have branches no lower than six feet and be placed at the
rate of at least two trees for every 10 parking spaces. All areas between the
parking area and the building shall be landscaped per approved drawings.
Loading Space Combined Apron and Aisle Length
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
90º
(feet)
60º
(feet)
60 10 72 66
60 12 63 57
60 14 60 54
A. Areas of ingress and egress, loading and unloading areas, major
interior driveways and aisles and other areas likely to experience
similar heavy traffic shall be paved with not less than four inches of
bituminous stabilized base course, Mix I-2, prepared and constructed in
accordance with the latest Standard Specifications of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
B. Parking space areas and other areas likely to experience light traffic
shall be paved with not less than three inches of bituminous stabilized
base course, Mix I-2. A surface course of at least a one-and-one-halfinch
thickness of bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-5, shall be
constructed. As an alternative, such areas may be constructed on six
inches of dense graded aggregate base course and two inches of
bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-5.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 91-114 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-117
83:421
Any plant material not surviving for a period of two years shall be replaced
with the same or equivalent size species. A majority of the parking area
shall be screened from streets by buildings, landscaped berms, natural
ground elevation or plantings singularly or in combination.
§ 91-118. Location of parking spaces and loading areas.
§ 91-119. Minimum loading requirements.
Adequate off-street loading and maneuvering space shall be provided for
every use. The minimum number of spaces shall be based on the following
schedule, and those uses not listed shall provide sufficient spaces as
determined under site plan review:
A. No off-street loading and maneuvering areas shall be located in any
front yard nor require any part of a street.
B. Loading spaces shall abut the building being served and shall be
located to directly serve the building for which the space is being
provided.
C. No loading and parking spaces shall be located in any required buffer
area.
D. Parking spaces located to service residential uses shall be within 150
feet of the entrance of the building. Commercial and industrial parking
shall be located on the lot unless a cooperative arrangement has been
approved by the approving authority. Parking spaces located to service
commercial or industrial uses shall be within 300 feet of the building
entrance.
E. Parking spaces for residential uses may be located in any yard as
designated for individual structures within a complex, but parking shall
be discouraged from being located in the yard space between the
existing public streets and the setback line but, when located within
this yard area, shall be set back from the street a minimum of 100 feet.
F. No parking shall be permitted in designated fire lanes, streets,
driveways, aisles, sidewalks or turning areas.
G. Parking spaces for shopping centers may be located in any side or rear
yard, or front yard if approved by the approving authority.
H. Off-street parking spaces for office buildings, other than offices in a
shopping center, may have parking located in the front yards limited to
not more than 20% of the total number of spaces required.
A. A minimum of one space per use, except that where more than one use
shall be located in one building or where multiple uses are designed as
part of a shopping center or similar self-contained complex, the number
of loading spaces shall be based on the cumulative number of square
§ 91-117 FLORENCE CODE § 91-119
83:422
§ 91-120. Minimum parking requirements.
The number of parking spaces for each use shall be determined by the
number of dwelling units, the amount of gross floor area, as defined in this
chapter, or such other measure as noted below. Where a particular function
contains more than one use, the total parking requirements shall be the sum
of the component parts. The number of parking spaces for each use shall be
as follows:
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Minimum Required Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Auto/truck sales 1 for each 50 square feet of showroom
area and sales office
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley
Car wash establishments 3 access lanes for each mechanized car
wash entrance, with each lane having a
minimum capacity for 12 vehicles; 1
space for each waxing, cleaning or similar
specialized service area; 1 space for
every 2 employees
Churches 1 for each 3 seats
Community swimming pools 1 for each 15 square feet of water surface
area
feet within the building or complex, shall be dispersed throughout the
site to best serve the individual uses and shall have site plan approval.
B. There shall be a minimum of one trash/garbage pickup location,
separate from the parking and loading areas, located either within or
outside of a building in steel-like, totally enclosed containers, located
and screened to be obscured from view from parking areas, streets and
adjacent residential uses or zoning districts. If located within the
building, the doorways may serve both the loading and trash/garbage
collection functions. If a container is used for trash/garbage collection
functions and is located outside of the building, it may be located
adjacent to or within the general loading areas, provided that the
containers in no way interfere with or restrict the loading and
unloading functions.
C. Where any use is located on a tract of at least 50 acres and no portion of
a loading area, including maneuvering areas, is closer than 200 feet to
any property line and where the length of the driveway connecting the
loading area may be less than the number required by the above
schedule provided, the applicant, as part of the site plan application,
shall indicate on his site plan and shall document to the Planning Board
how the number of spaces to be provided will be adequate to meet the
needs of the specific use proposed.
§ 91-119 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-120
83:423
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Minimum Required Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Day-care centers 1 for each 600 square feet of gross floor
area
Department store 7 for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof
Detached dwellings 2
Financial institutions 1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Firehouses 1 for each 400 square feet of gross floor
area
Garden apartments:
Efficiency unit 1
1-bedroom unit 1.5
2-bedroom unit 1.75
3-or-more-bedroom unit 2
Garden centers 6 for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof, plus 0.5 space
for each 1,000 square feet of outside
storage, sale or display area
Golf courses 4 per hole
Hospitals 1.5 per bed
Hotel or motel 1.75 per room
Libraries 1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Lumberyard and contractor's
yard
1 per 5,000 square feet of gross yard area
required for the use
Manufacturing, assembly or
fabrication
1 for each 800 square feet of gross floor
area
Medical centers, doctor or
dentist offices
1 for each 150 square feet of gross floor
area
Mortuaries, viewing room and
chapel
20
Movie theaters 1 for each 3 seats
Movie theaters in shopping
centers
1 for each 4 seats
Nightclubs 1 for each 2 seats
Offices and office buildings 1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 91-120 FLORENCE CODE § 91-120
83:424
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Minimum Required Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Personal services 1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Professional office as a home
occupation
1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor
area, with a minimum of 6
Research 1 for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Restaurants 1 per 2 seats
Retail stores 1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Schools:
Elementary 1.2 per each classroom, plus minimum of
1 for each teacher staff member
Intermediate 1.5 per classroom, plus a minimum 2 for
each teacher and staff member
Secondary 1 per classroom, plus a minimum of 2 per
each teacher and staff member, plus 1 per
10 students based on school capacity
Service stations 6 for the first bay, 5 additional for a
second work area and 3 additional for
each additional work area
Shopping centers 5.5 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Structure with 2 dwelling units 4
Theater 1 space for every 4 seats
Townhouses 2
Veterinary hospitals 6 per examination room or doctor,
whichever is greater
Warehouses, shipping and
receiving
1 for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Wholesale fuel distribution 1 for each 10,000 square feet of gross
yard area required for the use
NOTE: A maximum 20% of gross floor area can be office use without
additional parking for the office use. Office use above 20% shall require
parking at the appropriate rate.
§ 91-121. Variances from parking or loading space requirements.
A. Authorization. The municipal agency may allow an applicant to provide
fewer parking or loading spaces for a proposed development than this
§ 91-120 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-121
83:425
chapter requires, upon application for a bulk variance from the chapter
requirements, and with public notice.
B. Standards. No variance from parking or loading space requirements
shall be approved unless the applicant proves entitlement to such
variance in accordance with criteria applicable to bulk variances.
Factors to be taken into account by the municipal agency shall include,
but not be limited to the following:
(1) Amount of land available on the site to provide parking or loading
spaces.
(2) Availability of adjacent land to enlarge the site.
(3) Feasibility of space-conserving alternatives such as underground or
aboveground parking.
(4) Adequacy of existing parking on the site.
(5) Severity of existing traffic and traffic congestion at and near the
site.
(6) If the applicant also requires a variance to enlarge a
nonconforming use or structure, an analysis of the particular
benefits to Florence Township to be gained from such enlargement
compared with the disadvantages.
(7) Any facts pertaining to the particular site, its existing and proposed
use, its history, its needs for parking and loading spaces, and the
area surrounding the site.
C. Expert testimony. The municipal agency may require the applicant to
submit written and oral traffic studies, engineering studies, designs,
plans or any other form of expert testimony which it deems necessary
or helpful in order to reach an informed decision on the matter.
D. Limitation. In the case of vacant or unimproved land, the municipal
agency shall not approve an application for development that provides
less than 75% of the parking or loading spaces required by this chapter.
In all other cases, no application for development that provides less
than 75% of the required parking or loading spaces shall be approved
without a showing by the applicant of extraordinary and compelling
justification.
E. Landscaping. The applicant shall compensate for any reduction in
required parking or loading spaces by providing suitable landscaping,
additional drainage or percolation area, open space or better aesthetics
for the site. If the site permits, an amount of land equal in square
footage to that contained in the number of parking or loading spaces
not provided by the applicant as a result of a bulk variance applied for
under this section shall be set aside as "landscaped parking" and
specifically noted on the plan. Such "landscaped parking" shall not be
§ 91-121 FLORENCE CODE § 91-121
83:426
§ 91-122. Parking restrictions for commercial and recreational
vehicles in residential zones.
built upon nor considered in calculating front, side or rear yard areas
or buffer area.
A. No person shall park any truck, bus, trailer or tractor, the gross
registered weight of which exceeds 8,000 pounds, out of doors within
any residential zone in the Township. This requirement shall not pertain
to farms.
B. Nothing within this chapter shall be construed as preventing vehicles
exceeding a gross registered weight of 8,000 pounds from making
deliveries of merchandise within a residential zone or as prohibiting
any vehicle exceeding the gross registered weight of 8,000 pounds used
by any public utility company in connection with the construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of public utility facilities from
parking while being used for such purposes; neither shall the chapter
be construed as preventing vehicles exceeding a gross registered
weight of 8,000 pounds from being used in cases of emergencies within
a residential zone of the Township, in order to preserve and protect
persons and property within the residential zone.
C. Recreational vehicles and boats may be parked outside, in side or rear
yard areas only, with a limit of one recreational vehicle or boat per
family permitted outside a building. Recreational vehicles or boats so
parked shall not be used for temporary or permanent residential
purposes.
§ 91-121 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-122
83:427

ARTICLE XVIII
Sight Triangles; Recycling Containment Areas
§ 91-123. Sight triangles.
§ 91-124. Recycling containment areas; definitions. [Amended
5-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09]
A. Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets. The area within sight triangles shall be either dedicated as part
of the street right-of-way or maintained as part of the lot adjoining the
street and set aside on any subdivision or site plan as a sight triangle
easement. Within a sight triangle, no grading, planting or structure
shall be erected or maintained more than 30 inches above the street
center line or lower than 12 feet above the street center line.
B. The sight triangle is that area bounded by the intersecting street lines
and a straight line which connects sight points located on each of the
two intersecting street center lines the following distances away from
the intersecting street center line: arterial streets at 300 feet, collector
streets at 200 feet and primary and secondary local streets at 90 feet.
Where the intersecting streets are both arterial, both collectors or one
arterial and one collector, two overlapping sight triangles shall be
required, formed by connecting the sight points noted above with a
sight point 90 feet on the intersecting street. The classification of
existing and proposed streets shall be those shown on the adopted
Master Plan or as designated by the Planning Board at the time of the
application for approval for a new street not included in the Master
Plan.
C. A sight triangle easement dedication shall be expressed on the site plan
as follows: "Sight triangle easement, subject to grading, planting and
construction restrictions as provided for in the Land Development
Chapter of the Code of the Township of Florence." Portions of a lot set
aside for the sight triangle may be calculated in determining the lot
area and may be included in establishing the minimum setback
provisions of this chapter.
D. Sight triangles for driveways shall comply with the Burlington County
Land Development Review Resolution.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ACT or SWMA — The Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et
seq., as amended and supplemented.
BURLINGTON COUNTY REGIONAL PROGRAM — The program utilized
for the collection of those recyclable materials as designated by the
Department of Solid Waste from residential curbside, participating
multifamily and participating school collection programs.
§ 91-123 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-124
83:429
CLASS A RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Source-separated,
nonputrescible, metal, glass, paper and plastic containers; and
corrugated and other cardboard.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — All commercial and industrial
activities that operate for profit and are involved in retail or
manufacture of goods and services provided for sale.
COMMINGLED — A combining of source-separated recyclable
materials for the purpose of recycling.
COMMON AREA RECYCLING STORAGE LOCATION — A location
designed in accordance with the Land Use Ordinances of this
municipality as required for nonresidential developments with a
combined building floor area of 7,500 square feet or more and
multifamily dwellings with more than 20 residential units where
curbside collection is not provided under the Burlington County
Regional Program.
CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX — A group of units, arranged horizontally
or vertically, where the form of ownership of real property under a
master deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvements together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
CORRUGATED AND OTHER CARDBOARD — All corrugated cardboard
normally used for packing, mailing, shipping or containerizing goods,
merchandise or other material, but excluding plastic, foam or waxcoated
or soiled corrugated cardboard.
COUNTY — The Burlington County Board of Chosen Freeholders, and
its successors and assigns, acting through the Burlington County
Department of Solid Waste.
CURBSIDE DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES — Those designated
recyclables that are placed for collection within the parameters of the
curbside collection program as outlined herein.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING CONTAINER — A container(s) provided by
the municipality or persons for the temporary storage of recyclable
materials within the residential unit(s).
DEP or DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
to be source separated in this municipality, including but not limited
to aluminum cans, antifreeze, consumer electronics, corrugated
cardboard, fluorescent lights, glass containers, lead acid batteries,
leaves, metal appliances, paper, plastic bottles (coded No. 1 and No. 2),
rechargeable batteries, steel (tin) cans, textiles, tires and used motor
oil.
DSW — The Burlington County Department of Solid Waste, its
successors and assigns.
§ 91-124 FLORENCE CODE § 91-124
83:430
FIBER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books, chipboard, corrugated and other cardboard and
similar cellulosic material whether shredded or whole, but excluding
wax paper, plastic- or foil-coated paper, thermal fax paper, carbon
paper, blueprint paper, food-contaminated paper, soiled paper and
cardboard.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any park, including a trailer park or camp,
equipped to handle mobile homes sited on a year-round basis as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.7 et seq.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex
of buildings or structures in which three or more dwelling units are
rented or leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes;
whether privately or publicly financed, except hotels, motels or other
guesthouses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are
defined under subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law," P.L.1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.) and N.J.S.A.
40:66-1.2 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Florence located within the County
of Burlington, State of New Jersey.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Residential, commercial and institutional
solid waste generated within a community.
PAPER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books and similar cellulosic material whether shredded or
whole, but excluding tissue and towel paper, wax paper, plastic- or foilcoated
paper, thermal fax paper, carbon paper, NCR paper, blueprint
paper, food-contaminated or soiled paper.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental
agency of any other entity or any group of such persons, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative or fee simple community or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction comprised of a community trust or other
trust device, condominium association, homeowners' association or
council of co-owners, wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets
and providing essential services is paid for by a not-for profit entity
consisting exclusively of unit owners within the community. No
apartment building or garden apartment complex owned by an
individual or entity that receives monthly rental payments from tenants
who occupy the premises shall be considered a qualified private
community. No "proprietary campground facility," as defined in section
§ 91-124 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-124
83:431
1 of P.L.1993, c.258 (N.J.S.A. 45:22A-49), shall be considered to be a
qualified private community.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that would otherwise become
solid waste that can be separated, collected and/or processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials, which would otherwise
become solid waste, are collected, separated or processed and returned
to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RESIDENT — Any person residing within the municipality on a
temporary or permanent basis, but excluding persons residing in hotels
or motels.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 48:13A-1 et seq.
SOURCE SEPARATED — Recyclable materials separated from the solid
waste stream at the point of generation.
SWMA — The New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act, as amended.
B. Design of containment areas for designated recyclable materials on
commercial and residential sites.
(1) Design standards for common area recycling storage locations.
(a) In accordance with Chapter 122, Article IV, of the Code of the
Township of Florence, every multifamily, qualified private
community, mobile home park, and commercial establishment
within the Township of Florence shall be required to provide,
for the use of its residents, tenants, occupants or patrons;
centralized and common locations on its property for the
storage, prior to collection, of source-separated recyclables
generated by the residents, tenants, occupants or patrons of
the property.
(b) Each common area recycling storage location shall, at a
minimum, conform to the following standards:
[1] The dimensions of the recycling storage location shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling containers which are
of size and number as required by the DSW and which are
consistent with current methods of collection utilized by
the Burlington County Regional Program or the private
collection company being utilized. The following tables
indicate the minimum container capacity requirements for
weekly recycling service and common container
dimensions.
§ 91-124 FLORENCE CODE § 91-124
83:432
Minimum Container Capacity Requirements for
Weekly Recycling Service
Dual Stream
Collection
Fiber
(paper and
cardboard)
Commingled
(bottles and cans)
Non-agerestricted
complex
One cubic yard of
capacity for every
15 dwelling units
0.47 cubic yards
(96 gallons) of
capacity for every
18 dwelling units
Age-restricted
complex
One cubic yard of
capacity for every
20 dwelling units
0.47 cubic yards
(96 gallons) of
capacity for every
24 dwelling units
Commercial
establishment
Four bubic yards of
capacity for every
7,500 square feet
of commercial floor
area or portion
thereof
1.43 cubic yards
(288 gallons) of
capacity for every
7,500 square feet of
commercial floor
area or portion
thereof
Single Stream
Collection
Fiber and
Commingled
—
Non-age
restricted
complex
2 cubic yards of
capacity for every
20 units
—
Age-restricted
complex
1.4 cubic yards of
capacity for every
20 units
—
Commercial
establishment
6 cubic yards of
capacity for every
7,500 square feet
of commercial floor
area or portion
thereof
—
Common Container Dimensions
Size
Length
(inches)
Width
(inches)
Height
(inches)
1 cubic yard 72 24 29
2 cubic yards 72 34 45 (rear)/34
(front)
3 cubic yards 72 43 48 (rear)/40
(front)
§ 91-124 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-124
83:433
Common Container Dimensions
Size
Length
(inches)
Width
(inches)
Height
(inches)
4 cubic yards 72 51 56 (rear)/46
(front)
6 cubic yards 80 66 71 (rear)/47
(front)
8 cubic yards 80 71 86 (rear)/53
(front)
[2] Unless expressly prohibited by a municipality, or not
feasible due to existing site constraints, recycling
containers for all Class A designated recyclables shall be
co-located at all solid waste collection areas within the
complex.
[3] The recycling storage locations shall be conveniently
located for the residential disposition of source-separated
recyclable materials, preferably co-located, but clearly
separated from refuse containers.
[4] Outdoor recycling storage locations shall include a
concrete pad of the size as specified herein. The
dimensions of the recycling storage location shall provide
sufficient area for the required container(s):
§ 91-124 FLORENCE CODE § 91-124
83:434
[5] The recycling storage locations shall be well lit and shall
be safely and easily accessible by recycling personnel and
vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the
recycling areas without interference from parked cars or
other obstacles. The following turning template can be
used to plan vehicular accessibility to recycling storage
locations:
§ 91-124 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-124
83:435
[6] Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the
recycling areas and the bins or containers placed therein
against theft of recyclable materials or the bins or
containers themselves.
[7] Signs as approved by the DSW clearly identifying the
recycling areas and the materials accepted therein shall
be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
areas.
[8] Each recycling area shall be enclosed on three sides by a
solid fence or masonry enclosure six feet in height and
shall be surrounded by landscaping. A durable closable
access gate on the fourth side should be provided.
(2) Recycling container storage design standards; new residential
construction. In order to facilitate recycling in all new construction,
and to avoid the creation of unhealthful or cramped storage
§ 91-124 FLORENCE CODE § 91-124
83:436
situations, sufficient storage shall be available for recycling
containers within all new construction of residential housing.
(a) Recycling storage locations. Curbside recycling container
storage locations shall not include basements that require the
negotiation of stairs, or any location either above or below
finished grade. Locations shall be on a hard-wearing, smooth
continuous surface with access to a path with a width no less
than three feet and headroom of not less than seven feet.
(b) Single-family and two-family dwellings. Each residential
dwelling unit shall be designed to provide a curbside recycling
storage container storage location containing, at a minimum,
dimensions (1 x w x h) of no less than 36 inches by 32 inches by
84 inches per unit. The location shall be clearly marked as such
on floor plans of the dwelling unit if to be located inside the
dwelling unit. If to be located outside the dwelling unit,
adequate storage space for the container shall be identified on
the property survey. This shall be done at the time of
subdivision approval, if applicable, or at the time of zoning or
building permit application.
(c) Multifamily and condominium complex dwellings. Curbside
recycling container storage locations shall be provided for
each multifamily and condominium complex dwelling where
common area recycling storage locations are not otherwise
provided. Each multifamily and condominium complex
dwelling unit shall be designed to provide a curbside recycling
container storage location containing, at a minimum,
dimensions (1 x w x h) of no less than 36 inches by 32 inches by
84 inches per unit. The location shall be clearly marked as such
on floor plans of the dwelling unit if to be located inside the
dwelling unit. If to be located outside the dwelling unit,
adequate storage space for the container shall be identified on
the site plans or subdivision plans.
C. Construal. The terms and provisions of this section are to be liberally
construed, so as best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and
purposes hereof. This section shall be construed in pari materia with
the SWMA and the County Plan.
§ 91-124 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-124
83:437

ARTICLE XIX
Signs
§ 91-125. Unlawful signs; signs requiring permits.
§ 91-126. Animated, flashing and illusionary signs.
Signs using mechanical and/or electrical devices to revolve, flash or display
movement or the illusion of movement are prohibited.
§ 91-127. Attached signs.
Attached signs shall be affixed parallel to the wall to which they are
attached and project no more than 15 inches from the surface of the wall.
§ 91-128. Freestanding signs.
No freestanding sign shall be situated in a sight triangle.
§ 91-129. Height limitations.
The uppermost part of an attached sign shall not exceed the base of the
second floor window sill in a structure of two or more stories or the base
of the roof or 25 feet, whichever is lower, in a one-story structure or a
structure without windows. The uppermost part of a freestanding sign shall
not exceed the base of the roof of the building or 15 feet, whichever is lower.
§ 91-130. Illuminated signs.
Illuminated signs shall be arranged to reflect the light and glare away from
the adjoining lots and streets. No sign shall be permitted with beacon or
flashing illumination. All signs lighted exteriorily shall be lighted from the
bottom and be shielded from adjoining lots, streets and interior drives and
with the light source angled no closer to the horizontal than two vertical to
one horizontal. All lights shall be either shielded or shall have a translucent
fixture to reduce off-side effects.
§ 91-131. Location.
A. No billboards shall be erected. No signs of any type shall be permitted
to obstruct driving vision, traffic signals, sight triangles, traffic
direction and identification signs.
B. A building permit shall be required for all signs over four square feet in
area.
A. Attached signs may be located anywhere that does not conflict with any
height, obstruction to vision and similar regulations of this Article.
Freestanding signs shall be located only in front yard and shall be no
closer to a side lot than the minimum side yard for the principal
§ 91-125 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-131
83:439
§ 91-132. Maintenance.
Signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good
condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.
§ 91-133. Number of signs restricted.
The number of signs shall be determined based on sign standards included
in this section and as outlined in the applicable zoning districts. Upon
site plan approval, shopping centers, industrial parks and similar projects
containing more than one owner or tenant may also have one freestanding
sign giving the name of the shopping center, industrial park or similar
project, but not listing each tenant or use.
§ 91-134. Real estate signs.
Real estate signs temporarily advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises or portion thereof shall be, if not attached to the building, set back
at least five feet from all street and property lines. Such signs shall not
exceed eight square feet in area for residential advertising nor 35 square
feet for commercial and industrial uses. Such signs shall be removed at the
expense of the advertiser within 15 days after the termination or completion
of the matter or business being advertised. All such signs do not require a
building permit. No more than one sign shall be permitted along each street
on which the building has frontage. Real estate signs shall be permitted only
on the lot which the sign is advertising.
§ 91-135. Sign area and dimension.
Sign area shall include all lettering, wording, coloring and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or
closed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing incidental
to the display itself. A freestanding sign with no lettering, wording, coloring
or accompanying designs on one side shall not have that blank side included
in the total area of the sign. Sign number designations; postal boxes; family
names on residences; on-site traffic directional and parking signs; signs
posting property as "private property," "no hunting" or similar purposes;
and "danger" signs around utility and other dangerareas are permitted
but are not to be considered in calculating the sign area. The maximum
dimension in any direction along the surface of the sign shall be 10 feet.
building but, in any event, no closer to a street right-of-way than one
foot and not located in any sight triangle.
B. Signs and sign structures of all types shall be located to allow an
unobstructed line of sight for at least 300 feet from the stop line of any
intersection of two streets or the intersection of a driveway and a street
and at least 100 feet from the intersection of two driveways within a
parking or loading area.
§ 91-131 FLORENCE CODE § 91-136
83:440
§ 91-136. Temporary signs.
No more than one sign advertising the name of the building under
construction, general contractor, subcontractor, financing institution, any
public agencies or officials and the professional personnel who worked
on the project are permitted on a construction site, beginning with the
issuance of a building permit and terminating with the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the structure or expiration of the building
permit, whichever comes first. Such signs shall not exceed an area of 32
square feet.
§ 91-136 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-136
83:441

ARTICLE XX
Recreation and Open Space Standards
§ 91-137. Objectives.
The following objectives are hereby established to guide and promote the
development of a coordinated and balanced open space recreation program
for the Township:
§ 91-138. Open space areas.
A. To provide for the recreational needs of a growing and diverse
population.
B. To reduce maintenance responsibilities.
C. To provide flexibility as recreation needs change over periods of time.
D. To provide alternative options in response to the individual physical
characteristics associated with development projects.
E. To prevent duplication or an imbalance of facilities.
F. To make facilities accessible to persons with handicapping conditions.
G. To provide for various densities, lot sizes, street patterns and aesthetic
factors that are suitable to the land and aesthetic factors that will
enhance each development.
A. Open space areas in residential subdivisions shall be reserved in
accordance with the requirements for individual zones listed in Articles
XXVI through XXXI and in accordance with the provisions of § 91-139.
B. One-half ( 1/2) the total area of any reserved open space must be used
for active recreation in accordance with the requirements of Article XX.
C. The open space requirement shall be considered to be waived when
enforcement of this requirement would prevent the construction of lowand
moderate-income housing.
D. Dedication of open space to the Township:
(1) Prior to final subdivision approval, the applicant shall agree in
writing to dedicate all open space areas within a proposed
subdivision to the Township, unless the Township specifically
declines to accept dedication of such areas pursuant to the
recommendation of the approving authority and the approval of the
governing body.
(2) In the event that the Township declines to accept the dedication of
open space within a subdivision, such open space shall be
dedicated to a homeowner's association created pursuant to
§ 91-59 of Article XIII.
§ 91-137 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-139
83:443
§ 91-139. Development of recreational facilities.
§ 91-140. Contribution in lieu of construction of active recreation;
Recreation Trust Fund. [Amended 2-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-3]
A. All recreational improvements shall be installed in accordance with a
schedule prepared by the Director of Recreation. The schedule shall be
reviewed and approved by the approving authority at the time of
preliminary approval.
B. As a minimum requirement, no less than 50% of all recreation
improvements shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for more than 75% of the total number of approved dwelling
units.
A. In lieu of construction of the active recreation, the developer may elect,
with approval by the approving authority, to make a contribution to the
Township Recreation Trust Fund according to the following schedule:
(1) Two hundred fifty dollars for one unit.
(2) Five hundred dollars for two units.
(3) Seven hundred fifty dollars for three units.
(4) One thousand five hundred dollars per unit for four or more units in
a major subdivision.
B. In lieu of requiring construction of the active recreation, the approving
authority may elect to require the developer to make a contribution to
the Township Recreation Trust Fund in an amount not less than the
developer's cost of construction of the active recreation, to be
supported by adequate cost documentation to be furnished to the
approving authority by the developer. In making this election, the
approving authority shall take into consideration both the active
recreational needs of the Township and the active recreational needs of
the development under review.
C. The Recreation Trust Fund shall be maintained by the Township
specifically for the periodic purchase, lease, acquisition and/or
maintenance of active recreation lands and improvements for the use of
Township residents. Contributions to the fund by developers shall be
paid as follows: one-half ( 1/2) of the required amount at the time of
final land use approval, and the balance per unit at the time of each
building permit, in addition to regular building permit fees.
D. The land in the development under review required to be used for
active recreation but for the contribution in lieu of construction of
active recreation shall instead be used for passive recreation, unless
the Township elects to construct active recreation facilities thereon at
Township expense.
§ 91-139 FLORENCE CODE § 91-141
83:444
§ 91-141. General standards.
A. Open space and recreation sites proposed for dedication shall be large,
useful and usable parcels, and not small, fragmented and isolated
pieces of land. If in the opinion of the approving authority the proposed
open space, recreation areas and facilities do not conform to the
Township's current programs and policies, that portion of the plan so
affected shall be revised by the applicant as directed by the approving
authority. Any recreation and open space modifications shall be deemed
to be minor plan amendments not having a major impact on the basic
housing concept and, therefore, shall not be subject to further public
hearings to accomplish such plan changes. As a minimum, any modified
and substituted facilities should be equivalent in dollar value, except for
the provision of night lighting.
B. The recreation and open space area shall not include rights-of-way,
easements (except easements across open space), retention and
detention ponds, man-made or natural, or floodplains.
C. The applicant should try to create open space and recreation parcels
not less than one-half ( 1/2) acre in size if possible. Wherever possible,
one open space recreation site per development should be provided.
D. All proposed recreation areas shall have minimum grades sufficient to
permit active recreation facilities. All recreation areas and open space
shall have a detailed grading plan submitted at the time of preliminary
application.
E. The method of preserving such areas for recreation and open space
shall be by dedication to the Township or a homeowners association or
other means approved by the approving authority.
F. In the selection of the location of such open spaces, consideration shall
be given to the preservation of natural features. With respect to open
areas, and accessways where deemed necessary by the approving
authority, such areas shall be covered with approved plantings such as
seedlings or permanent ground cover that will eliminate repetitive
maintenance such as grass cutting. All stream banks and swales shall
be covered with a maintenance-free ground cover and/or suitable
engineering improvement, such as riprap, as required by the approving
authority. Slopes flatter than 5:1 may be in grass.
G. Minimum facilities.
(1) The developer shall install as a minimum the following recreation
facilities or the equivalent if approved by the approving authority
on the land which has been set aside for these purposes:
§ 91-141 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-141
83:445
§ 91-142. Playgrounds.
Number of
Dwelling
Units
Playground
Tennis
Courts
Basketball
and/or
Hockey
Courts
Ballfield
and/or
Soccer and/
or Football
1 to 24 1
25 to 100 1 1
101 to 150 1 1 2
151 to 200 2 2 2 1
201 to 300 2 2 2 1
301 to 350 2 2 3 1
351 to 400 2 3 3 2
(2) The mix of facilities shall be determined by the approving authority.
H. Each recreation area shall also contain one freestanding shelter
building as manufactured by Gametime, #2824 or equivalent.
I. The size of the ballfields and baselines and soccer and football fields
shall be determined by the approving authority.
J. The playgrounds shall be one or more of the models shown in the
construction specifications or equivalent as determined by the Planning
Board.
K. Unless waived by the approving authority, all facilities, except
playgrounds, shall be lighted in accordance with the following
guidelines:
(1) The number and type of existing and lighted facilities in the
neighborhood.
(2) The proximity to adjacent residential dwellings.
(3) The anticipated service level.
(4) The need for lighted facilities according to the following list in
order of priority:
(a) Ballfields.
(b) Basketball courts.
(c) Tennis courts.
(d) Hockey courts.
L. Wherever possible, priority shall be given to locating playgrounds in
wooded areas and adjacent to local residential streets.
§ 91-141 FLORENCE CODE § 91-142
83:446
§ 91-143. Tennis courts.
A. If required by the approving authority, the playground shall be enclosed
with a four-foot-high galvanized chain link fence, 9-gauge, green vinylcoated,
with a thirty-six-inch-wide gate.
B. If required by the approving authority, Wollmanized pressure treated
railroad ties shall be located completely around the perimeter of the
fencing except at the gate opening.
C. If required by the approving authority a six-inch deep sand blanket shall
be provided for playgrounds located in open areas. Underdrains shall
be provided if required by the approving authority engineer. In wooded
areas safety surfaces consisting of Goff's infield mix or equivalent may
be required around individual pieces of play equipment.
D. Playgrounds in open areas shall be provided with no less than eight
deciduous shade trees located near benches, tables and recreation
equipment. The trees shall have a minimum caliper of two inches and
shall be staked and protected with wire mesh to a height of six feet.
E. The sidewalk shall be extended to the perimeter of the play equipment
safety area and rest area as required by the approving authority.
A. All tennis courts shall be regulation size and shall be oriented on a
north-south axis. The blacktop and color coating shall be extended one
foot beyond the fence line.
B. The courts shall be enclosed with a ten-foot-high, 9-gauge green vinylcoated
galvanized chain link fence. The bottom of the fencing shall be a
uniform one inch from the court surface at all locations. Line posts are
to be a minimum two and one-half (2 1/2) inches outside diameter,
terminal posts a minimum three inches outside diameter with brace
assembly, and top rail a minimum one and five-eighths ( 1 5/8) inches
outside diameter. Posts shall be evenly spaced no further apart than 10
feet on center, and shall provide at least 36 inches setting in concrete.
Gate openings shall be not less than seven feet wide with a double door.
C. Tennis courts shall be in a true plane and graded side to side with a
cross slope of 1%.
D. The courts shall be four inches of bituminous stabilized base course on
a properly prepared subgrade acceptable to the approving authority
Engineer, one and one-half (1 1/2) inches thick FABC-1 leveling course;
and a one-inch SP-1 top course coated with a two-colored sealer as
approved by the approving authority. The sealer shall be Monsey
Decoralt or an equivalent approved by the approving authority
engineer. Underdrains and granular subbase may be required as
determined by the approving authority engineer.
E. The courts shall be lined in accordance with the rules of the United
States Lawn Tennis Association. The paint shall be white line paint by
§ 91-142 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-143
83:447
§ 91-144. Basketball and hockey courts.
Monsey Decoralt or an equivalent approved by the approving authority
engineer.
F. Tennis court nets shall be nylon, as manufactured by Gametime, No.
329 or an equivalent as approved by the approving authority.
G. Tennis posts shall be baked-on enamel with enclosed ratchets and
manufactured by Chevron, or an equivalent approved by the approving
authority. Posts shall be set in concrete.
H. An eight-foot aluminum bench with back support shall be located near
each gate entrance and be accessible from the walk. The benches shall
face the courts and shall be model No. 881 manufactured by Gametime,
or an equivalent approved by the approving authority.
I. Signs shall be located on each court identifying the court number, rules
and regulations. The sign material, size, color, location, method of
fastening, lettering and message content shall be as specified by the
approving authority.
J. Deciduous trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet to a tennis
court fence. All existing trees shall be trimmed to prevent overhanging
branches.
K. Lighted tennis courts shall provide a minimum of 14 footcandles
maintained average in the court area at grade level, using metal halide
lamps. Every two courts shall be on a separate electric control system.
Each control system will consist of an astronomical dial time clock; a
waterproof push-button surface-mounted station limited to turning the
light on only, with provisions for padlocking; and a watertight cast
aluminum meter cabinet with manual on/off switch and provision for a
key lock. The meter cabinet shall be baked green enamel. Poles shall be
Corten steel self-weathering, except that aluminum poles shall be used
when the poles are located on the playing surface.
A. The dimensions of the paved basketball court area shall be a minimum
of 60 feet by 94 feet and larger, 74 feet by 108 feet if the same court is
to be used for hockey. Courts shall be oriented on a north-south axis.
B. Nine-gauge green vinyl-coated galvanized chain link fence shall be
used, subject to all of the specifications of § 91-143B. The fencing shall
be located at the edge of the paved area and shall be one inch off the
surface.
C. The courts shall be four inches of bituminous stabilized base course on
a properly prepared subgrade acceptable to the approving authority
engineer, and a one-and-one-half-inch thick FABC-1 top course. Courts
shall be in a true plane and graded side to side with a cross slope of 1%.
§ 91-143 FLORENCE CODE § 91-144
83:448
§ 91-145. Baseball, soccer and football fields.
D. The basketball courts shall be lined with two-inch-wide painted lines
with court dimensions of fifty by eighty-four (50 x 84) feet,as measured
from the inside of the court lines. All other line locations shall be in
accordance with standard design practice as approved by the approving
authority.
E. Basketball posts shall be Gametime 460, goals and nets shall be
Gametime 423 and the backboard shall be Gametime 853 or equivalent
for all items if approved by the approving authority.
F. Lighted courts shall be as specified in § 91-143K.
G. Signs and tree planting, if required, shall be as specified in § 91-143J.
H. A bench for each court shall be included as specified in § 91-143H.
I. The dimensions of the paved hockey court area shall be a minimum of
80 feet by 200 feet. Courts shall be oriented on a north-south axis.
J. If required by the approving authority, curbing shall be placed around
the court perimeter to enable the courts to be used for ice skating;
specifications to be determined by the approving authority engineer.
K. The court shall be enclosed with a four-foot-high, 9-gauge green vinylcoated
galvanized chain link fence. The bottom of the fence shall meet
the court surfacing. The remainder of fencing shall be subject to all of
the specifications of § 91-143B.
L. The courts shall be four inches of bituminous stabilized base course on
a properly prepared subgrade acceptable to the approving authority
engineer; and a one-and-one-half-inch-thick FABC-1 top course. The
blacktop shall extend one foot beyond the fence line. Courts shall be in
a true plane and graded side to side with a cross slope of 1%.
M. The courts shall be lined with two-inch wide painted white lines. All line
locations shall be in accordance with standard design practice as
approved by the approving authority.
N. Play equipment shall be as specified by the approving authority.
A. All baseball fields shall be designed as specified in the design
specifications, except that the approving authority may specify altered
dimensions for baseball and softball fields.
B. The entire infield shall be skinned within a radius measuring 95 feet
from the front center of the pitcher's plate.
C. The infield area shall contain infield mix, equal to or better than Best
Top as furnished by Jesse Morie and Son, Inc.
D. Construction of the infield shall be as follows: The skinned subbase area
should be graded to within four inches of finished grade and contoured
§ 91-144 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-145
83:449
with a 2% slope from the pitcher's mound to the edge of the outfield
grass and to a point six feet beyond the baselines and home plate.
Stones should be removed and a soil sterilizer applied. The base should
be lightly scarified and infield mix applied uniformly to a depth of
six inches and then mat dragged to a smooth level grade. Lastly the
skinned area should be moistened with a fine spray to a depth of one
and one-half (1 1/2) inches and rolled to a uniform smooth surface.
E. The pitcher's plate and home plate shall be supplied by the applicant.
The pitcher's plate shall be "SAV-A-PITCH" and the home plate shall be
"SAV-A-LEG" as manufactured by Robert Sisco Associates or equivalent
as approved by the approving authority.
F. The backstop shall be made of 9-gauge chain link fencing with bottom
rails. It shall be 12 feet high and 12 feet wide with wings 12 feet high
and 10 feet wide on both sides and shall have a slanted eight-foot
overhang. Knuckled side line fence, eight feet high and 40 feet long
with bottom rails, shall be installed parallel to both wing walls.
G. All upright pipes are to be three inches outside diameter. All cross bars
and braces are to be one and five-eighths (1 5/8) inches outside
diameter. All upright pipes shall be set three feet into a concrete
foundation 12 inches in diameter and 42 inches deep. All pipes shall be
standard weight Schedule 40. All materials shall be galvanized and all
cross bars and bracing shall face away from the playing area.
H. The height of the pitcher's mound shall be 10 inches above the infield
and shall be composed of 45% clay and 55% fine gravel. The same
material mix shall be used in the batter's boxes. A slope of one inch per
foot should start six inches in front of the pitcher's plate and extend for
six feet.
I. All fields shall have a north-south orientation with home plate facing
north where possible.
J. Outfield distances shall not be less than 300 feet from home plate.
K. Off-street parking shall be provided if required by the Township.
L. The outfield shall consist of four inches of fertilized topsoil that is
graded and hydroseeded to create a smooth playing surface. The seed
mixture shall be 60% Kentucky 31 tall fescue, 20% Kentucky bluegrass
and 20% fine textured rye grass.
M. Two player's benches per field shall be provided as manufactured by
Mexico Forge No. 155-115, or equivalent as approved by the Planning
Board.
N. One portable all-aluminum bleacher shall be provided, as manufactured
by Gametime, model No. 2308, with one portability unit No. 2316 or
equivalent as approved by the approving authority.
§ 91-145 FLORENCE CODE § 91-145
83:450
§ 91-146. Softball, soccer and football fields.
All softball, soccer and football fields shall be designed and constructed as
specified in § 91-145, except as herein modified:
§ 91-147. Other recreation facilities.
O. First priority shall be given to designing separate fields with no overlap.
Where overlapping occurs, there shall be not less than 10 feet between
the baseball infield area and the soccer-football playing area. The
applicant shall provide one pair of removable combination footballsoccer
goals with nets, sleeves and caps as manufactured by Mexico
Forge No. 910-000 and No. 920-080 or equivalent as approved by the
approving authority.
P. Lighted baseball fields shall provide a minimum of 30 footcandles
maintained average for the infield and 20 footcandles maintained
average for the outfield. Corten Steel self-weathering or aluminum
poles and metal halide lamps shall be used.
A. The entire infield shall be skinned within a radius measuring 55 feet
from the front center of the pitcher's plate.
B. There will not be any pitcher's mound.
C. Outfield distances shall be 275 feet desired, 225 minimum from home
plate.
D. The distances between bases will be 60 feet or such other dimension as
specified by the approving authority.
E. The distance of the backstop from home plate shall be as specified by
the approving authority.
F. Lighted softball fields shall provide a minimum of 20 footcandles
maintained average for the infield and 15 footcandles maintained
average for the outfield. Corten Steel self-weathering poles or
aluminum poles and metal halide lamps shall be used.
G. The standards set forth in § 91-145 shall be followed where applicable.
H. Portable bleachers shall be added as specified in § 91-145N.
A. All recreation facilities shall be designed with minimum grades to
facilitate access by people with handicapping conditions
B. Concrete bituminous sidewalks not less than four feet wide shall be
constructed to connect recreation facilities with adjacent parking lots
and residential sidewalks. Buffer trees and maintenance-free ground
cover shall be placed in the open space access areas when the sidewalk
is contained in an open space access less than 50 feet wide and is
between residential lots. Such sidewalks shall be constructed to the
actual playing facility and spectator areas.
§ 91-145 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-147
83:451
§ 91-148. Tot lots.
Construction specifications for tot lot designs shall be as follows:
Model A
Gametime
Quantity Equipment No. Description
2 8717 Benches
1 8731 Trash receptacle
1 1312 Wheelchair picnic table
1 5722 3-level balance beam
1 280 Vertical tire mate
C. Four-inch-thick concrete pads shall be placed under all benches and
picnic tables and extend four feet out on three sides and one foot to the
rear to provide a stable area for wheelchairs on all sides, to reduce lawn
maintenance and to provide a continuous connection to the walkways.
The concrete shall be sealed with epoxy.
D. Evergreen buffer plantings shall be provided wherever necessary to
create a visual and noise barrier between adjacent residential
dwellings.
E. Landscaping of recreation sites shall be with maintenance-free ground
cover as approved by the approving authority.
F. All facilities shall be designed in accordance with barrier-free design
regulations.
G. The following specific standards shall be followed for designing
facilities to meet the needs of handicapped persons:
(1) Handicapped parking stalls with ramps shall be provided.
(2) Barrier-free routes of travel with no obstructions and minimal
grade changes shall be provided.
(3) Plantings next to walkways shall be species selected that will not
interfere with handicapped travel.
H. All routes of travel, pedestrian and vehicular, shall be illuminated
wherever use after dark is anticipated. Lighting intensity and design
shall be approved by the approving authority engineer.
I. The quantity and location of gate openings shall be as determined by
the approving authority. Gate handles shall be located 32 inches from
the ground and sixteen-inch-high metal kickplates shall be provided
across the entire width of gates.
§ 91-147 FLORENCE CODE § 91-148
83:452
Model A
Gametime
Quantity Equipment No. Description
1 196 or 660 Minibike saddle mate or
swinging gate
2 5656 3-place wood swings
3 2656 Seat packages
1 5797 Wood climber
3 2617 Seat packages
1 5655 C module climber
1 6511 Spiral slide
1 1400-000 Tumble gym (Mexico
Forge)
1 M-10-EM Merry-go-round (J.E.
Burke)
Model B
Gametime
Quantity Equipment No. Description
2 5906 Multilevel platforms
2 5904 Platforms
2 5934 Suspension bridge link
1 5928 8-foot trapeze swing
1 5932 8-foot horizontal ladder
1 5912 10-foot spiral slide
2 5922 Tire swing attachment
1 5357 Arch climber
1 8938 Hi side slide
2 5290 Climbing poles
1 5935 Log roll
1 5921 8-foot, three-inch place
swing
3 5945 Access equipment
3 5944 Access equipment
4 5939 Enclosures
1 5938 Enclosures
2 8717 Benches
1 8731 Trash receptacle
§ 91-148 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-148
83:453
Model B
Gametime
Quantity Equipment No. Description
2 1312 Wheelchair picnic table
3 2617 Seat packages
1 5722 3-level balance beam
Model C
Gametime
Quantity Equipment No. Description
2 8717 Benches
1 8731 Trash receptacle
1 1312 Wheelchair picnic table
1 5781 Large staircase climber
1 5784 Double slide climber
1 M-10-EM Merry-go-round (J.E.
Burke)
2 5656 Wood swings
3 2656 Seat packages
4 2617 Seat packages
1 5682 3-way chin bar
1 5689 Ring climber
1 5741 Climbing pole
1 5710 Horizontal ladder
1 5691 Great wall
1 1400-000 Tumble gym (Mexico
Forge)
Model D
Gametime
Quantity Equipment No. Description
2 8717 Benches
1 8731 Trash receptacle
1 1312 Wheelchair picnic table
1 5787 Swing bridge climber
1 5308 Platform
1 5302 Platform
1 5366 Log C module
§ 91-148 FLORENCE CODE § 91-148
83:454
Model D
Gametime
Quantity Equipment No. Description
1 5343 3-piece wood swing link
3 2617 Seat packages
4 5391 Enclosures
1 5396 Handhold access
1 5358 Log roll
1 5355 Horizontal ladder
1 5357 Arch
1 5389 Access
1 5325 Spiral slide
1 1400-000 Tumble gym (Mexico
Forge)
§ 91-148 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-148
83:455

Part 3
Zoning
ARTICLE XXI
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 91-149. Establishment; membership; terms; organization.
§ 91-150. Powers and duties; variances.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment, also known as the "Board of
Adjustment," is hereby established and shall consist of seven regular
members and not more than two alternate members. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the
authority appointing them as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2".
B. The members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the
governing body. The terms of the regular members first appointed
under this chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest
practicable extent, the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first four years after their appointment. Thereafter, the
terms of each regular member shall be for four years. The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that
in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed
exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of each alternate member shall
be for two years. No regular member or alternate member may hold any
elective office or position under the Township. No regular member or
alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he
has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. A
regular member or alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests it, be removed by the governing body for cause. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term held by a regular
member or alternate member shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its members and select a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee.
D. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
§ 91-149 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-150
83:457
by the Zoning Officer based on or made in the enforcement of Part
3 of this chapter.
(2) Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of Part 3 of this
chapter, requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map75 or Part 3 of
this chapter or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such Board is authorized to pass by Part 3, Zoning, or Part 1,
Article XI, Official Map, of this chapter.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situations or conditions of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation pursuant to Part 3 of this
chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict application of
such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship;
provided, however, that no variance shall be granted under this
subsection to allow a structure or use in a district restricted against
such structure or use; and provided, further, that the proposed
development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with such
the Planning Board shall review a request for a variance pursuant
to§ 91-33A(1) of this chapter.
(a) Any bulk variance granted under the terms of this section
without concurrent site plan or subdivision approval shall
expire one year after the date of approval unless the use is
commenced prior thereto or an extension of time is granted by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(b) Any bulk variance granted under the terms of this section
together with site plan or subdivision approval shall expire two
years after the date of approval unless the use is commenced
prior thereto or an extension of time is granted by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(4) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds ( 2/3)
of the full authorized membership of the Board.
B. Variances.
(1) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief:
75.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included in the pocket at the end of this Code.
§ 91-150 FLORENCE CODE § 91-150
83:458
(a) Can be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good; and
(b) Will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone
plan and Part 3 of this chapter.
(2) In the case of an application for a variance pursuant to
§ 91-150A(4) of this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment that,
notwithstanding the fact that the proposed use is prohibited in the
zoning district, it would not be inconsistent with such prohibition to
allow such use on applicant's property. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall evaluate all adverse impacts of the applicant's use
on adjacent and neighborhood properties, as well as all beneficial
effects, and shall not grant the variance unless it concludes, on the
basis of clear and specific findings set forth in its resolution, that
the benefits outweigh the detriments.
(3) Additional standards for approval of use or "d" variances.76 In
addition to the requirements set forth in § 91-150B of this chapter,
no variances shall be granted pursuant to § 91-150A(4) of this
chapter unless the applicant proves, and the Board of Adjustment
finds, one of the following ultimate facts:
(a) The proposed use is:
[1] An "inherently beneficial" use as determined by the courts.
[2] The proposed use, if located at the applicant's site,
advances the purposes of the zoning plan and Part 3 of this
chapter because such site is particularly suitable for such
use; proof of the general social benefits of the proposed
use without reference to its location at the applicant's site
will not meet this standard; or
[3] The applicant's property is incapable of being used in any
manner that conforms with the use regulations for the
zoning district in which it is located.
(4) Duration of use variance.
(a) Any use variance granted under the terms of this section
without concurrent site plan or subdivision approval shall
expire one year after the date of approval unless the use is
commenced prior thereto or an extension of time is granted by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(b) Any use variance granted under the terms of this section
together with site plan or subdivision approval shall expire two
years after the date of approval unless the use is commenced
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
§ 91-150 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-150
83:459
prior thereto or an extension of time is granted by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(c) When the use of a property is abandoned for more than one
year, which use was the subject of a use variance, the variance
shall be deemed to have lapsed. Thereafter, the use may not be
resumed without Zoning Board of Adjustment approval as
provided for by § 91-150A(4).
(5) Duration of variances other than use variances. [Added 5-5-1999
by Ord. No. 1999-9]
(a) Any variance other than a use variance which has been granted
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall expire one year after
the date of publication of the decision granting the variance,
unless the construction for which the variance was granted
shall have been commenced.
(b) Any variance other than a use variance which has been granted
by the Planning Board in conjunction with an approved minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days after the date on which the
resolution of municipal approval of the minor subdivision is
adopted, unless the subdivision shall have been perfected by
the filing and recording of a plan or deed as required by law.
(c) Any variance other than a use variance which has been granted
by the Planning Board in conjunction with an approved major
subdivision shall expire upon expiration of the rights conferred
by the decision granting subdivision approval, or upon
expiration of final approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
(d) Any variance other than a use variance which has been granted
by the Planning Board in conjunction with approval of a site
plan shall expire and shall be treated as having been
abandoned on the same date that approval of the site plan shall
expire as provided by law.
(e) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, may for good cause extend the expiration date of a
variance other than a use variance for not more than one
additional year. Where a variance has been granted in
conjunction with a major subdivision or major site plan
approval and the applicant, upon application for extension of a
variance, proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning
Board that applicant was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with development because of
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the applicant applied promptly
for and diligently pursued these approvals, the applicant shall
be entitled to an extension equal to the period of time applicant
was barred or prevented from proceeding with development.
§ 91-150 FLORENCE CODE § 91-150
83:460
§ 91-151. Employment of special staff and other personnel.
The Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, a
professional planner, a professional engineer and other staff and services
as it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the
amount appropriated by the Mayor and Council for its use.
§ 91-152. Appeals; applications for development.
C. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency, including the Planning Board pursuant to § 91-156E
of this chapter, for its report, provided that such reference shall not
extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall act.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of the Construction Code Official or
Zoning Officer of the Township based on or made in the enforcement of
Part 3, Zoning, or the Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20
days by filing a notice of appeal with the Construction Code Official or
Zoning Officer specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.77
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to the Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer.
C. If an application for development is filed with the Board of Adjustment,
whether or not an appeal from a decision of the Construction Code
Official or Zoning Officer is also taken, the applicant shall submit three
copies of his completed application to the Administrative Officer. The
time for the Board's review shall not begin to run until the submission
of a complete application with the required fee. Unless the applicant is
informed, in writing, by the Administrative Officer within 45 days of the
actual submission of the application that it is incomplete, said
application shall be deemed complete as of the date it was submitted.
D. In reviewing variance applications, the reviewing authority shall
determine that sufficient information has been submitted for the
reviewing authority to fully evaluate the hardship and/or special
reasons which would require relief from the zoning standards of this
chapter.
(1) Bulk variances. An applicant for bulk variance or variances shall
submit the following:
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 91-150 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-152
83:461
(a) The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
(b) The application and escrow fees required pursuant to § 91-24
of this chapter.
(c) Ten copies of a boundary survey of the property by a licensed
New Jersey land surveyor.
(d) Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes on said property
are paid to date.78
(e) A sketch plan outlining the location, nature and extent of any
variance or variances requested.
(f) A sketch of the proposed addition or new construction for
which a variance is sought, demonstrating how same is
architecturally consistent with the existing structure or an
improvement thereof.
(2) Use variance (with minor subdivision or site plan). An applicant for
a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d which will also
require minor subdivision or minor site plan approval shall submit
the information required for bulk variances in Subsection D(1)
above, and in addition the application shall provide a written
statement delineating the exact proposed use requested.
(3) Variances (with major subdivision, major site plan and/or
conditional use). An applicant for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c or 55D-70d, including use variances, which will also
require major subdivision, major site plan and/or conditional use
approval shall submit the following:
(a) The required application form supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
(b) The application and escrow fees required pursuant to § 91-24
of this chapter.
(c) A certified survey of the property.
(d) A certificate by the Tax Collector that all taxes on said property
are paid to date.
(e) A variance plan showing the limits of the proposed
construction.
(f) Architectural renderings and a sketch plat, including, at a
minimum, the data required under § 91-54 which the applicant
will accept as binding as a condition of approval of any
78.Editor's Note: See also Article II of Ch. 129, Taxation.
§ 91-152 FLORENCE CODE § 91-152
83:462
§ 91-153. Time limit for decisions.
§ 91-154. Appeals.
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and, to that end, have all the powers of the
Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 91-155. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal to the Board shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action with respect to which the decision appealed from was made, unless
the Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer from whose action the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court
upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
§ 91-156. Additional powers.
subsequent application for major site plan, major subdivision
and/or conditional approval.
(g) An environmental impact statement pursuant to Article XVI.
(h) A written statement delineating the exact proposed use
requested.
E. The Administrative Officer shall distribute the application for review
and report and, where required, approval as follows:
(1) The Board of Adjustment.
(2) The Planning Board.
(3) The Zoning Board Engineer.
(4) The Township Health Officer.
(5) The Construction Code Official.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of the Construction
Code Official or Zoning Officer or the submission of a complete
application for development to the Board pursuant to § 91-152B of this
chapter.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 91-152 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-156
83:463
§ 91-157. Period of approval.
A. Sections 91-152 through 91-155 of this chapter shall apply to the power
of the Board of Adjustment to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to § 91-42 of this chapter for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to § 91-41 of this chapter; or
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to§ 91-44 of this chapter for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Part 2 of this chapter or
conditional use approval pursuant to this chapter whenever the Board
of Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a variance
pursuant to § 91-150A(4) of this chapter.
C. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
Subsection B of this section, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the Administrative Officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required and shall be so accepted by the Clerk of the County of
Burlington for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
D. Whenever review or approval of the application by the Burlington
County Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L.
1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the Board of
Adjustment shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely
receipt of a favorable report on the application by the Planning Board or
approval by the Planning Board by its failure to report thereupon within
the required time.
E. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency for its report, provided that such reference shall not
extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall act.
A. Any variance from the terms of this Part 3 hereinafter granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board pursuant to the
authority contained under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., permitting the
erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting the
§ 91-156 FLORENCE CODE § 91-157
83:464
specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless said
construction or alteration shall have actually been commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance, or unless such
permitted use shall have actually been commenced within one year
from the date of entry of the judgment and determination of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from
the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Planning Board to the governing body or to a court
of competent jurisdiction until the determination any matters of such
appeal or proceeding.
B. In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from a proceeding with the
development otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action
instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or other party to
protect the public health and welfare or by a directive or order issued
by any state agency, political subdivision or court of competent
jurisdiction to protect the public health or welfare and the developer is
otherwise ready, willing and able to proceed with said development, the
running of the period of approval under this chapter or under any
ordinance repealed by this chapter, as the case may be, shall be
suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or such
directive or order is in effect.
§ 91-157 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-157
83:465

ARTICLE XXII
General Provisions
§ 91-158. Construal of provisions; greater restrictions to prevail.
The provisions of this Part 3 shall be held to be minimum requirements.
When this chapter imposes a greater restriction than other provisions of
law, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 91-159. Prohibited uses. [Amended 1-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-17; 5-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11]
§ 91-159.1. Businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. [Added
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-28]
Any business which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and which is
located in a residential zoning district, either as a preexisting,
nonconforming use or by any valid use variance, shall provide full menu
service at restaurant table seating in not less than 70% of the public usable
floor space, and that no more than the remaining 30% shall be used for the
bar area. The public usable floor space shall not include areas set aside for
kitchen or restroom facilities.
§ 91-160. Multiple uses of commercial and industrial sites.
[Amended 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
Multiple uses of commercial and industrial sites, shopping centers and
industrial complexes receiving site plan approval may have more than one
building on a lot and more than one use within a building.
§ 91-161. Principal uses. [Amended 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
No lot shall have situated upon it more than one principal permitted use.
No more than one principal building shall be permitted on one lot, except
that shopping centers, industrial complexes, apartment complexes and
townhouse developments receiving site plan approval may be permitted
to have more than one building on a lot in accordance with the zoning
district in which it is located. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the HC Highway Commercial and the SMO Special Manufacturing Overlay
Districts.
A. All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter shall be prohibited.
B. Truck stops prohibited. The Township Council finds that truck stops are
not compatible with the permitted land uses in the Township of
Florence; that truck stops present unique and difficult safety issues
relating to ingress to sites and egress from sites onto highways; issues
related to traffic circulation on developed sites; interaction between
trucks or oversized vehicles and automobiles, both on the site and at
nearby intersections; and that truck stops are, therefore, prohibited in
all zoning districts of the Township of Florence.
§ 91-158 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-162
83:467
§ 91-162. Accessory buildings. [Added 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-2]
An accessory building attached to a principal building is part of the
principal building and shall adhere to the yard requirements for the
principal building. No building permits shall be issued for an accessory
building prior to the issuance of a building permit for the principal building.
Construction of the principal building shall precede or coincide with the
construction of the accessory building, otherwise the building permit for
the accessory building may be revoked. The accessory building shall be
compatible in appearance with the area in which it is located. No accessory
building in any zone or district shall exceed 600 square feet unless the lot
exceeds three acres in size. No accessory building shall be located closer to
the front property line than the rear building line of the principal building
and no closer to any other side or rear property line than the height of
said accessory building, except that an accessory storage building of a
residential structure, which accessory building is less than 100 square feet
in area and less than 10 feet in height from its uppermost projection to its
base at ground level, shall be located no nearer than six feet to any rear
or side property line or no nearer to a street than a principal building to
which it is accessory. Garages may be brought to the front property line of
the principal building provided the garage is not less than 240 square feet
in area.
§ 91-162 FLORENCE CODE § 91-162
83:468
ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Districts; District Boundaries
§ 91-163. Districts established, boundaries. [Amended 8-5-1992 by
Ord. No. 1992-28; 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
§ 91-164. Compliance with district regulations and restrictions
required; exception.
A. Districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the area of the Township of
Florence is hereby divided into zones or districts, hereinafter referred
to as "districts," consisting of 13 classes designated as follows:
[Amended 3-4-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
R Low-Density Residential [Amended 8-4-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-27]
RA Low-Density Residential
RB Medium-to-High-Density Residential [Amended 8-4-1999
by Ord. No. 1999-27]
RC High-Density Residential
RD High-Density Residential, Municipal Affordable Housing
RD-1 High-Density Residential-Age-Restricted Affordable Housing
AGR Agricultural
HC Highway Commercial
NC Neighborhood Commercial
OP Office Park
GM General Manufacturing
SM Special Manufacturing
P Park
H Historic
S School District [Added 3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
RAA Active Adult Residential [Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
B. District boundaries. The boundaries of the districts are hereby
established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map, Florence
Township, Burlington County, New Jersey," prepared by Dante Guzzi
Engineering Associates, dated July 1, 1999, and revised December 7,
2005. [Amended 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2; 2-19-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-6; 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27; 7-3-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-19; 3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6; 9-17-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-25; 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18; 5-4-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12; 12-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-30]
§ 91-163 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-164
83:469
§ 91-165. Interpretation of boundaries.
District boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines, streams
and lot or property lines unless otherwise indicated by dimensions on
zoning development maps. Any dimensions shown shall be in feet, measured
horizontally and measured from the street right-of-way lines even if the
center line of that street serves as a district line. The location of any
disputed zoning district line shall be determined by the Board of
Adjustment. District lines extend vertically in both directions from ground
level.
A. On and after the effective date of this chapter, no person, unless
authorized otherwise by law or by order of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, shall occupy or use any land or construct or locate any
building within the bounds of said Township of Florence except in
conformity with the restrictions and regulations established by this
chapter for the district in which such land or building is located and in
conformity with all other pertinent terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this chapter, however, shall be deemed to prevent normal
maintenance and repair, structural alteration in, or the reconstruction
of a noncomplying building, provided that such action does not increase
or extend the degree of or create any new nonconformity with regard to
the regulations pertaining to such buildings or the lot upon which they
are constructed (e.g., an undersized house, situated closer to the street
line than now specified may have an addition on the back, provided that
side and rear yards are not invaded); except that the floor area of a
single-family house that occupies a lot that is smaller than the minimum
lot area for the district in which the house is located, may be increased
by not more than 20% of the floor area existing as of the date of
adoption of this chapter, provided that all other provisions of this
chapter are complied with.
C. On and after the effective date of this chapter, no person, unless
authorized by law or by order of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
whether acting as agent, architect, engineer, contractor or otherwise,
shall aid or assist any person in the occupation of or use of any land or
in the construction or location of any building within the bounds of said
Township of Florence unless such building is in conformity with the
restrictions and regulations established by this chapter for the district
in which such land or building or use is located and in conformity with
all other pertinent terms and provisions of this chapter, and the
construction of which or a portion of which has been begun or for which
a contract or contracts have been let pursuant to a permit issued prior
to the passage of this chapter may be completed and used in
accordance with the plans for which said permit was granted.
A. Where a zoning district line divides a lot, the district may be modified
by the owner by moving the district line up to the property line,
provided that the property line is within 20 feet of the district line as
§ 91-164 FLORENCE CODE § 91-165
83:470
shown on the map. A use permitted in this district so extended shall
thereafter be a permitted use in the extended area.
B. Where a street or public way serves as a zoning district line and it is
lawfully vacated, the former center line shall be considered the zoning
district line.
§ 91-165 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-165
83:471

ARTICLE XXIV
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
§ 91-166. Nonconforming lots.
§ 91-167. Continuation of lawful uses.
The lawful use of land, buildings or structures existing on the effective date
of this chapter may be continued although they may not conform to the
provisions of this chapter, provided that none shall be enlarged, extended,
relocated, converted to another use or altered except in conformity with this
chapter and except as permitted herein. Land on which a nonconforming
use or structure is located shall not be reduced in size nor shall any already
nonconforming use be made more nonconforming in any manner.
§ 91-168. Abandonment.
A nonconforming structure or lot shall be considered abandoned if:
A. Where two or more contiguous lots are or become under the same
ownership and one or more of them does not conform with the
minimum lot area or lot dimension requirements of the zone in which
they are located, the contiguous lots shall be considered as a single lot
and the provisions of subsection C shall not apply; provided, however,
that this subsection shall not apply to contiguous lots all of which were
created by official action of a Florence Township Land Use Board, taken
during the period from September 1, 1976, to November 26, 1991,
inclusive, nor to vacant conforming lots that are contiguous to
developed nonconforming lots; and further provided, that this
subsection shall not apply so as to create a violation of § 91-161.
[Amended 7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-18; 8-4-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-27]
B. Any nonconforming lot existing on the effective date of this chapter
which does not meet the definition of the previous subsection may have
a building permit issued for a permitted use without an appeal to the
Board of Adjustment, provided that the building coverage is not
exceeded and the parking and yard requirements are met.
C. Whenever land has been dedicated or conveyed to the Township by the
owner of a lot in order to meet the minimum street width requirements
or to implement the Official Map or Master Plan and which lot existed
on the effective date of this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall not
withhold a building or occupancy permit when the lot depth or area was
rendered substandard due to such dedication and where the owner has
no adjacent lands to meet the minimum requirements.
A. The use is terminated by the owner.
B. The nonconforming use involving a structure is discontinued for 12
consecutive months.
§ 91-166 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-168
83:473
§ 91-169. Conversion to permitted use.
Any nonconforming building, structure or use changed to conform to the
provisions of this chapter shall not be changed back to a nonconforming
status.
§ 91-170. Restoration.
§ 91-171. Repairs and maintenance.
Repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconforming use, structure
or lot, provided that the repair and maintenance work do not change the
use, expand the building or the functional use of the building, increase the
area of a lot used for a nonconforming purpose or otherwise increase the
nonconformity in any manner.
C. The nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of 12 months.
A. Any nonconforming building, structure or use which has been
condemned or damaged by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act of
God shall be examined by the following three people:
(1) The Construction Code Official.
(2) The owner or an architect or engineer selected by the owner.
(3) If the Construction Code Official does not agree with the owner or
an architect or an engineer selected by the owner, then a third
person agreed to by the Zoning Officer and the owner, whose fee
shall be agreed to and shall be paid in equal portions by the
Township and the owner.
B. If, in the opinion of the majority of the above three people, the value of
repairing the condition is greater than 50% of the value of replacing the
entire structure, it shall be considered completely destroyed and may
be rebuilt to the original specifications only upon approval of a use
variance as provided by state statutes.
C. Where the value of repairing the condition is determined to be less than
50% of the value of replacing the entire structure, the nonconforming
structure or use may be rebuilt and used for the same purpose as
before, provided that it does not exceed the height, area and volume of
the original structure.
D. The percent damaged shall be the current replacement costs of the
portion damaged or condemned, computed as a percentage of the
current total replacement cost of the entire structure, neither to include
the cost of the foundation.
§ 91-168 FLORENCE CODE § 91-172
83:474
§ 91-172. Sale.
Any nonconforming use, structure or lot may be sold and continue to
function in the same nonconforming manner.
§ 91-173. Nonconforming residential structures.
Any nonconforming residential structure may be enlarged without requiring
a variance from side or rear yard setback regulations, provided that such
enlargement or addition to such structure does not extend its existing front
dimension nor extend beyond the farthermost existing building line into the
side and/or rear yard area; and further provided that such residential use is
a conforming use.
§ 91-172 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-173
83:475

ARTICLE XXV
Zoning Permits79
[Added 8-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-15]
§ 91-174. Application; fee.
§ 91-175. (Reserved)
A. Whenever a zoning permit is required, an application shall be
submitted on the form established by the Zoning Officer, with the
approval of the Township Administrator, and shall include the following
information:
(1) The owner and the address of the premises where the use,
structure, fence or shed is to be located.
(2) The name and address of the company or person installing the use,
structure, fence or shed.
(3) Whenever the zoning permit is required for the placement of a
structure, fence or shed, the application shall have attached a copy
of the survey of the property showing the specific location, height
and design of the proposed structure, fence or shed and the streets
abutting and the nearest street intersection.
(4) Where appropriate for the identification of the design, the Zoning
Officer may require photographs of the style of the proposed
structure, fence or shed.
(5) Any deed restrictions affecting the property on which the structure,
fence or shed is to be erected or constructed shall not be
superseded by this section.
B. There is hereby established an application fee for a zoning permit as
established in Schedule A of Chapter 2 of the Code of the Township of
Florence. Zoning permit fees are charged in addition to any
construction code fees that may be required. [Amended 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-21; 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
C. No structure, fence or shed shall be constructed or maintained which is
not in accordance with the application and the zoning permit.
79.Editor's Note: Former Article XXV, Cluster Developments, was repealed 8-4-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-27.
§ 91-174 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-175
83:477

ARTICLE XXVI
R Low-Density Residential District80
§ 91-176. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide moderate growth area for singlefamily
residential dwellings and accessory uses incidental thereto with
provisions for clustering and the use of bonus densities.
§ 91-177. Permitted principal uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R District:
§ 91-178. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses in the R District shall be as follows:
A. Single-family residential detached dwellings.
B. Golf courses.
C. Municipal buildings.
D. Public parks and playgrounds.
E. Elementary, intermediate and secondary schools.
F. Firehouses and churches.
A. Private residential swimming pools. A wall of a swimming pool shall not
be located less than six feet from any rear or side property line or 10
feet from any alley or easement line. Swimming pools shall not be
located within any front yard setback. In addition to the application for
a construction permit, an applicant seeking to construct an in-ground
swimming pool must also include grading plans which illustrate the
proposed location of the pool as well as any appurtenances, and
existing and proposed grades, and which demonstrate the proposed
flow of surface drainage. The grading plan shall be signed and sealed by
a licensed New Jersey professional engineer and shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township Engineer to ensure that surface water flow is
not impacted and that adjoining properties will not be subject to runoff
beyond that which is existing prior to the installation of the in-ground
pool. Before the Construction Department issues a certificate of
approval, the applicant’s engineer must submit an as-built certification
letter documenting that the in-ground pool has been installed in
substantial conformity to the grading plan previously approved by the
Township Engineer. Should the applicant seek to make any modification
to the Township-approved grading plans, the applicant must submit the
amended plans for additional review and approval by the Township
Engineer. The cost of professional services rendered by the Township
80.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1999-5, adopted 5-5-1999, deleted the words "With Cluster
and Bonus Density Provision" from this article title.
§ 91-176 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-178
83:479
§ 91-179. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the R District shall be as follows:
Engineer in connection with the application(s) shall be in accordance
with Chapter 2, § 2-3, (entitled “Inspection fees”), of the Code of the
Township of Florence. [Amended 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
B. Private garages and carports to a maximum height of 20 feet. Private
garages and carports shall not be located less than five feet from rear or
side property lines or 10 feet from any alleyway or easement line.
Private garages and carports shall not be located within any front yard
setback.
C. Garden sheds up to 100 square feet if not on a permanent footing shall
not be located less than two feet from rear or side property lines and
not less than two feet from any alleyway or easement line and not less
than two feet from any fence. A zoning permit shall be required for any
shed. [Amended 8-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-15]
D. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to residential use less than
250 square feet in area for use with the main building. Accessory
buildings shall not be less than five feet from any rear or side property
lines, 10 feet from any alleyway or easement line and all accessory
buildings to residential use shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
E. Clubhouse with golf courses.
F. Dish antennas in rear yard only. Dish antennas shall not be less than
five feet from any rear or side property lines, 10 feet from any alleyway
or easement line. Dish antennas shall not be roof mounted.
G. Flagpoles. Flagpoles shall be set back from all property lines one foot
for each one foot in height to a maximum of 50 feet in height.
A. Utility structures and facilities needed to provide direct service of gas,
electricity, telephone, water and sewerage, but not offices, garages,
warehouses, maintenance areas or similar commercially or industrially
related operations of such companies.
B. Quasi-public building and recreation areas.
C. Home occupations which meet the standards of this chapter.
D. Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable uses.
E. Senior housing, not to exceed a maximum aggregate number of 500
units of such housing to be approved for development within Florence
Township under this chapter. [Added 9-19-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-22]
§ 91-178 FLORENCE CODE § 91-180
83:480
§ 91-180. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations shall be as follows:
A. Single-family residential detached dwellings, with public sewer and
water, noncluster.
(1) Maximum density: two units per acre.
(2) Bulk regulations.
(a) Lot size: 20,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Lot width: 125 feet minimum.
(c) Lot depth: 160 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 20% maximum. The principal building, driveway
and any expansion, enlargement or addition thereto shall not
exceed the maximum without a variance. For residential lots,
an additional lot coverage of 5% shall be allowed only for
decks, patios, sheds and/or swimming pools. [Amended
3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1]
(e) Front yard: 50 feet minimum.
(f) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(g) Side yard: 20 feet each minimum.
(h) Height: 35 feet maximum.
(i) Minimum constraint-free circle (CFC): sixty-foor diameter.
[Added 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
(3) Recreation and open space requirements. A minimum of 25% of the
entire tract shall be set aside for open space in accordance with
Article XX.
B. Single-family residential detached dwellings with on-site septic and
well, noncluster.
(1) Maximum density: one unit per acre.
(2) Area and bulk requirements.
(a) Lot size: one acre, minimum.
(b) Lot width: 150 feet minimum.
(c) Lot depth: 175 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 20% maximum. The principal building, driveway
and any expansion, enlargement or addition thereto shall not
exceed the maximum without a variance. For residential lots.
an additional lot coverage of 5% shall be allowed only for
§ 91-180 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-180
83:481
§ 91-181. Temporary portable pools (including inflatable pools).82
[Added 8-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
decks, patios, sheds and/or swimming pools. [Added 3-1-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-1]
(e) Front yard: 50 feet minimum.
(f) Side yards: 30 feet minimum, each side.
(g) Rear yard: 80 feet minimum.
(h) Height: 35 feet maximum.
(i) Minimum constraint-free circle (CFC): forty-five-foot diameter.
[Added 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
(3) Recreation and open space requirements. A minimum of 25%
percent of the tract shall be set aside for open space in accordance
with Article XX. 81
C. Single-family residential detached dwellings, with public sewer and
water and cluster developed and for which approval was issued prior to
May 25, 1999, for development in accordance with the then applicable
bonus density provisions in the chapter shall be subject to the following
bulk regulations: [Added 4-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-7]
(1) Bulk regulations.
(a) Lot size: 10,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Lot width: 70 feet minimum.
(c) Lot depth: 100 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 30% maximum.
(e) Front yard: 30 feet minimum.
(f) Rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
(g) Side yard: 10 feet each minimum.
(h) Height: 35 feet maximum.
A. Purpose and intent. The intent of this section is to permit small portable
temporary pools that are not permanent in nature and can be installed,
used and removed within a period of a few months over the summer
81.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), Required Building Envelope, added 2-15-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995, and Subsection C, Single-family residential detached dwellings, with public
sewer and water, cluster, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27.
82.Editor's Note: §§ 91-181, Recreational facilities, and 91-182, Density bonus program,
added 8-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-28, as amended 2-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-3, were
repealed 5-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-5.
§ 91-180 FLORENCE CODE § 91-181
83:482
months without any negative impact to the Municipal Code or property
owners.
B. Permitted in residential zones. Portable temporary pools shall be
permitted as accessory uses to single-family residential dwellings in the
residential zones, and in the AGR agricultural zone, subject to the
specific conditions set forth herein. Temporary portable pools shall be
permitted as accessory uses to residential properties in other zones.
(1) A building permit and zoning permit are required for any new pool
that is 24 inches or more in depth. No permit shall be required
under the Uniform Construction Code for any pool that is less than
24 inches in depth.
(2) A homeowner who desires to install a temporary portable pool must
obtain an initial permit from the Construction Code Office and
Zoning Office. Once the initial permit is issued by the Township for
the period beginning not before May 1 and ending not later than
September 30, then the property owner may apply for an annual
certificate of compliance from the Zoning Office each year prior to
reinstallation of the temporary portable pool. The fee for each
certificate of compliance will be $20.
(3) In order to obtain a certificate of compliance each year it is
necessary that the pool is placed in the same location; that it
remains temporary in nature; and that the same safety barriers
required under the Uniform Construction Code remain in place.
(4) A temporary portable pool or inflatable pool must be installed in a
residential zone on a property that has a primary residence. If a
residential property is located in a commercial zoning district, then
there still must be a primary residence on the same lot as the
temporary portable pool.
(5) Impervious surface standards shall not apply for temporary
portable pools (including inflatable pools) that are less than four
feet in depth and meet the definition contained herein.
(6) A temporary portable pool cannot be installed prior to May 1 and
must be removed no later than September 30 of each year. All
permits for temporary portable pools (including inflatable pools)
shall contain this requirement. Failure to adhere to this regulation
will result in enforcement action as a violation of the Code.
(7) A temporary portable pool cannot be located closer than two feet to
any side or rear property line.
(8) Temporary portable pools are not permitted in any front yard
setback.
(9) In order to provide for the safety of children and residents, no
municipal permits will be issued for an inflatable pool unless the
§ 91-181 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-181
83:483
§ 91-182. (Reserved)83
property has a proper barrier in place in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code. Barrier requirements address fencing,
pool steps, locking gates, etc. A copy of the basic barrier
requirements for all pools, including temporary inflatable pools, is
available from the Construction Code Office.
(10) The municipal permit process does not exempt a property owner
from receiving approval from their own homeowners' association
(HOA) prior to applying for municipal permits, nor does it override
the conditions in any homeowners' association bylaws.
83.Editor's Note: §§ 91-181, Recreational facilities, and 91-182, Density bonus program,
added 8-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-28, as amended 2-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-3, were
repealed 5-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-5.
§ 91-181 FLORENCE CODE § 91-182
83:484
ARTICLE XXVII
RA Low-Density Residential District
§ 91-183. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential
dwellings and accessory uses incidental thereto.
§ 91-184. Permitted principal uses.
All principal uses permitted in the R District shall be permitted as principal
uses in the RA District.
§ 91-185. Permitted accessory uses.
All accessory uses permitted by § 91-178 of this chapter in the R District
shall be permitted as accessory uses in the RA District. All accessory uses
in the RA District shall be sited in accordance with standards established by
§ 91-178 of this chapter for accessory uses.
§ 91-186. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-19-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-22]
All conditional uses permitted in the R District shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the RA District, except senior housing.
§ 91-187. Density requirements.
Maximum gross density for the RA District is four dwelling units per acre.
§ 91-188. Recreation and open space requirements.
A minimum of 25% of the tract shall be set aside for open space in
accordance with Article XX.
§ 91-189. Area and bulk regulations.
A. Area and bulk regulations with public water and sewer.
(1) Lot size: 10,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Lot width: 100 feet minimum.
(3) Lot depth: 100 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 20% maximum. The principal building, driveway and
any expansion, enlargement or addition thereto shall not exceed
the maximum without a variance. For residential lots, an additional
lot coverage of 5% shall be allowed only for decks, patios, sheds
and/or swimming pools. [Added 3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1]
(5) Front yard: 25 feet minimum.
§ 91-183 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-189
83:485
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 15 feet, each side.
(8) Height: 35 feet maximum.
(9) Minimum constraint-free circle (CFC): forty-foot diameter. [Added
8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
B. Area and bulk regulations with on-site septic.
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum
(2) Lot width: 150 feet minimum.
(3) Lot depth: 150 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 20% maximum. The principal building, driveway and
any expansion, enlargement or addition thereto shall not exceed
the maximum without a variance. For residential lots, an additional
lot coverage of 5% shall be allowed only for decks, patios, sheds
and/or swimming pools. [Added 3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1]
(5) Front yard: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Rear yard: 80 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 30 feet minimum.
(8) Height: 35 feet maximum.
(9) Minimum constraint-free circle (CFC): twenty-foot diameter.
[Added 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]84
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection B(9),
Required building envelope, added 2-15-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-1.
§ 91-189 FLORENCE CODE § 91-189
83:486
ARTICLE XXVIII
RB Medium-to-High-Density Residential District85
§ 91-190. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to comply with the substantive rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing promulgated
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act. The requirements of the zone reflect
the requirements established by the Council on Affordable Housing in the
substantive rules. Words and terms as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:92-1.3 are
incorporated herein and made a part hereof.86
§ 91-191. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 91-192. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses in the RB District shall be as follows:
A. Single-family residential detached dwellings with public water and
sewer.
B. Single-family residential attached dwellings (atrium or patio and
townhouses and duplexes) with public water and sewer.
C. Multifamily residential in accordance with public water and sewer.
A. Private residential swimming pools. A wall of a swimming pool shall not
be located less than six feet from any rear or side property line or 10
feet from any alley or easement line. Swimming pools shall not be
located within any front yard setback.
B. Private garages and carports to a maximum height of 20 feet. Private
garages and carports shall not be located less than five feet from rear or
side property lines or 10 feet from any alleyway or easement line.
Private garages and carports shall not be located within any front yard
setback.
C. Garden sheds up to 100 square feet if not on a permanent footing shall
not be located less than two feet from rear or side property lines and
not less than two feet from any alleyway or easement line and not less
than two feet from any fence. A zoning permit shall be required for any
shed. [Amended 8-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-15]
D. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to residential use less than
250 square feet in area for use with the main building. Accessory
buildings shall not be less than five feet from any rear or side property
85.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1999-27, adopted 8-4-1999, deleted the words "with Cluster
and Bonus Density Provision" from this article title.
86.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 87, Housing.
§ 91-190 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-192
83:487
§ 91-193. Density requirements. [Amended 8-5-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-28]
§ 91-194. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations shall be as follows:
lines, 10 feet from any alleyway or easement line and all accessory
buildings to residential use shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
E. Dish antennas in rear yard only. Dish antennas shall not be less than
five feet from any rear or side property lines, 10 feet from any alleyway
or easement line.
F. Flagpoles. Flagpoles shall be set back from all property lines one foot
for each one foot in height to a maximum of 50 feet in height.
A. Maximum gross density for the RB District is six dwelling units per
acre.
B. Twenty percent of all dwelling units constructed in the RB District shall
be set aside for low- and moderate-income housing. Such units shall be
subject to all applicable regulations pertaining to the RB District.
C. At a minimum, 35% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be twobedroom
units; 15% of such units shall be three-bedroom units, and not
more than 20% of such units shall be efficiency units.
D. The minimum living area of efficiency units shall be 500 square feet; of
one-bedroom units, 600 square feet; of two-bedroom units, 750 square
feet; of three-bedroom units, 950 square feet; and of four-bedroom
units, 1,150 square feet.
A. Single-family detached.
(1) Lot size: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 60 feet minimum.
(3) Lot depth: 100 feet minimum.
(4) Impervious coverage: 33% maximum.
(5) Front yard: 25 feet minimum. On the corner lots, the side yard
facing the street shall have a fifteen-foot setback.
(6) Rear yard: 25 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 15 feet minimum, total; side yard setbacks with a
minimum of five feet on each side.
(8) One side yard setback or the rear yard setbacks may be waived in
order to maximize open space, provided that this is done with
reasonable consistency throughout the tract.
§ 91-192 FLORENCE CODE § 91-194
83:488
(9) Minimum constraint-free circle (CFC): forty-foot diameter. [Added
8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
B. Townhouse units.
(1) Not more than eight townhouse dwelling units shall be contained
per structure.
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Number of
Bedrooms
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Number of
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
1 1,500 1,600 1.75 20
2 1,700 1,800 2.00 22
3 1,900 2,000 2.00 24
4 2,000 2,400 2.50 26
(3) Minimum lot depth with parking off lot: 80 feet; minimum lot depth
with parking on lot; 100 feet.
(4) A garage unit shall account for only 1/2 of a required parking
space.
(5) Minimum building setback.
(a) Front setback: 20 feet minimum.
(b) Building front to front: 45 feet minimum.
(c) Building back to back: 70 feet.
(d) From common parking area: 20 feet minimum.
(6) Each unit shall have an individual public sewer and water
connection.
(7) There shall be a minimum of 30 feet between buildings.
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(9) A minimum of a fifteen-foot-wide usable and unobstructed fire lane
at the rear of all townhouse dwelling units with access to same
shall be required by way of deed restrictions in a form approved by
the approving authority.
(10) Impervious coverage: 70% maximum.
C. Multifamily dwellings.
(1) There shall not be more than 16 dwelling units per structure, nor
shall the structure exceed 160 feet in width or length.
§ 91-194 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-194
83:489
§ 91-195. Recreation and open space requirements. [Amended
8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]
A minimum of 35% of the tract shall be set aside for open space.
§ 91-196. Special design requirements.
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Number of
Bedrooms
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Average Lot
Area
(square feet)
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
1 1,000 1,200 1.50
2 1,200 1,400 1.75
3 1,200 1,400 2.00
(3) Parking shall be accommodated by locating parking areas within
100 feet of dwelling structures.
(a) No more than 35% of the required parking for apartment
dwelling units shall be allowed adjacent to the cartway.
(b) No more than 50% of the required parking for a mixed use of
townhouse and townhouse flat dwellings shall be allowed
adjacent to the cartway.
(c) All remaining required parking shall be provided in designated
parking area.
(4) Minimum building setbacks:
(a) From rights-of-way of project perimeter roads: 50 feet.
(b) From project outbound property lines: 50 feet.
(c) From street right-of-way: 30 feet.
(d) From common parking: 20 feet.
(e) From pedestrian walks: 10 feet.
(5) Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
(6) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(7) Maximum building length: 160 feet.
(8) A minimum of a fifteen-foot-wide usable and unobstructed fire lane
at the rear of all multifamily dwelling units with access to the same
shall be required by way of deed restriction, in a form approved by
the approving authority.
§ 91-194 FLORENCE CODE § 91-196
83:490
§ 91-197. Phasing; marketing; affordability controls; price
stratification. [Added 8-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-28]
A. The facade and type of unit of the low- and moderate-income units shall
in no way be distinguishable from the facades of the other units in the
development.
B. The low- and moderate-income units shall be dispersed throughout the
project to the greatest extent feasible.
A. Schedule of completion for inclusionary housing. Developers of
inclusionary housing shall be entitled to receive final approval of at
least four market rate units for each low- and moderate-income unit, in
accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum Percentage of Low- and
Moderate- Income Units Completed
Percentage of Market
Rate Units Completed
0 25
10 25, plus 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
-- 100
B. Affirmative marketing within inclusionary developments. Developers
shall have primary responsibility for developing and implementing an
affirmative marketing program that addresses the occupancy
preference requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:92-15.1 et seq.
Developers and/or sponsors of low- and moderate-income housing are
required to market, screen, offer occupancy and select income-eligible
households in accordance with the foregoing regulations. [Amended
9-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-17]
C. Affordability controls.
(1) Units offered for sale shall be priced in accordance with the price
stratification provisions of this subsection.
(2) Units rented to moderate-income families shall have a maximum
annual rent of 24% of the median income of the Southwest (Mercer,
Burlington, Camden and Gloucester County) Region. Units rented
to low-income families shall have a maximum annual rent of 15% of
the median income of the Southwest Region.
(3) The income level, identity and family size of each household
occupying a low- or moderate-income unit shall be submitted by the
developer or owner prior to occupancy and shall be recertified
annually by the owner of each unit.
§ 91-196 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-197
83:491
(4) A certificate of occupancy shall be required for every low- and
moderate-income housing unit, whether owner-occupied or rented.
The certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the Construction
Code Official until he receives a written statement which confirms
that the occupants of the unit meet the income requirements and
affordability controls of this section. The developer is responsible
for providing to Florence Township the identification of each
affordable unit and the purchaser or tenant of such unit. A new
certificate of occupancy will be required upon each resale or
reletting.
(5) Units that are sold shall at all times remain the primary residence
of the owner. The owner shall not rent any affordable housing unit
to any party whether or not that party qualifies as a low- or
moderate-income household without prior written approval from
Florence Township, or if the unit is managed by the Florence
Township Fair Housing Corporation, from the Corporation.
(6) All affordable units, whether for sale or rent, shall be deed
restricted to occupancy by qualifying low- or moderate-income
households for a period of not less than 20 years.
(7) If a designated low- or moderate-income unit is offered for resale,
the maximum price shall not exceed the limits set forth in the price
stratification provisions of this subsection.
(8) At least one-half ( 1/2) of the affordable units built shall be
affordable to low-income households, and the remainder shall be
affordable to moderate-income households.
D. Price stratification.
(1) The average price charged by a developer of affordable units shall
be set, as best as practicable, at a level that is affordable to
households at 57.5% of the median income of the Southwest
Region.
(2) The price distribution of every 20 low- and moderate-income units
produced shall be set, as best as practicable, according to the
following range of affordability:
(a) Low-income units (total, 10).
Number of Low-Income
Units
Percentage of Median
Income
1 40% to 42.5%
3 42.6% to 47.5%
6 47.6% to 50%
(b) Moderate-income units (total, 10).
§ 91-197 FLORENCE CODE § 91-197
83:492
Number of Moderate-
Income Units
Percentage of Median
Income
1 50.1% to 57.5%
1 57.6% to 64.5%
1 64.6% to 68.5%
1 68.6% to 72.5%
2 72.6% to 77.5%
4 77.6% to 80%
(3) For initial occupancy, priority shall be given to households that fall
within the median income categories delineated in Subsection D(2)
above.
§ 91-197 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-197
83:493

ARTICLE XXIX
RC High-Density Residential District
§ 91-198. Purpose. [Amended 12-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
The purpose of this district is to provide for multiple-dwelling units such
as apartments, townhouses and age-restricted multifamily dwellings. It is
intended and declared that apartments or other multiple-dwelling units
be planned and controlled to provide proper aesthetic and design
considerations, including optimum recreation, open areas and parking
facilities at a low cost to users.
§ 91-199. Permitted principal uses. [Amended 12-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-16]
All uses permitted in the RA and RB Districts, age-restricted multifamily
dwellings and groups of apartments and townhouses shall be permitted as
principal uses in the RC District.
§ 91-200. Permitted accessory uses.
All accessory uses of the RB District shall be permitted in the RC District.
§ 91-201. Multiple-dwelling structures.
§ 91-202. Recreation and open space requirements. [Amended
12-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
A minimum of 25% of the entire tract shall be set aside for open space in
accordance with Article XX. Age-restricted multifamily developments of less
than 40 units shall be exempt from this requirement, provided that off-site
recreation shall be coordinated with the approving authority.
A. No application for multiple-dwelling structures shall be considered
unless the proposed location meets the following minimum
requirements:
(1) The plot to be developed shall front on an existing road, paved in
accordance with the provisions herein, or the developer's
performance guaranty as herein required and the subdivision
requirements of this chapter shall include the cost of construction
or reconstruction and upgrading of any road or street to serve the
development.
(2) The plot shall be in an area served by public water and sewer, or
the performance guaranty of the developer shall include the cost of
construction and installation of such services, together with the
cost to upgrade and survey the sewage treatment facility, if
necessary.
B. The plan requirements set forth in this section are in addition to all
other plans for subdivision and site plan required by this chapter.
§ 91-198 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-203
83:495
§ 91-203. Bulk and area requirements. [Amended 12-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-16]
Bulk and area requirements shall be as follows:
A. Minimum lot area: five acres; four acres for age-restricted multifamily
developments.
B. Maximum density: 12 units per acre.
C. Minimum lot width: 250 feet; 200 feet for age-restricted multifamily
developments.
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet; 35 feet for age-restricted multifamily
developments.
E. Minimum side yards: 30 feet each, except that in an age-restricted
multifamily development, the Planning Board may allow up to 15 feet of
the side yard requirement to be satisfied by a deed-restricted landscape
buffer easement area abutting the development on an adjacent
property.
F. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet; 45 feet for age-restricted multifamily
developments.
G. Minimum distance between buildings: 60 feet; 20 feet for age-restricted
multifamily developments.
H. Maximum lot coverage: 40%; 50% for age-restricted multifamily
developments.
I. Maximum height: two stories, with the basement not to be used for
living space.
J. Maximum units per building: 10.
K. Each individual unit shall contain the following minimum requirements:
(1) Kitchen, bath and two additional rooms.
(2) Sixty square feet of storage space, in addition to closets, with a
minimum height of six feet, which may be located in the basement.
Said storage space shall have a fireproof ceiling with a minimum
two-hour rating, a fire alarm system, an underwriter-approved
method of automatic fire control and proper and adequate lighting.
For age-restricted multifamily developments, a thirty-square-foot
outdoor storage area shall be provided in lieu of a sixty-square-foot
storage area.
(3) Private and separate entrance.
(4) Heating, with an independent control for each unit, sufficient to
maintain a temperature of 72° F. when the outside temperature is
0° F.
§ 91-203 FLORENCE CODE § 91-203
83:496
(5) Air conditioning, with independent controls for each unit, sufficient
to maintain a per-unit temperature of 15° below the outside
temperature. No window-type units shall be permitted.
(6) Adequate garbage and trash storage and pickup by means of selfdumping
bulk-material handlers. Storage areas shall be located
with a view toward convenience and minimizing the detrimental
effect on the aesthetic character of the structures. Storage areas
shall be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing and/or
shrubbery at least six feet in height. For age-restricted multifamily
developments, conventional, curbside trash pickup shall be
permitted.
(7) A minimum of six inches of soundproofing material shall be used
between units and in no event shall this requirement be less than
any state or municipal building code provisions in force and effect
in Florence Township at the time the application is filed.
(8) Off-street parking shall be provided with a ratio of 1 3/4 spaces in
agreement with the parking standards of this chapter (each space
to be 10 feet by 20 feet, with a rear clearance of 24 feet) for each
dwelling unit, with no more than 20 spaces in one parking area. All
parking areas shall be located within the permitted buildable area
or in the rear yard area; provided, however, that in the latter case, a
ten-foot-wide buffer strip shall be maintained along the entire
length of the rear lot and such other lines or portions thereof as
shall be required by the Planning Board. No on-street parking shall
be permitted.
L. Except as provided in this section, no dwelling unit shall be erected
with a living area of less than 1,250 square feet. Age-restricted
multifamily developments shall be permitted to reduce the living area
to 790 square feet for a one-bedroom unit and 850 square feet for a twobedroom
unit.
§ 91-203 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-203
83:497

ARTICLE XXX
RD High-Density Residential - Municipal Affordable Housing Zone
[Amended 4-1-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-10; 9-9-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-17]
§ 91-204. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide affordable multifamily dwelling
units and related facilities so as to comply with the substantive rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and the Fair
Housing Act. All residential development in the RD Residential District
shall be restricted to occupancy by low- and moderate-income families in
accordance with the substantive and procedural rules and regulations of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.87
§ 91-205. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 91-206. Density requirements.
Maximum gross density for the RD Residential District is 20.3 units per
acre.
§ 91-207. Area and bulk requirements with public water and sewer.
Area and bulk requirements with public water and sewer shall be as follows:
A. Multifamily affordable residential with public water and sewer only, as
provided in Florence Township's housing element and fair share plan,
as amended, and in the substantive certification of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing, as amended.
B. Senior citizen community center.
C. Township administrative offices.
A. Minimum building setbacks.
(1) Front yard setback: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard setback: 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard setback.
(a) Generally: 50 feet.
(b) If adjacent to Township-owned open space: 30 feet.
(4) Common parking area: 20 feet.
87.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 87, Housing.
§ 91-204 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-207
83:499
§ 91-208. Additional regulations.
Development in the RD High-Density Residential, Municipal Affordable
Housing District shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
substantive rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C.
5:92-1.1 et seq.
(5) Pedestrian walk: 10 feet.
B. Parking setbacks.
(1) Front setback: 20 feet.
(2) Side setback: 10 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 10 feet.
C. Maximum building length: 220 feet.
D. Minimum parking spaces: one per unit.
E. Maximum building height: three stories.
F. Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
G. Minimum open space: 20% of the tract will be set aside for open space.
§ 91-207 FLORENCE CODE § 91-208
83:500
ARTICLE XXXA
RD-1- High-Density Residential - Age-Restricted Affordable Housing
[Added 3-4-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
§ 91-208.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide a suitable location(s) for the
construction of housing exclusively for age-restricted low- and moderateincome
households consistent with the Township's Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan. "Age-restriction" for the purpose of this article and zoning
district is defined as provided in N.J.A.C. 5:97-1.4.
§ 91-208.2. Permitted uses.
§ 91-208.3. Area and bulk requirements.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Multifamily age-restricted affordable housing units with a density
not to exceed 50 units per acre.
(2) Senior Citizen Community Center.
(3) Management offices.
(4) Township administrative offices.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Recreational building and amenities (including gardens).
(2) Off-street parking.
(3) Antennas, subject to the owner or homeowners' association rules,
as applicable.
(4) Sheds strictly for the storage of materials and equipment, which
are directly used for the maintenance of the buildings and grounds
of a multifamily development. Private residential sheds are not
permitted.
(5) Supervisor apartment.
(6) Maintenance and leasing offices.
(7) Laundry facility.
(8) Other similar support services and amenities for the benefit of the
age-restricted residential community.
C. Conditional uses: none.
A. Front yard: five feet.
§ 91-208.1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-208.3
83:501
§ 91-208.4. Signage.
One building-mounted sign permitted on each face of the principal building;
and one two-sided monumental sign not to exceed 40 square feet. Additional
directional signage permitted as needed for clear-way finding and
circulation.
§ 91-208.5. Affordable housing requirements.
Development in the RD-1 High-Density Residential - Age-Restricted
Affordable Housing District shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the substantive and procedural rules and regulations as set forth by the
New Jersey (Department of Community Affairs) Council on Affordable
Housing at N.J.A.C. 5:97 et seq., and as reflected in Florence Township's
Fair Share Affordable Housing Ordinances pursuant to Chapter 87 of the
Township Code, including but not limited to affirmative marketing
procedures as will be amended in the third round. In addition, affordable
housing units in this district shall comply with the Uniform Affordability
Controls ("UHAC") at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and the amended Fair
Housing Act at P.L. 2008, c. 46, including but not limited to the provision of
very-low-income units.
§ 91-208.6. Landscaping.
Sufficient landscaping should be provided to create an aesthetically
pleasing design. In cases where the property abuts an existing roadway,
no buffering shall be required. To provide adequate separation between
parking spaces and residential zones, adequate buffering or screening shall
be provided. In general, the Planning Board may approve waivers to the
B. Side yard: 30 feet.
C. Rear yard:
(1) Fifty feet.
(2) Any nonconforming residential structure may be enlarged without
requiring a variance from the rear-yard-setback regulation,
provided that such addition does not extend beyond the
farthermost existing building line into the rear yard area; and
further provided such residential use is a conforming use.
D. Building height maximum: three stories or a maximum of 40 feet.
E. Maximum building length: 310 feet.
F. Minimum total parking spaces: 0.75 per unit.
G. Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
H. Minimum tract size: one acre of contiguous land.
I. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
§ 91-208.3 FLORENCE CODE § 91-208.6
83:502
standard landscaping requirements of the ordinance, provided the plan
presented is appropriate and adequate to meet the intent of providing an
interesting and aesthetically pleasing landscape.
§ 91-208.7. Utilities.
All dwelling units in the project shall be served with public sewer and water.
§ 91-208.8. Buffers and screening.
Notwithstanding § 91-91, buffers and screening are not required where
existing site conditions do not provide for such buffers or screening;
however, no parking shall be permitted within five feet of any residential
zone or use. Where curb is located around parking, five feet shall be
measured from curb face. To provide adequate separation between parking
spaces and residential uses or zones, adequate and effective buffering or
screening shall be provided to screen views, reduce noise.
§ 91-208.6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-208.8
83:503

ARTICLE XXXI
AGR Agricultural District
§ 91-209. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for farming and agricultural uses
and compatible single-family residential uses.
§ 91-210. Permitted principal uses.
Single-family residential dwellings, farms and farm buildings shall be
permitted as principal uses in the Agricultural District.
§ 91-211. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses in the AGR District shall be as follows:
§ 91-212. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-19-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-22]
All conditional uses allowed in the R District shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the AGR District, except senior housing.
§ 91-213. Density requirements.
Maximum gross density for the AGR District is one dwelling unit for three
acres.
§ 91-214. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations shall be as follows:
A. Customary farm buildings and structures for use in conjunction with
agricultural purposes.
B. Dwellings for farm workers on farms consisting of at least 15 acres,
provided that all such housing shall comply in every respect with the
statutes of the State of New Jersey and the rules and regulations of the
State Board of Health concerning farm labor housing.
C. Roadside farm stands for the sale of farm products grown or raised on
the premises by the owner or operator of the farm. One stand per farm
shall be permitted, with a minimum setback of 35 feet from the street
line.
D. All other accessory uses permitted by § 91-178 of this chapter in the R
District shall be permitted as accessory uses in the ARG District. All
other accessory uses in the ARG District shall be cited in accordance
with standards established by § 91-178 of this chapter for accessory
uses.
A. Lot size: three acres minimum.
§ 91-209 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-214
83:505
B. Lot width: 200 feet minimum.
C. Lot depth: 300 feet minimum.
D. Lot coverage: 20% maximum.
E. Front yard: 50 feet minimum.
F. Side yards: 30 feet minimum each side.
G. Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
H. Minimum accessory building setback.
(1) From the front lot line: 100 feet minimum.
(2) From the side lot line: 50 feet minimum.
(3) From the rear lot line: 25 feet minimum.
(4) From principal building: 75 feet minimum.
I. Maximum building height: 35 feet maximum.
J. Minimum constraint-free circle (CFC): one hundred-foot diameter.
[Added 8-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-27]88
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection J,
Required building envelope, added 2-15-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-1.
§ 91-214 FLORENCE CODE § 91-214
83:506
ARTICLE XXXII
HC Highway Commercial District
§ 91-215. Purpose.
The purpose of the Highway Commercial District is to provide commercial
uses along several major highways or major arteries in the Township which
provide services to the general traveling public and which have a service
radius generally wider than the immediate neighborhood. The provisions
are designed to curtail the further evolution of strip commercial patterns
while permitting controlled commercial growth.
§ 91-216. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
A. Retail sales of goods and services
B. Restaurants, bars, taverns and nightclubs.
C. Department stores.
D. Garden centers engaged in the retail sales of living plant material.
Outside storage, sale or display areas shall not exceed four times the
building coverage and shall be used only for the storage, sale and
display of living plant material.
E. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
F. Offices and office buildings.
G. Theaters and bowling alleys.
H. Automobile sales through franchised new car dealers as a conditional
use.
I. Car washes.
J. Service stations.
K. All neighborhood commercial uses.
L. Hotels and motels as a conditional use.
M. Adult uses, south of the New Jersey Turnpike only, as conditional uses
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. (See Article XL for standards.) [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
N. Fire stations and emergency squad buildings in accordance with the
provisions of Article XLIII of this chapter. [Added 5-19-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-7]
§ 91-215 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-217
83:507
§ 91-217. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses in the HC District shall be as follows:
§ 91-218. Maximum height of structures and impervious coverage.
[Amended 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
§ 91-219. Area and bulk requirements.
A. Off-street parking.
B. Fences and walls.
C. Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles.
D. Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 100 square
feet advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor(s), architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction,
beginning with the issuance of a building permit or one year, whichever
is less, provided that said trailer and sign are on the site where the
construction is taking place.
E. The operation and use of amusement machines, video machines, pinball
machines, pool tables and similar machines not dispensing products
and providing amusement generally by the insertion of a coin, token or
similar object. No more than 15% of the gross floor area of the a
building shall be devoted to the accessory use of the amusement
machines, with the balance of 85% of the floor area to be devoted and
used for the primary use. There shall be no separate, outside entrances
to the area devoted to the amusement machines.89
A. No structure shall exceed 75 feet in height or five stories, whichever is
less.
B. The maximum impervious coverage of the site shall not exceed 75%.
Impervious coverage shall include all structures, drives, walks and
parking areas.
A. Principal building, commercial. Minimum requirements shall be as
follows:
(1) Lot area: 60,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Lot width: 200 feet.
(4) Lot depth: 250 feet.
(5) Side yard, each: 25 feet.
(6) Front yard: 75 feet.
89.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 39, Amusements and Entertainments.
§ 91-217 FLORENCE CODE § 91-219
83:508
§ 91-220. Minimum floor area.
Each commercial building shall have a minimum gross floor area of 1,000
square feet.
§ 91-221. General requirements.
(7) Rear yard: 50 feet.
B. Accessory buildings. Minimum distances shall be as follows:
(1) To front line: 75 feet or in line with principal building, whichever is
greater.
(2) To side line: 25 feet.
(3) To rear line: 15 feet.
(4) To other building: 20 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 30%.
(2) Accessory buildings: 5%.
A. A minimum buffer area of 100 feet in width shall be provided along any
common property line with a residential district (including the AGR
District). Where the area along a common property line with a
residential district (including the AGR Zone) contains a natural
woodland, the woodland or portion thereof shall be preserved and
incorporated into the buffer. In such cases, the width of the buffer may
be enlarged by the Planning Board in order to preserve the natural
woodland or portion thereof. The buffer shall be designed in accordance
with § 91-91 of this Code. [Amended 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1;
2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-7; 3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6;
5-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11]
B. At least the first 40 feet adjacent to any street line and 10 feet adjacent
to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be planted and
maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery and separated from the parking area by poured concrete or
Belgian block curbing.
C. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed or stored outside.
D. All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any
street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block or
concrete block walls.
§ 91-219 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-221
83:509
§ 91-222. Off-street parking.
Parking areas for individual uses shall be designed to be interconnected
with adjacent properties and shall utilize common entrance(s) and exit(s),
where feasible, to minimize access points to the street.
§ 91-223. Off-street loading.
Minimum off-street loading shall be provided as follows:
E. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces
shall be landscaped, utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing,
shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing
foliage and the planting of conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the
area in order to either maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation
in the area and lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved
areas. The established grades on any site shall be planned for both
aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities
and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting, as
well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made drainage
system is sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated, both
from the site and contributing upstream areas.90
A. Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading, with
adequate ingress and egress from streets and shall provide such area(s)
at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by
40 feet. One space shall be provided for the first 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in each building and one additional
space for each additional 7,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof. There shall be no loading or unloading from the street.
B. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location provided
by each building, which shall be separated from the parking spaces by
either a location within the building or in a pickup location outside the
building which shall be a steel-like, totally enclosed container located in
a manner to be obscured from view from parking areas, streets and
adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or
combination of the three. If located within the building, the doorway
may serve both the loading and trash/garbage functions, and if located
outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or within the general
loading area(s), provided that the container in no way interferes with or
restricts loading and unloading functions.
C. All off-street loading areas shall be lighted.
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding minimum buffer areas, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1.
§ 91-221 FLORENCE CODE § 91-224
83:510
§ 91-224. Signs. [Amended 2-18-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-2]
The provisions of Article XIX, Signs, are supplemented and modified as
follows:
A. Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign shall be permitted in
accordance with the following:
(1) Site plan review. Site plan review shall be required for all new or
altered freestanding signs.
(2) Size. Except for major developments such as large shopping
centers and hotels, sign size shall be limited in accordance with one
of the following standards, at the discretion of the developer:
(a) Five percent of the first floor portion of the front facade of the
principal building or 100 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(b) Size in relation to the linear front footage of the property, as
follows:
Linear Front Footage
Maximum Sign Area
(sq. ft.)
Up to 150 50
151 to 200 75
201 to 300 100
301 to 400 125
401 to 500 150
500 and over 200
When a subdivision of a lot containing a freestanding sign
would result in the sign becoming nonconforming or, if
already nonconforming, becoming more nonconforming under
the terms of this section, a bulk variance for the sign shall be
required whether or not the proposed lot(s) would meet other
applicable bulk regulations. In deciding the sign variance
application, the Board may, as a condition of subdivision
approval, limit the maximum sign area for any new signs on
any of the new lots to less than the area otherwise permitted
by this section. In reducing the permitted sign size for any
new signs, the Board may consider the degree of
nonconformity of the existing freestanding sign.
(c) Double-sided freestanding signs shall be measured on one
side, provided that the message on both sides is identical and
only one side is visible at one time.
(3) Major developments. Major developments, such as large shopping
centers and hotels, shall be permitted one freestanding sign of no
more than 200 square feet. If the major development has frontage
§ 91-224 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-224
83:511
§ 91-225. Prohibited uses. [Amended 10-4-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-24; 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
The following uses are expressly prohibited in any zone in the Township
of Florence, except as a conditional use in the portion of the Highway
Commercial Zone located on the westerly side of Route 130, south of the
on more than one public road, one freestanding sign shall be
permitted on each frontage.
(4) Height. Maximum sign height shall be no higher than the height of
the principal building to which it is related and in no case higher
than 25 feet.
(5) Setback. Setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the right-ofway
line.
(6) Permanent structures. The supporting frames for all signs shall be
constructed of permanent materials and with a permanent
foundation.
(7) Service stations. Service stations shall also be permitted one
additional sign advertising fuel prices, located inside the property
line along the street frontage, not exceeding nine square feet.
B. Attached signs. One sign attached to the principle facade shall be
permitted in accordance with the following:
(1) Size. The size shall be 5% of the first floor portion of the front
facade or 100 square feet, whichever is less. When there is a
separate canopy structure, the front facade area of the canopy may
be added to the front facade of the principle building in
determining the five-percent calculation.
(2) Height. Such sign shall not have a vertical dimension in excess of
five feet and shall not project above the roof, cornice, parapet wall
or roofline when there is no cornice or parapet wall, whichever is
lowest, nor beyond the ends of the building.
(3) Projections. Such sign shall not project more than 12 inches from
the building facade to which it is attached.
(4) Canopy signs. Whenever there is a separate canopy structure, one
additional sign shall be permitted on each facade or supporting
structure of the canopy, provided that the total square footage of all
attached signs does not exceed that which is permitted in
Subsection B(1) above.
C. Sign alteration. Any substantial structural alteration of an existing sign
shall constitute a new sign under the terms of this section requiring
compliance with the standards of this section and, in the case of a
freestanding sign, site plan review. Substantial alterations shall include
any change in size, shape, materials, location or lighting.
§ 91-224 FLORENCE CODE § 91-225
83:512
New Jersey Turnpike Extension, and in accordance with the applicable
requirements of Article XL (Conditional Uses):
A. Adult uses, including but not limited to adult bookstores, adult mini
motion-picture/live entertainment theatres and massage parlors.
B. For purposes of this section, the following phrases shall have the
following definitions:
ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock and/or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola and human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal; or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
C. Adult uses enumerated.
(1) Adult bookstores. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall
establish a bookstore, newsstand or book department, in which a
significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade is in books,
magazines and/or other written and/or pictorial matter, which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or related to specific anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities, as defined herein.
(2) Adult movies. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall
offer for viewing through coin-operated motion-picture devices any
movie or other form of display which has substantial or significant
displays of specified anatomical areas of specified sexual activities,
as defined herein.
(3) Adult live entertainment. No person, form, corporation or other
entity shall use, feature, permit or offer for view dancers, strippers,
nude or seminude entertainers or other persons engaging in,
showing or exhibiting specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activity, as defined herein.
(4) Massage parlors. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall
use, feature or permit massages or the rubbing down of persons of
one sex by persons of the other sex where the massage includes
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined
herein; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to
prohibit the use or giving of massages in a single location, business
or building where the use or business of the massage is an
accessory use to a primary use permitted by this chapter.
(5) Adult activities generally. Any use not defined above that
demonstrates, uses, exhibits or otherwise involves specified
§ 91-225 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-225
83:513
§ 91-225.1. Inclusion of specific blocks and lots. [Added 3-19-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-6]
In order to provide for orderly review of any proposed development and
the application of consistent standards for development, Block 160.01,
Lots 1.01, 7, 8, 9, 10.01 and 10.02, which are partially located in the HC
Highway Commercial Zoning District, shall be included in the HC Highway
Commercial Zoning District to the full extent of the lots as they exist
upon adoption of this section. Block 160.01, Lots 2.01, 7, 8, 9, 10.01 and
10.02 shall also be included within the SMO Special Manufacturing Overlay
District as set forth in the Florence Code Article XLI.
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined herein, is
expressly prohibited.
§ 91-225 FLORENCE CODE § 91-225.1
83:514
ARTICLE XXXIII
NC Neighborhood Commercial District
§ 91-226. Purpose.
The purpose of the Neighborhood Commercial District is to allow for small
areas throughout the Township where retail and service businesses may
be located primarily for the convenience of the residents of the immediate
neighborhood. Each designated zone is large enough to permit expansion
of these convenience centers in anticipation of continued population growth
and increased demand for the goods and services. It is intended that
development in these areas be designed to enhance and improve the
centers by ensuring that an adequate traffic circulation plan evolves so
that each building does not have its own access point(s) to the highway(s),
that the building appearances and signs are compatible and that parking
facilities are interrelated and capable of common usage where advisable.
§ 91-227. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses on the land and in the buildings shall be as follows:
§ 91-228. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses in the NC District shall be as follows:
A. All uses permitted in the RA District, subject to all bulk requirements as
found for said district.
B. Local retail activities, including grocery stores, meat markets, seafood
markets, supermarkets, delicatessens, bakeries, drugstores, furniture
stores, sporting goods shops, gift shops, hobby shops, bookstores,
clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware stores, packaged liquor stores,
pet shops, stationery stores, fabric stores and florists.
C. Local service activities, including barber- and beauty shops, tailors, drycleaning
and laundering operations, appliance repair shops and
upholsterers.
D. Restaurants, bars and package stores.
E. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
F. Professional offices.
G. Service stations as conditional uses.
H. Dwelling quarters in the same building as the commercial use, which
quarters must contain not less than 850 square feet of living space.
A. Off-street parking.
B. Fences and walls.
C. Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles.
§ 91-226 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-228
83:515
§ 91-229. Maximum building height, commercial use.
No building shall exceed 25 feet in height or two stories.
§ 91-230. Area and bulk requirements, commercial use.
D. Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 50 square
feet advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor(s), architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction,
beginning with the issuance of a building permit or one year, whichever
is less, provided that said trailer and sign are on the site where
construction is taking place and set back at least 15 feet from the street
to the lot lines.
A. Principal building. Minimum requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: 125 feet.
(3) Lot width: 125 feet.
(4) Lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Front yard: 60 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(7) Side yard.
(a) In order to encourage an end product which provides parking,
access and architectural continuity even where development
occurs piecemeal and with diverse ownership, buildings may
be attached and may be built to the interior side line(s) in order
to be attached.
(b) Attached buildings may include two walls, which must be
keyed to each other. Where buildings are built to both side lot
lines, the site plan shall be accompanied by appropriate legal
documents and plans showing properly located loading spaces
and trash receptacles, with permitted access across adjacent
properties. If structures are not attached, the side yard(s) shall
be 20 feet each.
B. Accessory buildings. Minimum distances shall be as follows:
(1) To side line: 20 feet.
(2) To rear line: 20 feet.
(3) To other building: 20 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage shall be as follows:
§ 91-228 FLORENCE CODE § 91-230
83:516
§ 91-231. Minimum floor area.
Each building shall have a minimum gross floor area of 400 square feet,
with a width of each store no less than 20 feet.
§ 91-232. General requirements for commercial uses.
§ 91-233. Off-street parking.
(1) Principal building: 25%.
(2) Accessory building: 5%.
A. One building may contain more than one use, provided that the total
building coverage of the combined uses does not exceed the maximum
building coverage specified for this district, and further that each use
occupies a minimum gross floor area of 400 square feet.
B. At least the first 20 feet adjacent to any street line shall not be used for
parking and shall be planted and maintained in the lawn area or ground
cover or landscaped with evergreen shrubbery and separated from the
parking area by poured concrete, Belgian block curbing or concrete
bumper blocks.
C. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed or stored outside.
D. All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any
street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block or
concrete block walls.
E. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles and
driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with
shrubs, ground cover, seedlings or similar plantings and maintained in
good condition.
F. A minimum buffer area of 25 feet in width shall be provided along any
common property line with a residential district or residential use.
A. Minimum off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
(1) Grocery stores, meat markets, seafood markets, supermarkets,
delicatessens and bakeries: 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
(2) Drugstores, furniture stores, sporting goods shops, gift shops,
hobby shops, bookstores, clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware
stores, package liquor stores, pet shops, stationery stores, fabric
stores, florists, tailors, dry-cleaning and laundering operations,
appliance repair shops, shoe repair shops and upholsterers: five
spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
§ 91-230 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-233
83:517
§ 91-234. Off-street loading.
Minimum off-street loading shall be provided as follows:
(3) Barber- and beauty shops: two spaces per chair, with a minimum of
three spaces.
(4) Restaurants, bars and taverns: one space for every two seats.
(5) Banks and professional offices: six spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
(6) Service stations shall provide at least six spaces for the first lift,
wheel alignment pit or similar work area, five additional spaces for
a second work area and an additional three spaces for each
additional work area. Such spaces shall be separated from the
driveway and general apron areas which give access to the gasoline
and air pumps and service areas. No designated parking space
shall obstruct access to such facilities.
B. Parking areas for individual uses shall be designed to be interconnected
with adjacent properties and shall utilize access points to the street.
C. Where more than one use occupies one building or where there is an
attached group of buildings, the total parking spaces shall be an
accumulation of the various standards appropriate to the uses noted
above, except that where more than five separate uses are grouped into
one area using common parking facilities and controlled access points
to the parking area(s), the total parking need may be computed on the
basis of providing at least 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof to serve the total complex.
A. Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading with
adequate ingress and egress from streets and shall provide such area(s)
at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by
30 feet, and one space shall be provided for every 4,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in each building. There shall be no
loading or unloading from the street.
B. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location provided
by each building, which shall be separated from the parking spaces by
either a location within the building or in a pickup location outside of
the building, which shall be a steel-like, totally enclosed container
located in a manner to be obscured from view from parking areas,
streets and adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall,
planting or combination of the three. If located within the building, the
doorway may serve both the loading and trash/garbage functions, and if
located outside of the building, it may be located adjacent to or within
the general loading area(s), provided that the container in no way
interferes with or restricts loading and unloading functions.
C. All off-street loading areas shall be lighted.
§ 91-233 FLORENCE CODE § 91-235
83:518
§ 91-235. Signs.
A. Local retail service activities, banks and professional offices may have
one lighted or unlighted sign displaying the name of the use, attached
flat against the front of the building and not exceeding an area
equivalent to 5% of the front of the building or 50 square feet,
whichever is smaller. Where the building(s) is(are) designed for rear or
side entrances, one unlighted sign may be attached flat against the
building at the rear and side entrances, such sign not to exceed an area
equivalent to one-half ( 1/2) that of the sign on the front of the building.
B. A shopping center consisting of more than five separate uses grouped
together may have one lighted freestanding, but nonmoving, sign along
each arterial or collector road which the tract in question abuts,
provided that there exists at least 200 feet of unbroken frontage. Such
sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height, shall be set back from any
property line a minimum of 50 feet and shall not exceed an area of 100
square feet.
(1) Where uses share a common walkway, each use served by the
walkway may have one additional sign identifying the use,
suspended in perpendicular fashion from the roof over the
walkway. Suspended signs shall be no closer than eight feet at their
lowest point to the finished grade level below them. No such signs
shall exceed eight square feet in area.
(2) All signs in a shopping center shall conform in character with all
other signs in the complex and shall blend with the overall
architectural scheme of the shopping center.
C. Service stations may be permitted one freestanding sign, lighted but
nonmoving, and one sign attached flat against the building. The
freestanding sign shall not exceed the building height, shall be set back
at least one foot from the street right-of-way and shall not exceed 30
square feet in area. The attached sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in
area nor exceed the height of the roofline.
§ 91-235 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-235
83:519

ARTICLE XXXIV
OP Office Park District
§ 91-236. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for attractive, low-intensity
commercial development.
§ 91-237. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses in the Office Park District shall be as follows:
§ 91-238. Design and area requirements.
A. General office building.
B. Offices of doctors, dentists and veterinarians or similar professionals.
C. Churches, public and private schools and public hospitals.
D. Club or lodge organized for fraternal or social purposes, provided that
the chief activity shall not be one which is customarily carried on as a
business.
E. Convalescent home, medical center and sanatorium.
F. Child-care center.
G. Funeral parlor.
H. A single apartment in connection with a business.
A. Overall plan. Any proposed office park development shall be
constructed in accordance with an overall integrated plan.
B. Site size. The total site area shall not be less than two acres and shall
have a frontage of at least 200 feet on an approved road.
C. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet.
D. Setback requirements. All office park development shall be set back a
minimum of 65 feet from the proposed right-of-way, except where
reverse and/or side parking is utilized, in which event the front setback
can be reduced to no less than 40 feet.
E. Building coverage. The maximum building coverage shall not exceed
20% of the total site area.
F. Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious surface coverage shall
be 65%, and the open space area of the site shall not be less than 35%.
G. Side and yard requirements. Each office park building shall have a
minimum side yard of 10 feet, except where said property adjoins a
§ 91-236 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-238
83:521
residential zone, when a minimum thirty-foot side yard is required. A
minimum rear yard of 40 feet is required.
H. Access and egress. On all limited commercial lots, access, ingress and
egress shall be onto a nonresidential, arterial or collector street.
I. Minimum buffer requirements:
(1) Front property line, except for a permitted driveway: 40 feet.
(2) Side property lines: 10 feet, except where said property adjoins a
residential zone, in which event a thirty-foot buffer is required.
(3) Rear property lines: 15 feet, except where said property adjoins an
existing residential zone, in which event a thirty-foot buffer is
required.
§ 91-238 FLORENCE CODE § 91-238
83:522
ARTICLE XXXV
GM General Manufacturing District
§ 91-239. Purpose.
The purpose of the General Manufacturing District is to provide a location
in the Township where heavy manufacturing and warehousing operations
are permitted. It is intended that the use of buffers, conservation
techniques, aesthetic considerations and other visual and ecological
considerations be an integral part of this district, whether explicit or
implied.
§ 91-240. Permitted principal uses of land and buildings.
Permitted principal uses in the GM District shall be as follows:
§ 91-241. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
A. Offices.
B. Manufacturing plants of a type which manufacture, assemble or treat
products from raw or previously prepared materials, including but not
limited to factories and steel- and wire-making processes.
C. Wholesale distribution centers and warehouses.
D. Fire stations and emergency squad buildings in accordance with the
provisions of Article XLIII of this chapter. [Added 5-19-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-7]
A. Off-street parking.
B. Fences, walls, wharves and dockage.
C. Garages and storage buildings.
D. Fuel storage for on-site use and consumption.
E. Outside storage of inert raw materials and by-products generated by
the on-site manufacturing processes.
F. Electrical substations.
G. Temporary construction trailers and one sign, not exceeding 50 square
feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor(s), architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction,
beginning with the issuance of a building permit and concluding with
the issuance of an occupancy permit or one year, whichever is less,
provided that said trailer(s) and sign are on the site where the
construction is taking place.
§ 91-239 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-242
83:523
§ 91-242. Maximum building height.
No building shall exceed 75 feet in height or three stories.
§ 91-243. Area and yard requirements.
§ 91-244. Minimum floor area.
Each principal building shall have a minimum gross floor area of 2,500
square feet.
§ 91-245. General requirements.
A. Principal buildings. Minimum requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Lot area: 60,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Lot width: 200 feet.
(4) Lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Side yard, each: 50 feet.
(6) Front yard: 75 feet.
(7) Rear yard: 50 feet.
B. Accessory buildings. Minimum distance shall be as follows:
(1) To side line: 50 feet
(2) To rear line: 50 feet.
(3) To other building: 50 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 40%.
(2) Accessory building(s): 5%.
A. Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or
organization. Any lot may contain more than one principal structure,
provided that each principal structure is located in a manner which will
allow the possibility of subdividing the lot in a manner that each
structure and resulting lot would conform to the zoning and subdivision
regulations, including frontage on a public street.
B. At least the first 75 feet adjacent to any street line and 20 feet adjacent
to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be planted and
maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery and separated from the parking area by poured concrete or
Belgian block curbing.
§ 91-242 FLORENCE CODE § 91-245
83:524
§ 91-246. Off-street parking.
Minimum off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
§ 91-247. Off-street loading.
Minimum off-street loading shall be provided as follows:
C. Except as otherwise provided, no merchandise, products, waste or
similar material or objects shall be displayed or stored outside unless
adequately screened by natural or man-made barriers.
D. All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any
street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
walls.
E. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces
shall be landscaped, utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing,
shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing
foliage and the planting of conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the
area in order to either maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation
in the area and lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved
areas. The established grades on any site shall be planned for both
aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities
and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting, as
well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made drainage
system is sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both
from the site and contributing upstream areas.
F. A minimum buffer area of 50 feet in width shall be provided along any
common property line with a residential district or residential use.
A. One space for every 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area
used for storage and warehousing, plus one space for every 700 square
feet or fraction thereof of floor area used for manufacturing, plus one
space for every 200 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area used for
offices, subject to adjustment according to the projected number of onsite
employees.
B. In addition, one space for every vehicle owned and/or operated by the
use operating from that site shall be provided.
C. In any event, each use shall provide a sufficient number of spaces in
appropriate locations so that no driveway, aisle, fire lane or street rightof-
way is used at any time for parking.
A. Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading, with
adequate ingress and egress from streets, and shall provide such area
at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by
40 feet, and one space shall be provided for every 8,000 square feet of
§ 91-245 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-247
83:525
§ 91-248. Signs.
One lighted sign per use, not larger than the equivalent of 5% of the area of
the front wall of the building or 100 square feet, whichever is smaller, shall
be permitted. If attached to the building, the sign shall not be higher than
the roofline, and, if freestanding, the sign shall not exceed six feet in height
and shall be set back from the right-of-way line at least one foot.
gross floor area or fraction thereof in each building. There shall be no
loading or unloading from the street.
B. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location provided
by each building, which shall be separated from the parking spaces by
either a location within the building or in a pickup location outside of
the building, which shall be a steel-like, totally enclosed container
located in a manner to be obscured from view from parking areas,
streets and adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall,
planting or combination of the three. If located within the building, the
doorway may serve both the loading and trash/garbage functions. If a
container is used for trash/garbage functions and is located outside of
the building, it may be located adjacent to or within the general loading
area(s), provided that the container in no way interferes with or
restricts loading and unloading functions.
C. All off-street loading areas shall be lighted.
§ 91-247 FLORENCE CODE § 91-248
83:526
ARTICLE XXXVI
SM Special Manufacturing District
§ 91-249. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for industrial uses which are
of lesser magnitude and intensity than uses permitted in industrial districts.
§ 91-250. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 91-251. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses in the SM District shall be as follows:
A. Offices.
B. Distribution centers and warehouses.
C. Manufacturing of light machinery such as office machines, sewing
machines, cash registers and small machine parts.
D. Fabrication of bicycles, carriages and other nonmotorized vehicles;
metal foil; furniture; musical instruments; and toys.
E. Fabrication of paper and wood products.
F. Preparation of bakery products, bottling and canning of food and
beverages.
G. Laboratories.
H. Manufacture of brushes and brooms, electronic parts, farm machinery,
glass and glass products, jewelry, leather products, sporting goods,
textiles, thread and yarn.
I. Lumberyards and building material storage and sale areas.91
J. Fire stations and emergency squad buildings in accordance with the
provisions of Article XLIII of this chapter. [Added 5-19-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-7]
A. Off-street parking.
B. Fences and walls.
C. Garages and storage buildings.
D. Temporary construction trailers and one sign, not exceeding 50 square
feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor, architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction,
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding adult uses, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2. See now § 91-216M.
§ 91-249 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-251
83:527
§ 91-252. Maximum building height.
No building shall exceed 30 feet in height or two stories.
§ 91-253. Area and bulk requirements.
§ 91-254. Minimum floor area.
Each building shall have a minimum gross floor area of 2,000 square feet.
§ 91-255. General requirements.
beginning with the issuance of a building permit and concluding with
the issuance of an occupancy permit, or a period of one year, whichever
is less, provided that said trailer and sign are on the site where the
construction is taking place.
A. Principal building. Minimum requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Lot area: 50,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Lot width: 200 feet.
(4) Lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Side yard, each: 50 feet.
(6) Front yard: 75 feet.
(7) Rear yard: 50 feet.
B. Accessory building. Minimum distances shall be as follows:
(1) To side line: 50 feet.
(2) To rear line: 50 feet.
(3) To other building: 50 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 30%.
(2) Accessory buildings: 5%.
A. Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or
organization. Any lot may contain more than one principal structure,
provided that each principal structure is located in a manner which will
allow the possibility of subdividing the lot in a manner that each
structure and resulting lot would conform to the zoning and subdivision
regulations, including frontage on a public street.
§ 91-251 FLORENCE CODE § 91-255
83:528
§ 91-256. Off-street parking.
Minimum off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
§ 91-257. Off-street loading.
Minimum off-street loading shall be provided as follows:
B. At least the first 75 feet adjacent to any street line and 20 feet adjacent
to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be planted and
maintained as lawn area, ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery and separated from the parking area by poured concrete or
Belgian block curbing.
C. No merchandise, products, waste or similar material or objects shall be
displayed or stored outside.
D. All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any
street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
walls.
E. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces
shall be landscaped, utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing,
shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing
foliage and the planting of conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the
area in order to either maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation
in the area and lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved
areas. The established grades on any site shall be planned for both
aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities
and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting, as
well as assuring that the capacity of and natural or man-made drainage
system is sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both
from the site and contributing upstream areas.
F. A minimum buffer area of 50 feet in width shall be provided along any
common property line with a residential district or residential use.
A. One space for every 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area
used for storage and warehousing, plus one space for every 700 square
feet or fraction thereof of floor area used for manufacturing, plus one
space for every 200 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area used for
offices, subject to adjustment according to the projected number of onsite
employees.
B. In addition, one space for every vehicle owned and/or operated by the
use operating from that site shall be provided.
C. In any event, each use shall provide a sufficient number of spaces in
appropriate locations so that no driveway, aisle, fire lane or street rightof-
way is used at any time for parking.
§ 91-255 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-257
83:529
§ 91-258. Signs.
One lighted sign per use, not larger than the equivalent of 5% of the area of
the front wall of the building or 100 square feet, whichever is smaller, shall
be permitted. If attached to the building, the sign shall not be higher than
the roofline, and, if freestanding, the sign shall not exceed six feet in height
and shall be set back from the right-of-way line at least one foot.
§ 91-258.1. Residential property in SM District. [Added 12-21-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-30]
Any property having frontage on Railroad Avenue and located in the SM
Zoning District that is actually developed and in use for single-family
residential purposes as of December 7, 2005, and that are listed by block
and lot herein, shall be bound by the RA Zoning District standards so long
as the property continues to be actively used for residential purposes. In
the event of the abandonment or discontinuance of the residential use for a
period of one year, the property shall thereafter be bound by the SM Zoning
District standards. The foregoing exemption is applicable to the following
properties:
Block Lot(s)
147.01 15.01, 15.02, 4.01, 4.02, 4.03, 5.01,
5.02, 6.01, 6.02, 3.03, 3.04
A. Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading, with
adequate ingress and egress from streets, and shall provide such area
at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by
40 feet, and one space shall be provided for every 8,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in each building. There shall be no
loading or unloading from the street.
B. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location provided
by each building, which shall be separated from the parking spaces by
either a location within the building or in a pickup location outside the
building, which shall be a steel-like, totally enclosed container located
in a manner to be obscured from view from parking areas, streets and
adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or
combination of the three. If located within the building, the doorway
may serve both the loading and trash/garbage functions. If a container
is used for trash/garbage functions and is located outside the building,
it may be located adjacent to or within the general loading area,
provided that the container in no way interferes with or restricts
loading and unloading functions.
C. All off-street loading areas shall be sufficiently and adequately lighted.
§ 91-257 FLORENCE CODE § 91-258.1
83:530
ARTICLE XXXVII
P Park District
§ 91-259. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide the residents of the Township of
Florence with open space areas for recreational activities and purposes
specified by the Recreation Committee of the Township, subject,
nevertheless, to the provisions of Chapter 110, Parks and Recreation, and
its amendments and supplements, and to provide for such other areas for
public purposes as shall be necessary or advisable from time to time.
§ 91-259 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-259
83:531

ARTICLE XXXVIII
H Historic District
§ 91-260. Purpose.
The purposes of this district are as follows:
§ 91-261. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses in the H District shall be the same uses as are allowed
in those districts which comprise the Historic District; provided, however,
that no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, substantially
altered, changed or restored until the Planning Board approves site plans
therefor.
§ 91-262. Intent.
A. To safeguard the heritage of the Township of Florence by preserving
that portion which reflects elements of its cultural, social, economic and
architectural history.
B. To maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for the
architecturally significant historic buildings, structures and places
within the affected portion of the Township.
C. To stabilize and improve upon property values.
D. To foster civic beauty and continuity with the historic area.
E. To promote the uses of the Historic District for the pleasure, education
and welfare of the inhabitants of and visitors to the district.
A. In adopting this Article, it is the intention of the Township Council to
create a Historic Preservation Commission to serve in an advisory
capacity for certain matters before the Township Planning Board
affecting the Historic District of the Township and to assist the
Township Zoning Board of Adjustment in a reviewing/adjudicatory
capacity for certain matters concerning regulation of construction and
land use in the Historic District of the Township.
B. With respect to applications before the Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment, which applications relate to new construction,
land use or demolition of structures or the construction, alteration or
relocation of a sign, within the Historic Preservation Zone, the
applications shall be initially referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission as required by the Municipal Land Use Law92 and this
chapter. In considering such applications, the Commission and the
Boards shall be guided by the documents referred to and the standards
set forth herein.
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 91-260 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-263
83:533
§ 91-263. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Responsibilities. There is hereby created a Historic Preservation
Commission in order to carry out the responsibilities set forth in this
Historic District Preservation Ordinance and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107
through 40:55D-111, inclusive.
B. Membership. The Commission shall consist of seven regular members
and two alternate members. The members shall be divided into three
classes as follows:
(1) Class A: A person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside of
Florence Township.
(2) Class B: A person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside of Florence
Township.
(3) Class C: Citizens of Florence Township who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment except that they may have
membership on the Township's Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
C. Appointment and terms.
(1) The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
Of the regular members, a total of at least three shall be of Classes
A and B and there shall be at least one Class A and one Class B
member. Those regular members who are not designated as Class A
or B shall be designated as Class C. Alternate members shall meet
the qualifications of Class C members. The Mayor shall appoint all
members of the Commission and shall designate at the time of
appointment the regular members by Class and the alternate
members as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2". The Mayor,
prior to making the appointment of seven members to the
Commission, shall elicit recommendations for membership from
the Roebling Historical Society and the Florence Township
Historical Society, provided that these organizations exist, the
general public and other interested individuals or groups. At least
two of the seven members shall be property owners in the Historic
District.
(2) The terms of the members first appointed under this subsection
shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of the terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular
members, evenly over the first four years after their appointment
and, in the case of alternate members, evenly over the first two
years after their appointment, provided that the initial term of no
regular member shall exceed four years and that initial term of no
alternate member shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of a
regular member shall be four years, and the term of an alternate
§ 91-263 FLORENCE CODE § 91-263
83:534
member shall be two years. A vacancy occurring other than by
expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. A
term of a Planning Board member or a Zoning Board member shall
coincide with the term of such member on the Planning Board
or Zoning Board. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment and shall be only for the balance of the
unexpired term.
(3) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
D. Conflicts of interest and removal.
(1) No member may act on any matter in which the member has any
personal or financial interest, either directly or indirectly.
(2) A member may be removed by the Township Council for cause.
Prior to such removal, the Township Council shall conduct a
hearing if so requested, in writing, by the member within 10 days of
notice of intention to remove.
E. Officers, staff and expenditures.
(1) The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
from its members and select a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the commission or a municipal employee, to keep a
record of the proceedings before the Commission, which shall
include the voting records of the members, their attendance,
resolutions acted upon by the Commission and any of its findings,
determinations and decisions.
(2) At least four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of its business.
(3) The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business, which rules shall provide for the time and place of
holding regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings by
the Chairperson or at least three members of the Commission. All
meetings of the Commission shall be governed by the New Jersey
Open Public Meetings Act.93 Any matter not covered by the
Commission's adopted rules or by statute shall be governed by
Robert's Rules of Order.
(4) The Township Council shall provide for a Commission in its budget
and shall appropriate such funds for the expenses of the
Commission as the Township Council, in its sole discretion shall
93.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 10:4-1 et seq.
§ 91-263 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-263
83:535
§ 91-264. Activities requiring certificates of appropriateness.
A certificate of appropriateness, issued by the Commission, shall be
required before (1) action on any development approval by the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment on an application for development
involving new construction, demolition of structures or the construction,
alteration, relocation or demolition of signs in the Historic District or
determine, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-108. The Commission may
employ, contract for and fix the compensation of experts and other
staff and services as it shall deem necessary, except that the
Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the Township
Solicitor at the hourly rate of compensation set forth in the
Township Solicitor's contract with the municipality. Expenditures
pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Council for the
Commission's use.
F. Powers of the Commission. In addition to powers established in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-109, the Commission shall have the power to:
(1) Make recommendations to the appropriate individuals and/or
reviewing boards on pending development applications involving
new construction, demolition of structures or the construction,
alteration, relocation or demolition of signs which affect landmarks
or historic sites through the issuance or denial of certificate of
appropriateness, pursuant to Subsection F.
(2) Recommend, as circumstances warrant, amendments to the list of
landmarks specified in the community facility plan, amendments to
the Historic District Map or the creation of new historic districts to
the appropriate governmental body charged with the responsibility
of implementing those recommendations.
(3) Report at least annually to the Planning Board and the Township
Council on the state of historic preservation in Florence and make
recommendations to improve it.
(4) Prepare and distribute material on the importance of historic
preservation and techniques for achieving same and purpose of the
Historic Preservation Commission.
(5) Advise all Township agencies regarding goals and techniques of
historic preservation.
(6) Adopt and promulgate such regulations and procedures, not
inconsistent with this chapter, as are necessary and proper for the
effective and efficient performance of the duties expressed herein.
(7) Promulgate guidelines for financial assistance eligibility for those
persons who voluntarily participate in the Historic Preservation
Program.
§ 91-263 FLORENCE CODE § 91-264
83:536
affecting a Historic Site or landmark, which requires the issuance of a
building, demolition or sign permit, before the commencing of work at
a historic site, where the permit or work involves any of the following
activities:
§ 91-265. Application procedures; approval or denial.
A. Demolition or relocation involving a historic site.
B. An addition or alteration to a historic site which changes its
appearance.
C. New construction of any building or structure at an historic site.
D. Erection, alteration, location, relocation, construction, reconstruction,
maintenance or change to any sign located on a historic site.
A. Application. Prior to the issuance of a building, demolition or sign
permit or the commencement of work involving any of the activities
required under § 91-254, the person charged with the issuance of such
permit shall determine whether approval by the Commission is
required. If such approval is required, a property owner or an applicant
for a permit shall make application to the Commission, on forms
approved by it, for a certificate of appropriateness, and the property
owner or applicant for a permit shall file a properly completed
application and pay all appropriate fees to the Administrative Officer.
The Administrative Officer shall schedule consideration of the matter at
the next available Commission meeting, which shall be no earlier than
10 days nor later than 30 days after the date a complete application is
submitted. Applications need not be submitted where the matter has
been referred to the Historic Commission by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Contents of applications. The applicant shall submit an application
form, including architectural drawings and plans prepared by a New
Jersey licensed architect, photographs, sign designs and other
information required to be submitted under the regulations adopted by
the Commission, which regulations shall establish what documents
shall be filed in order for the application to be deemed complete.
C. Time limitations. The Commission shall have 45 days from the date of
the submission or resubmission of a complete application to act upon
the application. If the Commission does not act upon the application
within the time period provided, the application shall be deemed to
have been approved and the certificate of appropriateness granted
without condition. The time periods provided may be extended by
mutual agreement between the applicant and the Commission.
D. Approval or denial. The Commission may either approve the application
as submitted, deny the application as inconsistent with the standards
contained within this chapter or approve the application with those
conditions which the Commission finds are appropriate to impose in
§ 91-264 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-265
83:537
§ 91-266. Standards of consideration.
§ 91-267. Demolitions.
order to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter. The action of
the Commission on any application shall be done by written resolution
setting forth the findings of fact and conclusions of law upon which
its decision rests, and the Commission shall issue, not issue or
conditionally issue the certificate of appropriateness as may be
determined.
E. Sign application. Any person seeking a building permit to construct,
alter, repair, move or demolish a sign on an historic site shall be
required to receive a certificate of appropriateness from the
Commission. The Administrative Officer shall review all preapplication
forms involving signs with the criteria used in this section and classify
them accordingly, with the same provisions applying.
A. It is intended that demolition of historic sites shall be discouraged, as
their loss will be a common loss to the Township of Florence and the
neighborhood. Moving a historic site would be encouraged only as the
last resort as an alternative to demolition, if there is no other way to
save the historic site.
B. It is also the intent of this section that the Commission shall review
plans for new construction so that this construction is compatible with
existing structures in the neighborhood. It is not intended that new
construction be a copy of a particular historic period or style, but rather
be compatible in the use of materials, scale, color, size, design and
setback.
C. A certificate of appropriateness shall be approved if the Commission
specifically finds that the applicant cannot otherwise reasonably use
the property for a use permitted by Part 3 of this chapter.
A. In regard to an application involving issuance of a demolition permit
affecting a historic site, the following matters shall be considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural and social significance.
(2) Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by Part
3 of this chapter.
(3) Its importance to the Township and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be produced only with great difficulty.
§ 91-265 FLORENCE CODE § 91-267
83:538
§ 91-268. Historic site removals.
(5) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values;
generating business; creating new jobs; attracting tourists,
students, writers, historians, artists and artisans and new
residents; encouraging study and interest in American history;
stimulating study in architecture and design; educating citizens in
American culture and heritage; and making the Township a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(6) If it is within a Historic District, the probable impact of its removal
upon the ambiance of the Historic District.
(7) The health and safety of the public.
B. If a property owner shows the Commission that a historic site is capable
of earning economic return on its value, as appraised by a qualified real
estate appraiser, the Commission may delay issuance of the demolition
permit for a period of time not to exceed six months. The Commission
shall have the right to obtain its own appraisal at the expense of the
applicant. Notice of the proposed demolition shall be posted on the
premises of the building or structure in a location clearly visible from
the street.
C. The purpose of this section is to further the purposes of this chapter by
preserving historic buildings and to afford the Township, interested
persons or historical societies or organizations the opportunity to
acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings. The
Commission may, at any time during such delay, approve a certificate of
appropriateness and, at the end of six months, must automatically
approve a certificate of appropriateness, in which event a demolition
permit shall be issued without further delay.
A. In regard to an application to move a historic site to a location outside
the Township, the following matters shall be considered:
(1) The historic loss to the site of the original location and the district
as a whole.
(2) The compelling reasons for not retaining the historic site at its
present location.
(3) The proximity of the proposed new location in the
Township,including the assessability to the residents of the
Township and other citizens.
(4) The probability of significant damage to the historic site.
(5) The applicable matters listed in § 91-267.
§ 91-267 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-268
83:539
§ 91-269. Additional considerations.
In regard to an application for approval of other proposed changes as set
forth in requiring a certificate of appropriateness, the following matters
shall be considered:
§ 91-270. Commission action.
B. In regard to an application to move a historic site to a new location
within the Township, the following matters shall be considered, in
addition to the matters listed in Subsection A above:
(1) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this chapter.
(2) If the proposed new location remains within the Historic District,
the visual compatibility factors shall follow those outlined in
§ 91-272B.
A. The impact of the proposed change on this historic architectural
character.
B. The extent to which there would be involvement of textures or materials
that could not be reproduced only with great difficulty.
C. The use of any historic site is involved.
A. After action either approving or disapproving an application, the
Commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness and provide the
applicant and the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, if the
matter has been referred to the Commission by those Boards,
otherwise, the Administrative Officer, with a certified copy of the
certificate.
B. The Planning Board of Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider the
Historic Commission comments and approval or disapproval of the
certificate of appropriateness before taking action on any application of
or development in the Historic District or effecting a historic site or
landmark.
C. The Administrative Officer shall consider the comments and approval or
disapproval of the certificate of appropriateness when considering the
issuance of any building demolition, new construction or sign permit.
However, if the Historic Commission recommends to the Administrative
Officer against the issuance of a permit and disapproves the certificate
of appropriateness or recommends conditions to the permit, the
Administrative Officer shall deny the issuance of the permit or include
the conditions in the permit, as the case may be.
D. Failure of the Historic Commission to approve or disapprove a
certificate of appropriateness within 45 days of the matter being
§ 91-268 FLORENCE CODE § 91-270
83:540
§ 91-271. Financial assistance.
§ 91-272. General review criteria; visual compatibility factors.
The following general review criteria and visual compatibility factors apply
to demolition, new construction and signs and apply to voluntary
participation in the Historic Preservation Program so as to be eligible for
financial assistance. In assessing the effect of any proposed demolition
or structure removal or sign application at a historic site or landmark or
where persons voluntarily participate in the Historic Preservation Program
in order to be eligible for financial assistance, the following general review
criteria found in the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation
submitted to the Commission shall be deemed to constitute approval of
the certificate of approval.
E. In the event that an applicant alleges that compliance with the
requirements of this section would create an unreasonable hardship
and that the nature of the application is such that the change sought
neither justifies the time and expense of the plenary proceeding nor will
impact negatively on the public good not specifically on the historic
qualities sought to be preserved, the Commission, by the affirmative
vote of five of its members, may grant such relief from the requirements
of this section as it deems consistent with the public good and the
purposes of this section.
A. If the cost of compliance with the requirements of this section increases
the cost of the work proposed to be done, the applicant may apply to the
Historic Preservation Commission for financial assistance for such
excess costs. To the extent permitted by law, such financial assistance
may be in the form of a grant of all or a part of the excess costs or of a
no-interest or low-interest loan for all or part of such excess costs.
B. Factors to be considered by the Commission in granting or denying
such application shall include:
(1) Degree of financial hardship created by the mandated
improvements.
(2) Value of the property after completion of the originally proposed
improvements and value of the property after completion of the
mandated improvements.
(3) Relevance of the mandated improvements to the originally
proposed improvements.
(4) Value of the mandated improvements to the originally proposed
improvements.
(5) Availability of funds.
(6) Such other factors as the Commission deems appropriate.
§ 91-270 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-272
83:541
and the following visual compatibility factors shall be used to analyze the
effect that the change applied for would have on the historic site and on
those structures to which the historic site is visually related.
A. General review criteria.
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment, or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that
seek to create an earlier or newer appearance shall be
discouraged.
(4) Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance may be
recognized.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced whenever possible. In the event that replacement is
necessary, the new materials should match the material being
repaired in design, color, texture and other visual quantities.
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be
based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by
historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural
designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting or other clearing methods
that will damage the historic buildings shall not be undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale,
§ 91-272 FLORENCE CODE § 91-272
83:542
color, materials and character of the property, neighborhood or
environment.
(10) Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall
be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were
to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would be unimpaired.
B. Visual compatibility factors.
(1) The height of the proposed buildings shall be visually compatible
with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids on fronting of public places. The
relationship of solids to voids in such facades of a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which they are
visually related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(7) Relationship of materials, texture and color of the facade and roof
of a building shall be visually compatible with the predominant
materials used in the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with
buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Appurtenances of a building such as a wall, open type fencing or
evergreen landscape masses shall form cohesive walls of enclosure
along a street to the extent necessary to maintain visual
compatibility of the building with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(10) The size of a building, the mass of a building in relation to open
spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be
§ 91-272 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-272
83:543
§ 91-273. Sign review criteria; maintenance.
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(11) A building shall be visually compatible with buildings and places to
which it is visually related in its directional character, whether this
be vertical character, horizontal character or nondirectional
character.
A. The Commission will review sign applications with the requirements
and review standards applicable to signs in Article XIX of this chapter of
the Code of the Township of Florence and with the following signreview
criteria:
(1) Compatibility. The size, shape and character of the sign shall be in
keeping with the historic character of the Historic District and of
the historic site on which the sign is located. Good signage should
create an effective depiction of goods, items or services and should
relate to its surroundings in an inoffensive and constructive way.
(2) Visual quality.
(a) The signage for a particular building or shop should be
reduced to the fewest separate panels or statements as
possible.
(b) Most buildings are designed with a definite panel or framed
zone for the sign mounting. This should be used with the sign
taking a complementary shape.
(c) Signs on buildings should not obliterate or obscure the
architecture of the building. A sign on a building should be
compatible or integral with it.
(d) Obsolete signage from defunct activities should be removed
unless it is an integral part of the building's original
architecture.
(e) Each business, office or shop should rely on one, or at the most
two, letter styles to enhance readability, as well as to create a
more dependable logo for the business.
(f) The usage of self-illuminated signs shall be restricted, as such
signs are less appropriate to the basic architectural and
historical character of Florence's Historic District.
(g) Signs shall be installed so as to be flush with the exterior wall
of the historic site.
B. Sign maintenance. To bring signage within the Historic District into a
complementary and unified format, the maintenance of a sign within
the Historic District, whether existing prior to the effective date of this
§ 91-272 FLORENCE CODE § 91-273
83:544
§ 91-274. Issuance of certificate of appropriateness.
The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding upon the
person charged with the issuing of the building, demolition or sign permit
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111.
§ 91-275. Appeals.
§ 91-276. Violations and penalties.
section or otherwise, shall require the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness under the standards of this section. Owners of signs
in existence on the effective date of this section shall apply for and
obtain a certificate of appropriateness for their respective signs within
two years of the effective date of this section, or their right to continue
maintenance of the sign shall terminate.
C. Interior signs. Interior signs which are intended to be viewed from the
outside of the building or structure shall conform to the requirements of
this section insofar as they are applicable.
A. When a matter is referred to the Historic Commission by the
Administrative Officer, the grant, grant with conditions or denial of a
certificate of appropriateness and the consequent determination of the
person charged with the issuance of the building, demolition or sign
permit may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Township of Florence on the record produced before the Commission in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72. In such appeal,
the Zoning Board shall make independent findings of fact and may
affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Commission. If the Zoning
Board desires, it can take additional testimony, consider additional
evidence or remand the matter to the Commission for further
deliberation.
B. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the right of judicial review of
the Zoning Board's actions after an appeal is concluded by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
A. Any person who undertakes an activity regulated by this Article without
first having obtained a certificate of appropriateness shall be in
violation of this Article. Prior to prosecution of such a violation, the
Zoning Officer shall serve upon the owner a notice of the violation,
describing in detail its nature and the action which the owner must take
to abate the violation. If the owner cannot be personally served with the
notice, a copy shall be posted on the site, and a copy shall be sent,
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at his last known
address as it appears on the Township tax rolls. In the event that the
violation described within the notice is not abated within the time
provided within such notice, the owner shall be deemed in violation of
this Article and shall be subject to prosecution before the Municipal
Court of the Township of Florence.
§ 91-273 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-276
83:545
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be
punishable as provided in § 91-16. Each day that a violation of this
Article occurs or continues after the time period for abatement has run
shall be a separate violation under this Article. In addition, the
Township of Florence may apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for
injunctive relief to prohibit a violation of this Article.94
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 91-276 FLORENCE CODE § 91-276
83:546
ARTICLE XXXIX
Storage and/or Disposal of Chemicals and Chemical Wastes
§ 91-277. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to strictly and specifically prohibit any use
or uses not specifically permitted by other sections of this chapter and
to strictly and specifically prohibit such use or uses as shall be deemed
to constitute a detriment to the health, safety and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township of Florence.
§ 91-278. Findings.
It is hereby stated, found and declared by the governing body of the
Township of Florence that the storage, dumping and/or disposal of
chemicals and chemical by-products, toxic, special and/or hazardous, within
the Township of Florence is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the Township and that the same will, presently
or ultimately, pollute and render dangerous, noxious, unsafe and
unhealthful the air, surface water and underground aquifers servicing
inhabitants of the Township of Florence.
§ 91-279. Unlawful acts.
It is hereby declared by the governing body of the Township of Florence to
be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store, dump or dispose of
chemicals and chemical by-products, toxic, special and/or hazardous, within
the boundaries of the Township of Florence for the reasons hereinabove set
forth. For purposes of this section the definitions of "hazardous waste" and
"special waste" shall have the same meanings as are contained in N.J.A.C.
7:26-1.4, as amended and supplemented.
§ 91-280. Violations and penalties.95
Any person, firm or corporation who shall store, dump or dispose of
chemicals and chemical by-products in any manner inconsistent with the
ordinances of the Township of Florence heretofore adopted, as amended
and supplemented, shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in
§ 91-16. Each day or part thereof during which the terms of this section are
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 91-281. Limiation of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall be limited only by the terms,
conditions and provisions contained in Part 2, Industrial Waste Regulations,
of Chapter 140, Water and Sewers.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 91-277 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-281
83:547

ARTICLE XL
Conditional Uses
§ 91-282. Purpose.
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and conveniences of the Township of Florence and at the
same time recognizing that such uses may be or become inimical to the
public health, safety and general welfare if located and operated without
proper consideration being given to existing conditions and character of the
surrounding area, such uses are hereby designated as conditional uses. In
addition to other powers conferred by this chapter and applicable statutes,
the municipal agency shall have original jurisdiction pursuant to the
procedural requirements established in Part 2 of this chapter to grant a
permit for a conditional use under the terms and conditions established by
this chapter, and under the following stipulations and guiding principles.
§ 91-283. Design standards.
The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is such that
the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and reasonable
consideration is afforded to the:
§ 91-284. Standards for consideration.
A. Character of the neighborhood and zone.
B. Conservation of property values.
C. Health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent properties and in
the surrounding neighborhood.
D. Potential congestion of vehicular traffic or creation of undue hazard.
E. Principles and objectives of this chapter and planned development of
the Township of Florence.
A. In any instance where the municipal agency is required or permitted to
consider a conditional use or uses, the municipal agency, among other
things, shall require the following:
(1) That there be submitted to it a complete set of plat and building
plans, showing the location of the property in relation to the
surrounding property and streets within 500 feet of the tract, both
ways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, drives, parking areas, streams and loading zones; and
the use to be made of all land areas.
(2) That the developer submit a complete detailed statement setting
forth all particulars on the operation of the proposed use.
(3) The developer shall secure a written report from the Board of
Health of the Township or from the Burlington County Department
§ 91-282 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-284
83:549
§ 91-285. Home occupations.
of Health as to any health or sanitary problems that may develop or
be encountered if the conditional use is granted.
(4) Assurance that the proposed use is consistent with the spirit,
purpose and intent of Part 3 of this chapter.
(5) A determination that the proposed use will not substantially injure
or detract from the use of the neighboring properties or from the
character of the neighborhood and that the use of the property
adjacent to the area included in the proposed use is adequately
safeguarded.
(6) That the proposed use will serve the best interests of the Township,
the community and the public welfare.
(7) That no building, structure, facility, active recreation facility or use
of land shall be located or used within the 50 feet of an adjacent
residential property line.
(8) That adequate off-street parking be provided so that the traffic
hazards or congestion will be caused if the proposed conditional
use is granted.
(9) That the property proposed to be so occupied by such use shall
have a minimum lot area of one acre and that no more than 25% of
the land area be occupied by buildings or structures.
(10) That adequate and attractive fences or sufficient landscaping,
including shrubs, trees and lawns will be provided in order to
provide a buffer zone sufficient to screen all adjacent residential
zones or properties from the land or premises which is the subject
of the application.
(11) Provide a public hearing, after due notice, in strict accordance with
the procedures set forth in the statutes of the State of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Township of Florence.
B. In addition, such conditional uses shall adhere to the minimum
standards specified for the particular use in this section and to such
additional conditions and safeguards as in the opinion of the municipal
agency will implement the intent and objectives of this Article and Part
2 of this chapter. In addition, in reviewing any application for a
conditional use, the municipal agency shall apply the applicable
standards set forth in Articles XIV through XX of this chapter.
A. A home occupation may be permitted in the R, RA and AGR Districts as
a conditional use in accordance with the review and approval
procedures set forth in Part 2 of this chapter. The reviewing board shall
determine that the following standards are met and any other
requirements applying have been fulfilled.
§ 91-284 FLORENCE CODE § 91-285
83:550
§ 91-286. Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable uses.
Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable uses may be permitted in the R, RA
and AGR Districts as a conditional use, provided that the reviewing board
finds the following:
§ 91-287. Quasi-public buildings and recreation areas.
Quasi-public buildings, including fire stations and emergency squads, and
recreation areas and facilities, including clubhouses, parks, playgrounds,
swimming pools, tennis courts and other quasi-public activities operated by
B. The occupation being conducted, in whole or in part, from a residence
or its residential lot is an accessory use. Such occupation shall be
conducted solely by resident occupants of the residential building,
except that no more than one person not a resident of the building may
be employed, and provided, also, that no more than 900 square feet or
the equivalent of the first floor area of the building, whichever is
smaller, shall be used for such purposes; the minimum area for the
residence shall remain at least as large as that required for residences;
no display of products shall be visible from the street; the residential
character of the building will not be changed; no sign shall be displayed
exceeding a maximum of two square feet on each of the two sides, and
the sign shall be placed either inside or flat against the surface of the
building when placed outside, but not on both; no occupational sounds
shall be audible outside the buildings; no articles shall be offered for
sale from the premises; no machinery or equipment shall be used which
will cause interference with radio and television reception in the
neighboring residences; and the use shall not reduce the parking or
yard requirements of the principal residential use.
A. No building or buildings will occupy more than 25% of the lot area.
B. Such use will in no way be detrimental to surrounding property values
and that the structure of proposed use will serve a useful purpose to the
general welfare of the Township.
C. Signs may be illuminated but nonflashing and limited in area to not
more than 30 square feet on any one side and shall not be closer than
five feet from any street line or 15 feet from any other property line.
D. The front, rear and side yards shall be increased one foot for each foot
by which such building exceeds the height limit herein established for
the zone in which it is located. An applicant seeking to exceed the
height limit shall apply for a bulk variance.
E. The off-street parking requirement standard may be increased where
necessary to provide sufficient parking for the number of cars
anticipated to utilize the proposed use.
F. That all utilitarian and service areas are adequately screened in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 91-285 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-287
83:551
nonprofit organizations, may be permitted as a conditional use in the R, RA
and AGR Districts in accordance with the review and approval procedures
set forth in Part 2 of this chapter. The municipal agency shall determine that
the following standards are met:
§ 91-288. Public utility uses.
Public utility uses shall be permitted as a conditional use in all districts in
accordance with the review and approval procedures set forth in Part 2 of
this chapter, provided that the municipal agency shall find the following:
A. The application shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth
particulars on the proposed operation of the use and a complete list of
the current officers including names and residents' addresses.
B. It is ascertained that the proposed use is a bona fide nonprofit
organization operated solely for recreation and enjoyment of the
members of said organization.
C. The proposed use in the proposed location will not adversely affect the
safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights or otherwise
adversely affect the value of adjacent properties, that the design of any
structures erected in connection with such use are in keeping with the
general character of the area and that sufficient landscaping, including
trees, shrubs and lawn, are provided to serve as a buffer between said
use and adjoining residential properties and to insure an attractive
appearance for the use.
D. That buildings will not occupy more than 25% of the lot area and that all
other requirements as set forth in this chapter for the zone in which it is
to be located are observed and that the structure or use proposed will
serve a useful purpose to the general welfare of the Township.
E. The front, rear and side yards shall be increased one foot for each foot
by which such building exceeds the height limit herein established for
the zone in which it is located.
F. The off-street parking requirement standard may be increased where
necessary to provide sufficient parking for the number of cars
anticipated to utilize the proposed use.
G. Signs may be illuminated but nonflashing and limited to an area not
more than 15 square feet from a street line or 15 feet from any property
line.
H. That all utilitarian and service areas are adequately screened in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
A. That the proposed use in a specific location is necessary for the
efficiency of the public utility system.
B. That the design of any building in connection with such facility shall
conform to the general character of the area and will in no way
§ 91-287 FLORENCE CODE § 91-288
83:552
§ 91-289. Service stations.
Service stations shall be permitted as a conditional use in the NC District in
accordance with the review and approval procedures set forth in Part 2 of
this chapter, provided that the municipal agency shall find the following:
adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights
of adjoining property owners or within the neighborhood.
C. That adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices shall be
provided and sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawns,
shall be provided and will be periodically maintained by the public
utility.
D. That all other requirements and specifications for the zone district in
which such use is located will be met and observed.
A. All storage areas, trash facilities, pits, lifts and working areas shall be
within a building. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be
performed in an enclosed building, and no dismantled parts shall be
placed outside.
B. All gasoline pumps, air pumps and islands upon which pumps are
normally located shall be set back from the street line at least 60 feet
and from any other property line at least 50 feet. A minimum space of
25 feet shall exist between any two islands and between any island and
the service station building.
C. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, no new or used cars offered for
sale, no unregistered motor vehicle or not more than four motor
vehicles incapable of normal operation on the highway shall be
permitted outside an enclosed service station, except that not more
than six motor vehicles may be located outside a building for a period
not to exceed five days for each vehicle, provided that the owners are
awaiting the repair of the motor vehicle.
D. The exterior display and parking of equipment or vehicles for rent or
sale shall be permitted, provided that the area devoted to this purpose
is in addition to the minimum lot size required for a service station, the
area devoted to this purpose does not exceed 20% of the total area of
the entire site, the maximum sign area for a service station is not
exceeded and the location of the equipment or vehicles being rented or
sold does not interfere with the required off-street parking
requirements for the service station and does not interfere with the onlot
traffic circulation indicated on the approved site plan.
E. It is intended that service stations be designed compatible with other
permitted commercial or industrial uses in the zone in which they are
located, that they may be stripped along the available highway frontage
or at each quadrant of a convenient intersection and that they be
located within shopping centers and in office and industrial complexes
as an integral part of the overall design. Ingress and egress shall be
§ 91-288 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-289
83:553
§ 91-290. Hotels and motels.
Hotels and motels may be permitted in the HC District as a conditional use
in accordance with the review and approval procedures set forth in Part
2 of this chapter. The municipal agency shall determine that the following
standards are met and any other requirements applying have been fulfilled:
§ 91-291. Auto sales.
Auto sales may be permitted in the HC District as a conditional use in
accordance with the review and approval procedures set forth in Part 2 of
this chapter. The municipal agency shall determine that:
designed to recognize the turning movements generated. These access
points shall be coordinated with the access points required for the
nearby uses, the frequency of intersecting side streets, minimizing
left turns off collector and arterial streets and maintaining building
setbacks compatible with the required setbacks and landscaping.
A. Minimum lot area per unit: 1,500 square feet.
B. Efficiency apartments may be permitted by the Planning Board,
provided that the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that they will be
utilized primarily for transients for a period not to exceed 30 days.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
D. No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line.
E. Minimum number of units: 20.
F. No accessory building or parking area shall be located closer than 20
feet to a residential property line.
G. No additional parking shall be required for swimming pools, provided
that the pools are not open for use by the general public but are
primarily for use of the guests at the hotel or motel.
A. Vehicles for sale may be displayed out-of-doors within areas which meet
all of the general requirements, including setback from property lines
for parking areas; further provided that the area set aside for outdoor
display shall not exceed an area equal to the gross floor area of the
principal building. In the calculation of the percentage of the lot
occupied by the buildings and required off-street parking area, the area
of outdoor display areas shall be included in the same manner as the
area of the principal building. The area to be used for any such outdoor
display shall be appropriately set forth at the time of application for a
building permit or site plan approval.
B. Any outdoor storage of waste materials or supplies shall be in a
shielded location but suitable for containerized collection, and within
an area screened or fenced to a height of not less than six feet. The area
of such enclosure shall not exceed 110 square feet and shall not be
§ 91-289 FLORENCE CODE § 91-291
83:554
§ 91-292. Education uses.
Educational uses, including public elementary or secondary schools, duly
licensed by the State of New Jersey, attendance at which is sufficient
compliance with the compulsory education requirements of the state may
be permitted as a conditional use is all zones, provided that the municipal
agency finds the following:
closer than 25 feet to another lot which is within a residential zone or a
street line which is across the street from a residential zone.
C. The entire area of the site for the travel or parking of motor vehicles
will be covered by an all-weather, hard surface.
D. Repair of motor vehicles will be performed in a fully enclosed building,
and no motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled or inoperative motor
vehicles will be stored outside of an enclosed building.
E. All necessary steps shall be take to ensure that any resulting dust,
lighting, welding flashes, fumes, gas, noise, odor, smoke, vapor or
vibration does not create a condition more detrimental to the
neighborhood that would result from specifically permitted use.
A. The applicant shall follow all procedures, requirements and standards
for preliminary site plan approval.
B. The applicant shall submit a statement which shall indicate the grade
levels of the pupils to be housed in the building or buildings, the
planned pupil capacity of such building or buildings and the
contemplated eventual enrollment of the school.
C. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the municipal parking
standards plus adequate space for buses or delivery vehicles. These
requirements may be increased if, in the judgment of the municipal
agency, the unavailability of bus service, the particular location or the
relatively high percentage of pupils driving or anticipated to be driving
cars to school make such increased requirements desirable.
D. No driveways shall open onto a public street within 75 feet of an
intersection of such street with another public street.
E. Illumination for night athletic activities shall be shielded from
illuminating adjoining streets and residential areas.
F. Educational uses shall be screened from adjacent residential zones or
existing residences adjacent to the site in accordance with municipal
buffering studies and/or shall provide fencing along such property lines
as may be deemed adequate by the municipal agency.
G. Permitted signs. One freestanding sign not larger than 10 square feet in
area and not exceeding eight feet in height shall be permitted. In
addition, facade signage occupying an area no greater than 5% of the
front facade shall be permitted.
§ 91-291 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-292
83:555
§ 91-293. Adult uses. [Added 10-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-24;
2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
Adult uses are permitted in that portion of the HC Highway Commercial
District south of the New Jersey Turnpike as a conditional use in accordance
with the review and approval procedures set forth in Part 2 of this chapter.
The municipal agency shall determine that:
H. Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
A. No permitted adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet from any
residential district, school, place of worship or park or within 1,000 feet
from any such use in any contiguous municipality. For purposes of this
section, the AGR Agricultural District shall not be considered a
residential district.
B. No permitted adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet from any
other adult use within Florence Township or any contiguous
municipality.
C. The foregoing distance limitations shall be measured by a straight line
drawn from the nearest point of the lot boundary on which the proposed
adult use is to be located to the nearest point of the lot or district
boundary, as the case may be, of the other use or district, and those
uses, district boundary lines and dimensions shall be indicated on the
submitted site plan.
D. Every adult use shall be located in a freestanding building. If the adult
use is adjacent to a use patronized by minors or by families with minor
children, the adult use will include an appropriate buffer to separate
and screen it from the adjacent use. The buffer shall be constructed of
either a seven-foot high (minimum), visually opaque fence or of
landscape plantings. If landscape plantings are utilized, planting
materials shall be selected and planted to form a solid evergreen visual
barrier seven-feet high within five years.
E. No adult use shall be permitted in a building having a capacity of 50 or
more occupants.
F. Off-street parking requirements are one space for every 200 square feet
of gross floor area or portion thereof, plus one space for each viewing
booth of from one to three occupants, plus one space for each additional
three occupants or part thereof, plus one space for each employee.
Provided that a minimum of 10 parking spaces shall be provided.
G. Signs shall comply with requirements applicable to retail commercial
uses in the HC Highway Commercial Districts; provided, that no
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be shown,
described or depicted on any signs, advertisements, displays or exhibits
that are visible from outside the building. Further provided, that a sign
shall be posted giving notice that the premises are off limits to minors.
§ 91-292 FLORENCE CODE § 91-293
83:556
§ 91-293.1. Senior housing. [Added 9-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-22]
H. All other applicable requirements of the Land Development Ordinance,
including but not limited to those applicable to HC Highway
Commercial District, shall be met.
A. Purpose. The following provisions are intended to provide for the
development of housing for an older adult population. Such
development shall be located close to the existing residential
developments of Florence Township and shall be able to be served by
public sewer and water. Flexibility in site layout is encouraged to
promote clustered homesites, preserving open space within the tract on
which the development occurs. Noncontiguous residential duster
development of senior housing utilizing land in the AGR Agricultural
District is also permitted as a means of preserving farmland or
providing for public uses such as recreation, open space or other public
use appropriate to such land.
B. Lot and area requirements.
(1) Minimum tract size: 25 acres of contiguous land.
(2) Maximum density: four units per acre, requiring use of the
noncontiguous residential cluster technique to obtain a lot yield per
tract for senior housing that would exceed the lot yield if the tract
were developed for conventional single-family detached housing
under bulk regulations of the R Low-Density Residential District
applicable to conventional housing. In the noncontiguous
residential cluster technique, all or a portion of the density of
residential development permitted on a separate, noncontiguous
site in the AGR Agricultural District that is owned or controlled by
the developer of the senior housing project is to be utilized on the
senior housing site with the land in the AGR Agricultural District
reserved and permanently deed-restricted for agricultural use and/
or such public uses as recreation, open space over and above that
needed to meet the open space requirements of the senior housing
development itself, or other appropriate public use, provided that
in no case shall the density on the senior housing development site
be permitted to exceed four units per acre.
(3) For the purpose of noncontiguous residential cluster:
(a) The density permitted in the AGR Agricultural District where
there is public sewer and water shall be calculated at one unit
per acre. If such lands are dedicated by the developer and
accepted by the Township Council for public use such as a
park, recreation, open space or other appropriate public use,
the density shall be calculated at four units per acre.
(b) The density permitted in the AGR Agricultural District where
such utilities are not present shall be calculated at one unit per
§ 91-293 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-293.1
83:557
three acres. If such lands are dedicated by the developer and
accepted by the Township Council for public use such as a
park, recreation, open space or other appropriate public use,
the density shall be calculated as one unit per acre.
(4) Formula for determining number of noncontinuous AGR District
units required for a given senior housing development. The
difference between the total number of senior housing units
proposed for the development, and 1.2 times the number of gross
acres of land to be developed (including all parcels within the tract)
in the R District, is the number of noncontiguous AGR District units
required.
(5) Minimum requirements for individual senior housing lots.
(a) Lot size: 7,500 square feet, exclusive of any area dedicated or
reserved for conservation purposes.
(b) Lot width: 50 feet.
(c) Lot depth: 100 feet.
(d) Front yard setback: 20 feet.
(e) Side yard setback: 10 feet.
(f) Rear yard setback: 20 feet. Forty feet shall be provided for
reverse frontage lots adjacent to a county road.
(6) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(7) Maximum impervious coverage (per lot): 35%.
(8) Open space set aside for use by the residents of the senior housing
development shall be a minimum of 15% of the total contiguous
development tract. Except as provided in Subsection B below, such
open space shall be passive open space, left in or returned to a
natural state. Detention and retention basins shall be excluded
from such required open space.
(9) Recreation shall be provided pursuant to Article XX, which
requirements shall be modified to reflect the age of the projected
population of the development. Such recreation shall include tennis
courts, bocce courts, swimming pools and/or similar ageappropriate
facilities. Recreation areas shall not constitute less
than 3% nor more than 5% of the contiguous tract area.
(10) Buffers shall be as required by § 91-91, except that the planted
areas shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide. All yards abutting or
adjacent to a county road shall be increased an additional 25 feet in
width or depth, as the case may be, over the minimum otherwise
required. All yards abutting or adjacent to interstate highways,
including the New Jersey Turnpike, shall be increased an additional
§ 91-293.1 FLORENCE CODE § 91-293.1
83:558
100 feet in width or depth, as the case may be, over the minimum
otherwise required. There shall be a buffer of 50 feet adjacent
to the HC Highway Commercial District and a buffer of 100 feet
adjacent to the SM Special Manufacturing and GM General
Manufacturing Districts.
(11) Landscaping shall comply with § 91-90.
(12) All lots adjacent to county roads shall have reverse frontage.
C. Eligibility. Permanent residents of the homes in said development must
be at least 55 years of age, except that the spouse or an immediate
member of the family other than a child of said permanent residents, or
a live-in domestic, companion or nurse, may be a permanent resident
regardless of his or her age. A maximum of one child, age 18 or older,
may also reside as a permanent resident with his or her parent or
parents.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Perimeter fences (on individual lots) as approved by any
homeowners' association and provided for in the association
bylaws.
(2) Signs per Article XIX of this chapter.
(3) Community buildings for the entire development.
(4) Swimming pools for the entire development, but not on individual
lots.
(5) Tennis court(s) or similar recreational facilities for the entire
development, but not on individual lots.
(6) Maintenance buildings and storage sheds for the entire
development, but not on individual lots.
E. Use of land in AGR Agricultural District for noncontiguous residential
cluster.
(1) All lands located within the AGR Agricultural District may be
incorporated into a noncontiguous residential cluster development
of senior housing as provided in Subsection B(2) of this section and
as defined in this chapter.
(2) Land in the AGR Agricultural District from which all of the
permitted density has been utilized in a senior housing
development shall be permanently deed-restricted for use only for
the following purposes:
(a) Farms and farm buildings.
(b) Existing single-family detached dwellings, if any.
§ 91-293.1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-293.1
83:559
(c) Municipal open space, recreation and other appropriate uses.
(d) Customary accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
(3) Land in the AGR Agricultural District from which less than all of the
permitted density has been utilized in a senior housing
development shall be permanently deed-restricted only to the
extent of the permitted density actually utilized in the senior
housing development. If the utilization takes the form of dedication
and acceptance of land for public use, the land thus dedicated and
accepted shall be subdivided from the remainder, which shall not
be deed-restricted. If the utilization takes any other form, the land
may be subdivided into deed-restricted and unrestricted parcels or
the entire tract may be partially deed-restricted.
(4) Prior to the grant of final approval for any proposed noncontiguous
residential cluster development of senior housing using lands in
and densities assigned to the AGR Agricultural District, a deed
restriction shall have been recorded burdening such lands in the
AGR Agricultural District and reducing the permitted density for
residential development on such lands in the AGR Agricultural
District commensurate with the utilization of the permitted density
in the noncontiguous residential cluster development of senior
housing. Such recorded deed restriction shall be deemed null and
void in the event that the proposed noncontiguous residential
cluster development utilizing the density permitted on said lands in
the AGR Agricultural District does not receive final approval or in
the event that such final approval expires or is implemented
without the permitted density having been utilized, and in such
event, the Township of Florence shall execute whatever documents
are necessary to cause such deed restrictions to be removed of
record.
F. Procedure for applications involving dedication of lands.
(1) Any applicant for development of senior housing who seeks to
obtain a higher density by dedication of lands for public use shall,
prior to filing an application for development with a Land Use
Board, make application to Township Council for acceptance of
such lands. The application to Township Council shall be made on
forms available from the Township Clerk and shall include an
accurate survey of the lands proposed for dedication, a statement
of the purpose(s) for which the dedicated lands may be used, an
analysis of the suitability of the dedicated lands for the intended
purpose(s), and all other information required on the forms. There
shall be no additional fee for this application.
(2) In deciding whether to accept the dedicated lands, Township
Council shall be guided by the following standards:
(a) The location, size and accessibility of the lands;
§ 91-293.1 FLORENCE CODE § 91-293.1
83:560
(b) The usefulness of the lands for the purpose(s) intended;
(c) The public need for lands dedicated to such purpose(s):
(d) The appropriateness of the proposed public use in light of
alternative uses envisioned in the Master Plan and permitted
by ordinance; and
(e) Such other and further standards as may be reasonable and
warranted.
(3) Township Council shall render its decision on whether or not to
accept the proposed dedication of lands within 90 days or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Should
Township Council fail to render a decision within the time allowed
by this section and extensions, if any, the dedication of lands shall
be deemed disapproved.
(4) Acceptance by Township Council of any proposed dedication of
lands under this procedure shall be conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining approval by a Florence Township Land Use Board of an
application for development of senior housing utilizing the density
provided by such dedication. Preliminary major subdivision
approval or preliminary major site plan approval of such senior
housing development shall be obtained within one year of the date
of conditional acceptance of the dedication by Township Council or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(5) An applicant for development of senior housing who receives
preliminary major subdivision approval or preliminary major site
plan approval of plans utilizing density provided by dedication of
lands shall, as a condition of preliminary approval, be required to
deed over such lands to the Township of Florence at the time such
applicant receives final approval of such application or final
approval of the first section of such application, whichever occurs
first. The Land Use Board having jurisdiction over such application
shall require that the deed(s) to such lands be recorded in the
Burlington County Clerk's office prior to authorizing its Chairman
and Secretary to sign applicant`s final plans.
G. Sunset provision. The maximum number of units of senior housing that
may be approved for development in the aggregate within Florence
Township is 500 units. At such time as an application for development
containing the 500th and final unit of senior housing allowable under
this section receives final approval from a Florence Township Land Use
Board, the right of any applicant thereafter to apply for or receive
approval of an application for development of senior housing under this
section shall automatically expire and become null and void and of no
further force and effect. At such time, the provisions of this section shall
remain effective only for the purpose of regulating the units of senior
housing then constructed or approved for development and shall be of
§ 91-293.1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-293.1
83:561
no further force and effect for the purpose of development of additional
units of senior housing.
§ 91-293.1 FLORENCE CODE § 91-293.1
83:562
ARTICLE XLI
SMO Special Manufacturing Overlay District
[Added 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
§ 91-294. Purpose.
The purpose of the SMO Special Manufacturing Overlay District is to permit
SM Special Manufacturing uses in addition to the standard uses permitted
in the HC Highway Commercial District in accordance with the following
standards.
§ 91-295. Permitted uses.
Permitted principal and accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 91-296. Special requirements for SM Special Manufacturing uses
in SMO Special Manufacturing Overlay District; HC Zone height
limitations.
The following special requirements and provisions shall apply to any use
permitted under § 91-295B above (special manufacturing uses) in the SMO
Special Manufacturing Overlay District:
A. All principal and accessory uses permitted in the HC Highway
Commercial District shall be permitted in the SMO Special
Manufacturing Overlay District in accordance with the requirements of
§§ 91-218 through 91-225 (HC Highway Commercial District bulk,
parking, sign, etc. standards).
B. All uses permitted in the SM Special Manufacturing District shall be
permitted in the SMO Special Manufacturing Overlay District in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 91-252 through 91-258 (SM
Special Manufacturing District bulk, parking, sign, etc. standards).
A. All buildings and outside storage areas associated with a special
manufacturing use shall be set back from Route 130 a minimum of 300
feet; or
B. All buildings, parking and outside storage areas associated with a
special manufacturing use that are within the 300 foot setback from
Route 130 shall be screened from view of Route 130 and from any
existing and abutting HC Highway Commercial use(s) by means of a
double row of evergreen trees with a spacing of 25 feet on center or
equivalent visual screening such as fencing or berming. This
requirement shall be considered satisfied where there is an existing
equivalent visual screen or buffer on an adjacent property.
C. Site improvements required by Part 2 of this chapter that are not
necessary for the public health and safety may be waived by the
municipal agency (Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment) for
all developments complying with Subsection A or B above.
§ 91-294 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-296
83:563
D. Height limitations in the Highway Commercial Zone, which zone is
subject to the Special Manufacturing Overlay District zoning
classification, are hereby revised to permit a height of 50 feet for
structures in the zone, measured from finished grade. [Added
11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-19]
§ 91-296 FLORENCE CODE § 91-296
83:564
ARTICLE XLII
S School District
[Added 3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
§ 91-297. Purpose.
The school properties have been designated on the zone map as institutional
uses, and this zoning will establish them as a separate zone.
§ 91-298. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 91-299. Maximum building height.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 91-300. Area and bulk requirements.
A. Schools.
B. Parks, playgrounds and playing fields.
C. School-related facilities such as school maintenance buildings and
yards.
A. Principal building. Minimum requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Lot size: one acre for schools and 20,000 square feet for school
maintenance buildings and related facilities.
(2) Lot width: 100 feet.
(3) Lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Building coverage: 30%.
(5) Front yard: 30 feet.
(6) Year yard: 30 feet.
(7) Side yards: 20 feet.
§ 91-297 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-300
83:565

ARTICLE XLIII
Fire Stations and Emergency Squad Buildings
[Added 5-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
§ 91-301. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to establish standards for the placement of
fire stations and emergency squad buildings.
§ 91-302. Permitted principal uses.
Fire stations and emergency squad buildings shall be permitted principal
uses in the following zoning districts, in addition to any other district in
which they are listed as permitted uses:
§ 91-303. Area and bulk requirements for fire stations and
emergency squad buildings.
The following area and bulk standards shall apply to fire stations and
emergency squad buildings located in the HC, GM or SM Zoning Districts:
§ 91-304. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 91-120.
Where a building is designed to accommodate ancillary functions such
as social events and fund-raising activities, off-street parking shall be
calculated on the basis of four spaces per 1,000 square feet of net floor area
designed for such activities.
A. HC — Highway Commercial.
B. GM — General Manufacturing.
C. SM — Special Manufacturing.
A. Minimum lot area: two acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
E. Front yard setback: 75 feet.
F. Side yard setback: 50 feet.
G. Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
H. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
I. Maximum impervious coverage: 65%.
J. Maximum building height: 40 feet.
§ 91-301 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-305
83:567
§ 91-305. Landscaping and buffer requirements.
Fire stations and emergency squad buildings located in the HC, GM or SM
Zoning Districts shall comply with the landscaping and buffer requirements
of §§ 91-90 and 91-91 of this chapter.
§ 91-306. Signs.
Fire stations and emergency squad buildings shall comply with the sign
standards applicable to the zoning district in which the facility is located.
§ 91-305 FLORENCE CODE § 91-306
83:568
ARTICLE XLIV
RAA Active Adult Residential District (Senior Housing)
[Added 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
§ 91-307. Purpose.
The following provisions are intended to provide for the development of
housing for an older adult population. Such development shall be located
close to the existing residential developments of Florence Township and
shall be able to be served by public sewer and water. Flexibility in site
layout, including where appropriate a combination of detached (singlefamily)
and/or attached or semiattached (e.g., townhome) housing units, is
encouraged to promote design efficiency and the preservation of open space
within the tract on which the development occurs.
§ 91-308. Lot and area requirements.
A. Minimum overall tract size: 25 acres of contiguous land.
B. Maximum overall tract density (all units of each type): four units per
acre.
C. Minimum requirements for individual housing lots:
(1) Lot size.
(a) Single-family detached units: 8,000 square feet.
(b) Townhome units: 3,000 square feet, excluding, in each case,
any area dedicated or reserved for conservation purposes.
(2) Lot width.
(a) Single-family detached units: 60 feet.
(b) Townhome units: 28 feet.
(3) Lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Yard setbacks.
(a) Front yard setback: 25 feet. The measurement shall be from
the property line to the front building line of the structure, but
shall not include the steps and entrance pad, provided that the
steps and entrance pad do not exceed eight feet in length.
(b) Side yard setback: 10 feet (single-family detached units and
townhome end units only) measured from the furthest point of
the roof overhang to the property line.
(c) Rear yard setback: 20 feet.
D. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
§ 91-307 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-308
83:569
§ 91-309. Eligibility.
The permanent residents of all housing units in the senior housing
development must be at least 55 years of age, except that the spouse
or a member (other than a child) of the immediate family of an eligible
permanent resident (or, in the alternative, a single live-in adult domestic
employee, companion or nurse of an eligible permanent resident) may be
a permanent resident regardless of his or her age. A maximum of one
child, aged 18 or older, may also reside in any housing unit as a permanent
resident with his or her parent or parents.
§ 91-310. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses include the following:
E. Maximum impervious coverage (per lot).
(1) Single-family detached units: 45%.
(2) Townhome units: 75%.
(3) The maximum impervious coverage for lots containing each type of
housing unit has been calculated to allow for reasonable additions
and patios, and it is the intent of these standards that the maximum
impervious coverage shall not be exceeded. The average
impervious coverage for all the lots in the development may not
exceed 35%. This shall include single-family lots only and not any
townhome lots, open space, public right-of-way, or common lots.
F. Open space to be set aside for use by the residents of the senior housing
development shall be a minimum of 20% of the total contiguous
development tract, excluding for the purposes of such calculation the
total area occupied by any stormwater detention and/or retention
basins. The open space shall include the common community facilities
and shall be subject to a deed restriction restricting the use of the open
space, which deed restriction shall be subject to review and approval by
the Township Council.
G. Common recreation facilities for use by the residents shall include a
clubhouse, swimming pool and other age-appropriate facilities, the
construction of which shall be the obligation of the developer of the
senior housing development, as set forth in a developer's agreement
between the Township and the developer.
H. Buffers of undeveloped open space shall be maintained along the entire
perimeter of the development tract and shall be a minimum of 25 feet
wide, along the entire perimeter of the property, including along any
public right-of-way where residential properties in the development
back on that public right-of-way.
§ 91-308 FLORENCE CODE § 91-310
83:570
§ 91-311. Affordable housing.96
The developer shall be required to meet an affordable housing obligation
with respect to the development. The specific number and location of the
affordable housing units shall be set forth in a developer's agreement
between the developer and the Township.
A. Perimeter fences (on individual lots) as approved by any homeowners'
association and provided for in the association bylaws and in
compliance with Township ordinances.
B. Signs in accordance with Township ordinances.
C. Community buildings for the entire development.
D. Swimming pools for the entire development, but not on individual
housing lots.
E. Tennis court(s) or similar recreational facilities for the entire
development, but not on individual housing lots.
F. Maintenance buildings and storage sheds on individual housing lots,
but not in any case in which the total impervious coverage for an
individual housing lot would thereby exceed the allowable maximum for
such lot, as established by this article.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Housing.
§ 91-310 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-311
83:571

ARTICLE XLV
Residential Grading Plans
[Added 6-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
§ 91-312. Findings.
It is hereby determined to be necessary to establish regulations requiring
approval of grading plans for single-lot residential development in order
to limit stormwater runoff onto adjacent properties. While multiple lot
developments require land use approvals and the submission of grading
plans, it is equally important to require grading plans for single-lot
development.
§ 91-313. Submission of single-lot development grading plans.
Whenever a single lot is being developed with a new or replacement
residential structure, it shall be a condition for the issuance of any permits
or certificate of occupancy that the owner of the property shall have
obtained approval for a grading plan and that the approved plan is followed
and maintained.
§ 91-314. Submission of proposed grading plan.
The proposed grading plan shall be submitted to the Construction Code
Office at the time that the first application for any permit is submitted. The
proposed grading plan shall be forwarded to the Township Engineer for
review and approval before any permits are issued.
§ 91-315. Approval of grading plan.
Upon approval by the Township Engineer, the approval shall be noted on
the plan and a copy of the approved plan shall be retained in the file of the
Construction Code Office.
§ 91-316. Enforcement and obligations of property owner.
A. It shall be the obligation of the property owner to perform the grading
in accordance with the approved grading plan and to thereafter
maintain the grading in accordance with the approved grading plan.
B. Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the grading shall
be inspected by the Township Engineer to verify compliance with the
approved grading plan. The Township Engineer shall provide a written
notice to the Construction Code Official that the construction has been
completed in compliance with the approved grading plan.
C. The property owner shall be responsible for the payment of all
reasonable engineering fees in connection with the review of the
grading plan and the inspections of the on-site grading. Payments shall
be received by the Township from the property owner before the
certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ 91-312 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-316
83:573
D. In the event that the grading is changed without obtaining approval for
a revised grading plan, the property owner shall be responsible for the
restoration of the grading in accord with the approved grading plan and
for all engineering fees related to the restoration and inspection.
§ 91-316 FLORENCE CODE § 91-316
83:574
ARTICLE XLVI
Renewable Energy
[Added 8-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
§ 91-317. Purpose.
§ 91-318. Definitions.
A. The purpose of this article is to permit renewable energy facilities in
appropriate locations in the Township in a way that is consistent with
the Florence Township Master Plan and state legislation to facilitate
development of alternative forms of energy production, and to minimize
potential land use conflicts and potential negative impacts associated
with such facilities on surrounding properties. This article is intended
to accomplish the foregoing while also:
(1) Retaining prime agricultural soils for agricultural use by avoiding
siting such facilities on lands within the Agricultural District (AGR)
and lands with significant areas of prime farmland soils and soils of
statewide importance.
(2) Preserving the industry of agriculture and agricultural use of the
Township's rural environs by avoiding siting such facilities on lands
which have the realistic potential to become permanently
preserved farmland in accord with state legislative policies and
state and county planning initiatives.
(3) Preserving areas with an established rural and/or historic
character by avoiding siting such facilities on land within areas of
rural and/or historic character, particularly on land which is
exposed to public view and where, by reason of topography or other
natural features, the facility cannot be effectively screened from
view.
(4) Protecting the quality of life in residential districts by siting
ground-mounted facilities in locations that minimize the visibility of
such facilities from adjacent residential areas.
(5) Providing standards for buffering and screening of renewable
energy facilities to protect surrounding properties from glare and
to mitigate the negative visual impact of ground-mounted facilities.
(6) Providing for proper decommissioning of the renewable energy
facility after its useful life.
(7) Preventing heat islands or unnatural heat absorption, causing
ecological damage and habitat loss.
(8) Preserving and protecting existing forested areas which provide
multiple direct environmental benefits, such as carbon
sequestration, wildlife habitat and local cooling.
§ 91-317 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-318
83:575
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
MAJOR GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY
FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — An energy-generating facility that shall
be deemed to be a principal use when any of the following conditions
are met:
MINOR GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY
FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — An energy facility which does not meet
one or more of the conditions to be defined as a "major solar or
photovoltaic energy facility or structure."
RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY — A facility that engages in the
production of electric or heat energy from solar technologies,
photovoltaic technologies, or wind energy.
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY-GENERATING
FACILITY — A solar or photovoltaic facility mounted to the roof of a
building, carport or other structure which provides protection from
weather or provides habitable or storage space. This shall not include
facilities mounted above surface parking lots.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system that utilizes solar panels, as
defined herein, to convert solar energy to electricity or heat in order
to satisfy all or a portion of the energy requirements associated with a
dwelling or nonresidential structure and/or to generate electricity for
use in the regional high-voltage electrical grid. The conversion may
be accomplished by solar radiation absorbed by a medium (such as
solar panels, as defined herein) and distributed to a point of use. The
"system" shall include the solar panels and all associated equipment,
including any base, foundation, structural support, wiring, piping,
batteries or other components necessary to fully utilize the system. An
When the ground-mounted facility exceeds a ratio of 1:5 of the
land area on which the facility is constructed to the area used for
another purpose (including farming).
(1)
When the ground-mounted facility comprises an area of 10 acres or
greater.
(2)
When the ground-mounted facility is the only use or structure on a
lot.
(3)
When all of the energy produced by the facility is not used at
the site of the facility or on an adjoining contiguous property in
common ownership. For purposes of this article, net metering for
purposes of smoothing out differences in day-to-day production and
demand on the site of the facility or on an adjoining contiguous
property in common ownership does not constitute off-site use of
energy, and facilities constructed with up to 110% of the projected
demand of the site of the facility or an adjoining contiguous
property in common ownership or combination thereof does not
constitute off-site use.
(4)
§ 91-318 FLORENCE CODE § 91-318
83:576
§ 91-319. General provisions: use standards.
Unless otherwise specified, the following general requirements apply to all
solar and photovoltaic facilities regardless of whether they are principal or
accessory uses:
auxiliary energy system may be employed to supplement the output
provided by the solar energy system and to provide for the total energy
demand should the solar energy system become inoperable.
SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — A
facility or structure for the purpose of supplying energy produced from
solar or photovoltaic technologies, whether such facility or structure
is a principal use, a part of the principal use, or an accessory use or
structure.
SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC PARKING STRUCTURE — A solar or
photovoltaic facility mounted on a surface parking lot such that vehicles
may park and/or drive beneath.
SOLAR PANEL AREA — The area contained within an elevated panel
or plate, or a canopy or array thereof, that captures and converts
solar radiation to produce power, and includes flat plate, focusing
solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes the base or
foundation of the panel, plate, canopy, or array.
SOLAR PANELS — A structure containing one or more receptive cells,
the purpose of which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical or
heat energy by way of a solar system. This term includes all components
necessary to generate, store, transport and/or transfer energy.
A. Solar or photovoltaic energy systems are permitted as a principal use in
the SM Special Manufacturing and GM General Manufacturing
Districts in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.11.
B. In the AGR Agricultural District, solar or photovoltaic systems are
permitted only as accessory residential or agricultural uses. On
commercial farms (as defined under N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.), such
facilities shall be permitted in accord with the standards set forth in
N.J.A.C. 2:76-2A.12, which is the State Agricultural Development
Committee's ("SADC") Agricultural Management Practice ("AMP") for
the Construction, Installation, Operation or Maintenance of Solar
Energy Generation Facilities, Structures and Equipment on Commercial
Farms. Such systems shall be subject to site plan review. The governing
body has expressly considered allowing major ground-mounted solar or
photovoltaic energy facilities as a principal use in the AGR Agricultural
District but has determined that such facilities are inconsistent with the
Township's duly adopted Master Plan, sound environmental policies,
and the policies articulated by the New Jersey Legislature in recent
regulatory amendments enacted by way of P.L. 2012, Chapter 24, which
seek to protect farmland from such development. The governing body's
decision has been taken in full awareness of the New Jersey
§ 91-318 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-319
83:577
Legislature's earlier policy statement, set forth in P.L. 2009, Chapter
146, which made wind, solar or photovoltaic structures and uses
inherently beneficial uses under the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.). It is the governing body's considered determination,
in light of the Township's policies and the overall policies of this state,
that conversion of land located in Rural Planning Area 4 that has
been actively devoted to agricultural or horticultural use, and that is
valued, assessed and taxed pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act,
to major solar facility use would be a substantial detriment to the public
good and substantially impair the Township's Zone Plan. The detriment
and impairment, respectively, would be significantly exacerbated if
the subject lands were considered desirable for preservation under
the County and/or State Farmland Preservation Programs' planning
documents.
C. Solar energy-generating systems are permitted as an accessory use on
the same lot as the principal use, whether roof-mounted or groundmounted,
in all residential and business zone districts (specifically, R,
RA, RB, RC, RD, RD-1, AGR, HC, NC, OP, GM, SM, P, S, and RAA). The
purpose of these accessory systems is to generate energy to satisfy all
or a portion of the energy requirements associated with the on-site
dwelling(s) or business(es), rather than for sale back into the electrical
grid system. This provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the net
metering of excess power generated from time to time from a solar
energy system that is designed to meet up to 110% the energy needs of
the principal use on the same property. Major ground-mounted facilities
shall not be accessory uses.
D. Any solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility mounted to a
structure above a surface parking area or a roof shall be deemed an
accessory use.
E. Solar or photovoltaic energy facilities are permitted on the roofs of
buildings.
F. The installation of solar or photovoltaic energy systems by any
governmental agency on land owned or leased by said agency shall be
permitted as either a conditional accessory use or conditional principal
use in any zone district. The conditions for the use shall be in
compliance with the buffer, screening and setback requirements
otherwise applicable to such facilities under Township ordinances.
G. Solar or photovoltaic energy systems installed on, within or above a
stormwater management facility, parking lot, sign structure or any
other type of freestanding structure not specifically considered a roof
by the Construction Official shall be considered a ground-mounted
system.
H. Solar or photovoltaic energy systems shall not be used for displaying
any advertising. Reasonable identification of the manufacturer and/or
operator of the system is permitted using text that does not exceed a
§ 91-319 FLORENCE CODE § 91-319
83:578
§ 91-320. Standards: types of solar energy systems installation.
height of two inches. Hazard and/or warning signs pertinent to the
electrical nature of the equipment shall also be permitted.
I. Installation of a solar or photovoltaic energy system on a
nonconforming structure, or on a site containing a nonconforming
structure or use, shall be considered an expansion of the
nonconforming structure or use.
J. No structure or other portion of any major ground-mounted facility or
structure shall occupy any area designated and regulated by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection ("NJDEP") as a
floodplain, flood hazard area, wetland, wetland transition area or
riparian corridor unless approved in that location by the NJDEP.
K. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth herein, the installation of any
solar energy system shall require a zoning permit and all applicable
regulatory and construction permits, and its design shall conform to all
applicable prevailing codes, standards and ordinances, including, but
not limited to, the State Uniform Construction Code (UCC), National
Electrical Code (NEC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
requirements.
A. Roof-mounted systems.
(1) Roof-mounted systems which satisfy the provisions set forth herein
shall require construction and zoning permits but may not require
site plan approval. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, the
installation of the solar energy system does not satisfy the
provisions of this article, the applicant shall be directed to file a site
plan or variance application with the reviewing board having
jurisdiction. Said application for development or appeal shall
comply with the appropriate notice and hearing provisions
otherwise required for the application or appeal pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.). When any type of renewable energy facility is proposed to be
installed on an existing roof (roof-mounted), the applicant shall
provide to the Construction Code Official engineered drawings,
detailed calculations and/or a structural analysis prepared by a
New Jersey licensed professional engineer or architect verifying
the structural integrity of the roof system.
(2) Residential properties in all zone districts and commercial
properties in the NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone District.
(a) The panels and all accessory equipment on principal or
accessory buildings shall extend no more than 12 inches above
the highest point of the roof surface or structure and may not
project beyond the vertical plane of the roof edge. This
requirement includes installations on flat roofs.
§ 91-319 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-320
83:579
(b) On all pitched roofs which face public rights-of-way, solar
panels shall be co-planar with the roof surface and shall be
mounted no more than 12 inches above the roof surface.
(c) All frames and support structural elements shall be colored
black.
(d) Solar energy facilities or structures may be attached to any
accessory building that satisfies zoning location, setback and
height requirements for the zone. However, in no event shall
solar energy facilities or structures be attached to more than
two accessory buildings on a single lot. Solar energy facilities
or structures shall not be exempt from applicable height or
setback requirements.
(e) Solar energy facilities or structures may not be attached or
mounted to fences, walls, or the like.
(f) Solar energy facilities or structures are prohibited on feesimple
townhouse lots in developments lacking a homeowners'
association with a design-approval function.
(g) Solar energy facilities or structures are permitted accessory
uses and structures in condominium complexes, apartment
complexes and on fee-simple townhouse lots in developments
with a homeowners' association with a design-approval
function, in accord with all accessory use requirements and
standards governing residential uses above. Such solar energy
facilities or structures are permitted subject to written
preapproval of the homeowners' association, condominium
association or apartment association.
(3) Nonresidential properties in all commercial and industrial zone
districts except the Neighborhood Commercial Zone District.
(a) Roof-mounted solar energy facilities or structures on principal
or accessory buildings shall be mounted parallel to the roof
angle and shall not exceed a height of three feet above the
roofline to which they are mounted. However, a reviewing
board may permit the system to be mounted at a greater height
if the applicant can demonstrate that no part of the system will
be visible from any roadway on which the building has
frontage. In no instance shall any part of the system extend
beyond the vertical plane of the edge of the roof or exceed the
applicable height requirement of the zone in which it is
located, whether located on a principal or accessory structure.
(b) Roof-mounted systems shall not be permitted to be installed on
temporary buildings.
B. Ground-mounted systems.
§ 91-320 FLORENCE CODE § 91-320
83:580
§ 91-321. Standards for major ground-mounted solar or
photovoltaic energy facilities or structures as a principal use.
(1) Residential. A ground-mounted system installed on a single or twofamily
residential lot which satisfies the provisions set forth herein
shall require construction and zoning permits but shall not require
site plan approval. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, the
installation of the solar energy system does not satisfy the
provisions of this article, the applicant shall be directed to file a
variance application with the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Said
application for development or appeal shall comply with the
appropriate notice and hearing provisions otherwise required for
the application or appeal pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
(2) Nonresidential. A ground-mounted system installed on a
nonresidential or multifamily residential lot shall require a site plan
application with the reviewing board having jurisdiction. Said
application for development or appeal shall comply with the
appropriate notice and hearing provisions otherwise required for
the application or appeal pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
(3) Lot coverage. The total solar panel area, along with the impervious
surface area of any appurtenant facilities, shall be used for the
purpose of calculating lot coverage, and the installation shall not
result in a lot coverage percentage which exceeds the maximum
percentage permitted by code for the zone district in which the
facility is located.
A. All major solar or photovoltaic energy facility or structure installations
shall comply with the following area, yard and height requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 20 acres.
(2) Minimum front, side and rear yards: 75 feet.
(3) Maximum height of any structure, including panels and inverters,
shall be 15 feet.
B. No structure or other portion of the facility, except for fencing, access
roads and non-energy-generating equipment, shall be situated less than
300 feet from any residence or less than 150 feet from any accessory
structure, whether located on the same or adjacent property.
C. Major solar or photovoltaic energy facility applications shall submit a
landscape plan conforming to the following requirements. A landscape
buffer shall be installed around the facility to shield the facility and all
related accessory structures and parking areas from public view and
the view of any adjoining uses on a lot having a common lot line on
which such facility or structure will be located. The vegetative buffer
shall be not less than 50 feet in width and may not be located in the
§ 91-320 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-321
83:581
§ 91-322. Standards for ground-mounted minor solar or
photovoltaic energy facilities or structures as an accessory use.
setback required pursuant to § 91-321A(2). The required buffer shall
consist of at least three rows of trees, which may include existing
vegetation, new plantings, or a combination thereof, providing yearround
screening. The required buffer shall include native evergreens
in the rear interior rows with a mix of deciduous and evergreen trees
planted in the front exterior row. Deciduous trees shall be at least 3.5
inches' caliper and 14 feet in height at the time of planting. Evergreen
trees shall have a minimum height at planting of six feet. Trees shall be
planted 10 feet on center in staggered rows. Shrubs shall supplement
the landscape buffer areas in order to conceal ground-level visual
penetration year round. Existing hedgerows or vegetated windbreaks
that provide screening of the subject site from neighboring properties
shall be retained and augmented as necessary. Substations and other
associated transmission structures shall be screened with a double
row of evergreen plantings with a minimum height of eight feet at
planting. Clearing of upland hardwood forest shall be prohibited except
to the extent required for site access from a public road. Buffers and
screening that have been planted or natural buffers that have been
utilized to form an effective screen must be retained in perpetuity. Any
areas in which the effect of the buffer has been reduced, for any cause
or reason, must be replanted and returned to an effective buffer as
described in this section.
A. All minor ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy installations
shall be considered accessory uses and shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) The purpose of a minor solar or photovoltaic energy facility or
structure shall be to provide power for the principal use on the
property. The facility shall be sized to accommodate no more than
110% of the average annual electric use for the property, or in the
case of new construction, 110% of the projected annual electrical
use of the property.
(2) The maximum height of any structure, including panels and
inverters, shall be 15 feet.
(3) Minor ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or
structures shall only be located in the rear yard.
(4) All nonresidential minor ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic
energy facilities or structures shall be screened from view on all
sides by a twenty-foot-wide planted buffer which completely
screens the view of the facility and any associated glare from
adjacent streets (measured from a height of four feet at the center
line of the street) and adjacent property lines (measured from a
height of five feet at the property line). The buffer shall also consist
of a mix of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs.
§ 91-321 FLORENCE CODE § 91-322
83:582
§ 91-323. Standards applicable to ground-mounted major and
minor solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or structures as a
nonresidential principal or accessory use.
(5) All other bulk standards shall be as otherwise required for
accessory structures in the applicable zone district of the subject
property.
B. Facilities mounted above parking lots shall be considered accessory
uses and shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Facilities mounted above parking lots shall be designed to provide
adequate space for access by emergency vehicles whenever
necessary.
(2) The maximum permitted height shall be 20 feet.
(3) Facilities shall only be located within the rear yard.
(4) The minimum side and rear yard setback for any such facility shall
be 50 feet if adjacent to a nonresidential use or district and 100 feet
if adjacent to a residential use or district.
(5) The facility shall be screened from view on all sides by a twentyfoot-
wide planted buffer which completely screens the view of the
facility and any associated glare from adjacent streets (measured
from a height of four feet at the center line of the street) and
adjacent property lines (measured from a height of five feet at the
property line). The buffer shall also consist of a mix of deciduous
and evergreen trees and shrubs.
(6) Existing vegetation shall be retained and utilized to the extent
practical.
(7) The facility shall be designed in such a manner that neither water
nor snow accumulates and has concentrated flow off the structure.
A. All structures or other portions of the facility shall be adequately
screened from public view and historic sites. Ground-mounted facilities
shall be located to minimize views of the facilities from public roadways
and from existing residences not located on site and from neighboring
undeveloped residentially zoned property by utilizing existing visual
barriers, including, but not limited to, buildings, trees, hedgerows and
natural topography, to the maximum extent possible, in addition to
visual screening described elsewhere in this section.
B. Ground-mounted solar facilities and structures shall be limited to
existing cleared areas as shown on 2012 NJDEP aerial photographs.
C. All on-site utility lines associated with the renewable energy system
shall be underground.
§ 91-322 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-323
83:583
D. The preservation of agricultural activities and agriculturally viable soils
is key to the long-term survival of farming as an industry in the
Township; therefore, construction of solar facilities is subject further to
the requirements set forth below:
(1) No prime soils or soils of statewide importance as identified by the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service shall be removed
from any site upon which major solar or photovoltaic energy
facilities and structures are constructed.
(2) Within areas of prime soils or soils of statewide importance, no
concrete footings shall be constructed or used for solar or
photovoltaic panel racking systems or other structures used to
support panels; however, concrete pads for inverters and similar
equipment, and concrete footings for security fence, may be
constructed within areas containing these soils.
(3) Grading within areas of prime soils or soils of statewide importance
shall be limited to that necessary to construct access roads,
inverter and switching equipment and pads, parking areas and
construction trailers and associated facilities.
(4) No major solar or photovoltaic energy facility shall occupy more
than 50% of the gross tract area of any parcel or contiguous parcels
in common ownership now subject to farmland assessment after
environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, wetland
transition areas, flood hazard areas and riparian corridors have
been subtracted from the gross tract area. The remaining 50% of
gross tract area, minus environmentally sensitive areas described
above, shall continue in agricultural use so long as the solar facility
remains on the subject property. These lands shall be known and
designated as "agricultural use lands."
(5) Farm structures and not more than one residential dwelling
supporting continuing farm operations on the restricted lands
portion of the site shall be permitted; provided, however, that areas
occupied by farm buildings, the residential dwelling, and
appurtenant residential areas shall not be counted toward the
overall 50% gross tract area of agricultural use lands.
(6) Agricultural use lands guidelines. The following guidelines shall be
utilized in determining the configuration and location of the lands
remaining in agricultural use:
(a) Agricultural use lands shall be contiguous, allowing for the
most valuable agricultural lands to be utilized in an efficient
manner.
(b) Agricultural use lands shall be configured to facilitate
agricultural use. Factors such as, but not limited to, proximity
of the restricted lands to adjacent tracts containing farming
operations, the ability to create large contiguous tracts of
§ 91-323 FLORENCE CODE § 91-323
83:584
agricultural use lands or farmland, and the desirability of
maximizing separation between the solar or photovoltaic
energy facility and existing off-site residential units should be
considered.
(c) In order to maintain the rural character and scenic viewsheds
of the Township, as perceived from the public rights-of-way,
agricultural use lands should be located in such manner as to
preserve scenic vistas and preserve the rural character of
farmsteads, barns and homesteads after development.
(d) Where tracts include existing farm operations, agricultural use
lands should be configured to preserve such uses, to the
greatest extent possible, in order to facilitate the continuation
of farming.
(e) Proposed roads should be located within the portion of the
property utilized for the major solar or photovoltaic energy
facility. It is the intent of this subsection to keep the
agricultural use lands portion of the tract continuous and free
of roadway intrusions; however, adequate access must be
provided to the agricultural use lands area.
(f) Agricultural use lands created as a result of these regulations
may be used for recreation, agriculture, or natural resource
conservation. No buildings or structures shall be constructed
or maintained on the agricultural use lands except such
structures that are part of the agricultural or natural resource
conservation land use.
E. Soil erosion control, soil stabilization. All ground areas occupied by the
solar or photovoltaic energy facility or structure installation that are
not utilized for access to operate and maintain the installation shall be
planted and maintained with crops or pasture for farm animals or native
or noninvasive shade-tolerant vegetation for the purpose of soil
stabilization. Plants such as clovers, vetches and other low-growing
blooming plants supportive of pollinators shall be included in any
ground cover seeding mix. The vegetative cover must be established
prior to the setting or construction of a solar array. Stone ground cover
is prohibited. Ground cover shall be maintained primarily by using
mechanical means; however, herbicides may be used on a spot basis for
targeted weeds. Broadcast application of herbicides for routine
maintenance of ground cover is prohibited.
F. Sound levels from the energy system shall not exceed 40 dBA when
measured from any site property line.
G. Where the prior use of a facility site consists of agriculture, the facility
shall be installed such that it can be returned to active agricultural
production after the useful life and removal of the facility. As such, site
disturbance, including, but not limited to, grading, cut and fill, soil
removal, excavation and soil compaction, shall be minimized.
§ 91-323 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-323
83:585
§ 91-324. Application requirements.
H. The use of concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface, including
gravel, is prohibited on the site of such facilities, except in the following
locations:
(1) The mounting of inverters, transformers, power conditioning units,
control boxes, pumps and other such facility components.
(2) The mounting of solar photovoltaic panels, films and arrays when
used as ballast.
(3) Driveway aprons.
(4) Portions of roads and driveways where necessary to provide
stability for vehicles.
I. The extent of roads and driveways shall be minimized to the extent
possible and shall be constructed so as to minimize soil compaction.
J. All electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to
prevent unauthorized access.
K. The only signs permitted on a solar or photovoltaic facility or any
associated building or structure are those depicting the manufacturer's
or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner
identification.
L. The system shall be constructed in such a manner that exposed
hardware, supporting structures, frames and piping are finished with
nonreflective surfaces.
A. Permit. A zoning permit and construction permit shall be required for
the installation of a renewable energy system.
B. Except for roof-mounted solar applications, an application for a
nonresidential facility shall be accompanied by a site plan which
includes the following:
(1) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property.
(2) The location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on
the property.
(3) The location of all of the components of the renewable energy
system, including substations, inverters and transformers.
(4) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property.
(5) The location of proposed and existing overhead and underground
utility and transmission lines.
(6) Energy system specifications, including manufacturer and model.
§ 91-323 FLORENCE CODE § 91-324
83:586
(7) A detailed plan of the interconnection to the electrical distribution
or transmission system of the intended energy user.
(8) A description of any necessary upgrades or modifications to
existing substations or the necessity for a new substation; for
projects over 2 MW, the location and elevations of all transmission
lines, support structures and attachments to a substation(s); proof
of initiation and current state (i.e., feasibility study, system impact
study, interconnection facilities study, or executed interconnection
service agreement and construction service agreement) of the PJM
generation interconnection planning review process shall be
provided for any projects over 2 MW, along with copies of the
executed interconnection service agreement and construction
service agreement, if available.
(9) The location and condition of existing hedgerows and tree lines.
Trees on the site that have a caliper of eight inches in diameter at
breast height (dbh) or greater shall be described by location,
species and overall condition.
(10) A copy of the application to the local electric utility for
interconnection.
(11) Photographic simulation of the view of the proposed facility from
ground level from all public roads abutting the property and from
adjacent residential uses. A graphical cross-section shall also be
required showing the line of sight to the facility in relation to
adjoining properties, including residences or other buildings where
a view of the facility is possible.
(12) A grading and drainage plan under the seal of a licensed
professional engineer, which shall provide the details necessary to
adequately demonstrate to the reviewing agency engineer that
stormwater management is in compliance with Township ordinance
standards. Notwithstanding that the surface of a solar panel shall
not be considered to be impervious for the purpose of calculating
stormwater runoff, the reviewing board engineer, as applicable,
shall require the submission of stormwater calculations and/or
improvements to determine if the installation of the groundmounted
system and associated site improvements will create a
potential impact to the on-site or off-site drainage or increase
stormwater runoff from the predevelopment condition. Prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or placing the facility
online, an as-built grading and drainage plan, prepared by a
licensed professional surveyor, shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer for review and approval. The plan shall show that the asbuilt
conditions are substantially the same as those shown on the
approved grading and drainage plan.
(13) For those systems constructed in a stormwater management
facility or on a parking lot or sign structure, a professional
§ 91-324 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-324
83:587
§ 91-325. Decommissioning plan.
engineer's certification shall be submitted stating the integrity
of the stormwater management facility or structure will not be
compromised by the system and that relevant capacities will not
be reduced. The certification shall include necessary details to
demonstrate that no stormwater runoff or natural water shall be
diverted to overload the existing system, increase runoff to
adjacent properties, create flooding or the need for additional
facilities, cause the systems to be underwater or to reduce the
capacity or operation of the stormwater management facility.
(14) A maintenance plan and land surface management plan shall be
submitted that sets forth provisions for the continuing maintenance
of the entire site, including all solar panels and associated
equipment, required plantings, area not devoted to solar
production, including a schedule of specific maintenance activities
to be conducted on site, but outside of the solar facility, and shall be
maintained to a level that will discourage successional growth or
the establishment of invasive species. Planting of warm-weather
native grasses which allow for mid to late summer mowing,
providing beneficial critical habitat to native bird species and other
wildlife, is encouraged. The use of herbicides, pesticides and
chemical cleaners or solvents shall not be permitted as an
acceptable maintenance practice.
(15) A construction staging and sequencing plan shall be provided
which details all pertinent information related to construction
activities, including, but not limited to:
(a) Days and hours of construction activities.
(b) Location of parking and loading areas.
(c) Location of truck washing areas.
(d) Location of construction trailers and associated facilities.
(e) Location of topsoil stockpile areas.
(f) Designated truck routes to and from the site.
(g) Temporary lighting.
(h) Site security.
(16) The applicant shall provide initial and periodic familiarization to
local first responders on safe entry, shut-down and operations
within the solar array site
A. All applications for a major solar facility as a principal use shall be
accompanied by a decommissioning plan to be implemented upon
abandonment and/or in conjunction with removal of solar energy
§ 91-324 FLORENCE CODE § 91-325
83:588
§ 91-326. Abandonment.
system. Before beginning any decommissioning activities, the applicant
must submit a performance bond in a form and amount satisfactory to
the Township Attorney, which shall be based upon an estimate approved
by the Board Engineer, assuring the availability of adequate funds to
restore the site to a useful, nonhazardous condition in accordance with
the decommissioning plan. Prior to removal of solar energy systems,
a permit for removal activities shall be obtained from the Florence
Township Construction Official. The decommissioning plan shall include
the following provisions:
(1) Restoration of the surface grade and soil after removal of
aboveground structures and equipment.
(2) Restoration of soil areas with native seed mixes, and/or plant
species suitable to the area, which shall not include any invasive
species.
(3) Retention of access roads, fences, gates or buildings or buffer
plantings, as required at the discretion of the Township.
(4) Restoration of the site for agricultural crops or forest resource
land, as applicable.
B. If the property owner fails to remove the facility and restore the facility
in accordance with the decommissioning plan, the Township may
remove the facility in place of the owner. All costs incurred by the
Township in connection with same shall be a first priority lien,
enforceable pursuant to municipal tax lien statutes.
A. A solar energy facility that is out of service for a continuous twelvemonth
period will be deemed to be abandoned. The Zoning Officer shall
issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of a solar energy facility
that is deemed to be abandoned. The notice shall be sent return receipt
requested.
B. The property owner shall have 30 days to respond to the notice of
abandonment from the receipt date of the notice.
C. If the property owner provides information that demonstrates the solar
energy facility has not been abandoned, the Zoning Officer shall
withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the property owner that
the notice has been withdrawn.
D. If the Zoning Officer determines the solar energy facility has been
abandoned, the property owner shall remove the facility in its entirety
at the owner's sole expense within three months after the owner
receives the notice of abandonment.
E. If the property owner fails to remove the facility in the time allowed, the
Township and/or its employees and/or contractors may enter the
§ 91-325 GAMES OF CHANCE § 91-326
83:589
property to remove the solar energy facility and, in the event the
Township performs the removal, all costs of such removal shall be
reimbursed to the Township by the owner. In the event the owner
fails to reimburse the Township, the Township may place a lien on
the property in the amount of the costs of said removal and, in the
event that the township incurs any additional costs in enforcing the
lien and/or collecting the money owed, the owner shall be obligated
to reimburse the Township for the additional costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorneys' fees.
§ 91-326 FLORENCE CODE § 91-326
83:590
Chapter 95
(RESERVED)
Chapter 98
MERCANTILE LICENSES
Chapter 100
NEWSPAPER VENDING BOXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 91.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, any newspaper duly
entered or registered with the United States Postal Service in accordance
with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper filed or recorded with
any recording office as provided by law or any publication containing news,
editorial or advertising content and which is intended to be disseminated to
the general public either with or without charge from a vending box.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind that is the owner or publisher of any
newspaper or who dispenses, distributes or disseminates any newspaper.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, court, highway
or road and the legal right-of-way thereof, including but not limited to the
cartway or traffic lanes, curb, sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and
any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a
street. The term shall also include any: parking lots, parks, playgrounds,
public buildings and similar areas that are open for the use of the public.
VENDING BOX — Any box, receptacle or machine from which newspapers
are intended to be dispensed, distributed or disseminated to the general
public, either with or without charge or the payment of any contribution or
subscription.
§ 91-326 (RESERVED) § 100-2
95:591
§ 100-2. Standards for maintenance and installation. [Added
4-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-797]
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon or over any public
sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:
§ 100-2.1. Location and placement of vending box. [Added 4-7-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-7]
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of
a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a
public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
A. No newsrack shall exceed sixty (60) inches in height, twenty-four (24)
inches in width or twenty (20) inches in thickness.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event that he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin
return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in
the event of a malfunction of the coin return mechanism, or to give the
notices provided for in this chapter.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof;
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion, in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed, are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 100-2, Compliance required.
§ 100-2 FLORENCE CODE § 100-2.1
100:592
§ 100-2.2. Notice of violations. [Added 4-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-7]
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly
or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
C. Newsrack or newsracks shall be chained, bolted or otherwise secured
so as to prevent their being blown down or around the public right-ofway.
D. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of
newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than four (4) feet along a
curb.
E. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within twelve (12) feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
(3) Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box
or other emergency facility.
(4) Within five (5) feet of any driveway.
(5) Within three (3) feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
A. If any newspaper distribution box is determined to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, then a notice of violation shall be sent to the
person designated to receive notices in the registration form.
B. The notice shall state the specific provisions of this chapter which have
not been adhered to and notify the owner that the box must either be
removed or brought into compliance with the specified provisions of
this chapter within fifteen (15) business days. If the owner elects to
cure the specified violation or violations within said time period, then
the owner shall take all necessary curative actions prior to the
expiration of said time period.
§ 100-2.1 NEWSPAPER VENDING BOXES § 100-2.2
100:593
§ 100-3. Violations and penalties.98
Any person who should violate any provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.)
or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or serve
a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any
combination thereof. Each continuing day of violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 101
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 126.
§ 101-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the term "solicitation" or "solicit"
shall mean the request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property,
financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value. Solicitation shall
include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of canisters, cards,
receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money or other things of
value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 101-2. Permit fee.
The annual permit fee is $25 per bin.
§ 101-3. Application and requirements for placement; use of
clothing bins for solicitation purposes.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin within the Township of
Florence, for solicitation purposes, without meeting the requirements of
this chapter and having obtained a permit as outlined herein:
C. Upon request, the official issuing a notice of violation shall meet with
the recipient of such notice to discuss the basis for the determination
that a violation exists and any proposed means of eliminating any
violations.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 100-2.2 FLORENCE CODE § 101-3
100:594
§ 101-4. Renewal application requirements.
In addition to the above application requirements, renewal applications
must include:
A. The donation clothing bin must be owned by a charitable organization
registered with the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to P.L. 1994, c. 16.
B. The donation clothing bin cannot be placed without having first
obtained a permit from the Municipal Clerk, which is approved by the
Township Zoning Officer and the Township Administrator or his
designee. Permits are renewable on an annual basis during the month
of January.
C. Zoning approval is contingent upon the following information:
(1) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible as indicated on a property survey. For commercial
properties or those properties subject to site plan approvals, a
clothing donation clothing bin can only be placed in the location
where the recycling and or waste collection for the business takes
place. Site plan approval may be required as determined by the
Zoning Officer. Clothing donation bins are not permitted in any
right-of-way.
(2) The manner in which the charitable organization or person
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the bin
would be used, sold or dispersed, and the method by which the
proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or spent.
(3) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
applicant and of any entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin.
(4) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the bins, which
can be no less often than once per week, and the name and
telephone number of the person to be notified if the bin is
overflowing prior to the scheduled date of pickup.
(5) Written consent from the property owner, or the owner's
authorized representative, to place the bin on his/her property.
A. A statement of the manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donation collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the person anticipates he/she may
make in this process during the period covered by the renewal.
B. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected
§ 101-3 NEWSPAPER VENDING BOXES § 101-4
100:595
§ 101-5. Placement of bins.
Florence Township shall not grant an application for a permit to place, use,
or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the placement of the
bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be
limited to, the placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any
place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids
or gases or the placement of a bin where it interferes with vehicular or
pedestrian circulation. The person placing, using or employing a donation
clothing bin shall maintain the bin and the area surrounding the bin such
that there shall be no accumulation of clothing or other donations outside
the bin.
§ 101-6. Display of permit.
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
via the bin and of any entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal.
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, the new location where the bin
is to be situated, as precisely as possible, and written consent from the
property owner of the new location.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration.
B. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin and of
any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin.
C. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. For the purposes of this chapter, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office.
D. In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that clothing or other donations collected via the bin, their
proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to, an entity other
than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities
which may share or profit from such donations.
E. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the Township
in the most-recent permit or renewal application, indicating the manner
in which the owner anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed and the method
by which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent.
§ 101-4 FLORENCE CODE § 101-7
100:596
§ 101-7. Receipt and investigation of complaints relative to
donation clothing bins.
§ 101-8. Additional penalties; remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
A. The Zoning Officer and/or the Township Administrator or his designee
shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any complaints from the
public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the Zoning Officer and or
the Township Administrator or his designee that a person has engaged
in or is engaging in any act or practice in violation of this chapter, the
person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing with the appropriate municipal
agency is not requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or
removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at public
auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to
notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to
the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, Florence Township may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Township
may bring this action in the Florence Township Municipal Court or the
Superior Court of New Jersey as a summary proceeding under the
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.), and any penalty moneys collected shall be paid to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of P.L.
2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the Township
Council to have that person's eligibility restored. The Township Council
may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
§ 101-7 NEWSPAPER VENDING BOXES § 101-8
100:597
Chapter 102
NOISE
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good-faith, effort to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60
et seq.), and all other applicable laws and regulations or had no
fraudulent intentions.
§ 101-8 FLORENCE CODE § 101-8
102:598
ARTICLE I
Engine and Compression Brakes
[Adopted 7-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-20]
§ 102-1. Unlawful use.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or
cause to be used or operated within the limits of the Township of Florence,
Burlington County, New Jersey, any engine brake, compression brake or
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration
of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive or
unmuffled noise from the vehicle.
§ 102-2. Exceptions.
This prohibition shall not apply to the application of unmuffled engine or
compression brakes or a mechanical exhaust device where necessary for
the protection of persons and/or property which cannot be avoided by
an alternative braking system. Noise caused by the application of engine
compression brakes, otherwise known as engine braking, which is
effectively muffled or where the application is necessary for the health,
safety and welfare of the community is exempt from the provisions of this
section. Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency purposes
are also exempt from this section.
§ 102-3. Signs posted.
Appropriate signs shall be posted at entrances to the community and at
other locations determined by the Chief of Police to be reasonable in order
to give notice of the prohibition on the use of engine and compression
brakes.
§ 102-4. Violations and penalties.
The fine for a violation of this section shall be $50 on a first offense and
shall not be less than $50 nor more than $500 on any second or subsequent
offense.
§ 102-1 NOISE § 102-4
102:599

ARTICLE II
Regulation of Noise
[Adopted 12-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2899]
§ 102-5. Outdoor construction activities prohibited.
No outdoor construction activity shall be permitted which involves the
operation of vehicles, equipment, machinery, generators, compactors,
welders or other power tools or specialized construction or building
equipment between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the
weekdays, Monday through Friday, inclusive, or between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays.
§ 102-6. Indoor construction activities restricted.
No indoor construction activity shall be permitted which involves the
operation of equipment, machinery, generators, compactors, welders or
other power tools or specialized construction or building equipment which
generates noise that is audible beyond the property lines of the lot on which
the building is located in a manner that would reasonably annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling or other type of
residence or of any persons in the vicinity between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. during the weekdays, Monday through Friday, inclusive, or
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays.
§ 102-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 102-5 shall not apply to a federal, state or local
government employee or a public utility employee performing emergency
repairs or to other repairs of an emergency nature being conducted in
accordance with a specific waiver issued by the Construction Official of the
Township of Florence.
§ 102-8. Yelling, shouting.
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time
or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in
any office or in any dwelling or other type of residence or of any persons in
the vicinity.
§ 102-9. Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising.
The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial
advertising or for any other purpose, with the following exceptions: such
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, Construction Noise, Yelling and
Shouting, adopted 9-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20.
§ 102-5 NOISE § 102-9
102:601
sound as may attract attention but which will not disturb the peace, quiet,
and comfort of the inhabitants.
§ 102-10. Radios, televisions, phonographs.
The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio
receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at
any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for
the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which
such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
§ 102-11. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter.
Penalties shall be imposed as provided in § 1-10 of this Florence Township
Code.
§ 102-9 FLORENCE CODE § 102-11
102:602
Chapter 104
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 56.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Housing — See Ch. 87.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
§ 104-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, authorizing the inspection of premises
by an enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to c. 188, P.L. 1950.100 A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof, with the exception of Section VI of
said code, without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 104-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter, with the exception of
Section VI of said code, is described and commonly known as the "Public
Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 104-3. Violations and penalties.101
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be liable to a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or
imprisoned for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or serve a period
of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof, for each such violation.
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 102-11 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 104-3
104:603
Chapter 106
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Removal and disposal of soil — See Ch. 120.
Stormwater quality protection — See Ch. 123.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 126.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 140.
§ 106-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Off-Tract Street Improvement Cost
Allocation and Recapture Ordinance." For purposes of this chapter, the
terms "pro-rata contribution," "pro-rata share" and "fair share" are intended
to be used interchangeably.
§ 106-2. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
§ 106-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to off-tract street improvements and related
drainage facilities and necessary easements therefor. For purposes of this
chapter, "off-tract" shall mean "not located on the property which is the
subject of the pending development application nor on the closest half
of the abutting street or right-of-way." Such off-tract street improvements
A. Ensure adequate off-tract street and related drainage improvements,
and easements therefor, which are clearly, directly and substantially
related to or necessitated by any construction or development which is
the subject of an application for subdivision or site plan approval;
B. Facilitate safe and efficient traffic circulation and control to maintain
satisfactory levels of traffic service during peak travel times;
C. Assess all developers and owners benefitted by such off-tract street
improvements a fair share of the reasonable and necessary costs and
expenses of such improvements proportionate to the benefit conferred
thereby;
D. Provide reasonable standards by which such fair share assessments
shall be calculated, and to provide for recapture in the event that any
party shall pay or incur more than its fair share; and
E. Encourage development that is compatible with the goals and
objectives of the circulation plan element and other provisions of the
Township's Master Plan.
§ 104-3 FLORENCE CODE § 106-3
104:604
may be to Township and Burlington County streets and roads, or portions
thereof, located within the Township, whether improved or unimproved,
existing or shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
which hereafter is approved by official action pursuant to law, and to
intersections located within the Township of such streets and roads with
state highways. Such improvements may include, but shall not be limited
to, street widening, alignment, realignment, channelization of intersections,
construction of barriers, new or improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs,
street drainage and related drainage facilities, sidewalks, street lighting,
shade trees, utility improvements or relocations, grading or regrading,
paving or repaving, the establishment or widening of shoulders, the
construction or reconstruction of existing or new streets, and other street
or traffic improvements to improve capacity or level of service within the
public right-of-way.
§ 106-4. Assessment for required off-tract street improvements.
As a condition of final subdivision and final site plan approval, the board of
jurisdiction shall require the applicant to pay its pro-rata share of the cost
of providing reasonable and necessary off-tract street improvements and
associated drainage facilities and easements that are clearly, directly and
substantially related to or necessitated by construction or improvements
within such subdivision or development. Such pro-rata share shall be
determined in accordance with §§ 106-5 and 106-6, as applicable. The board
of jurisdiction, in its sole discretion, may require the applicant to install
some or all of the required off-tract street improvements; provided,
however, that in the event the applicant shall incur more than its pro-rata
share of the cost of such improvements, the applicant shall be entitled to
recapture the amount incurred in excess of its pro-rata share, with the
assistance of the Township, as provided in this chapter.
§ 106-5. Off-tract street improvements benefitting only applicant.
Where required off-tract street improvements will provide additional
capacity that is sufficient to accommodate only the applicant's proposed
development and/or the additional traffic to be generated as a result of
such development, and no other developers or property owners will be
benefitted by any excess capacity created by the improvements installed or
to be installed by the applicant, as determined by the board of jurisdiction's
traffic consultant using the formula set forth in § 106-6 below, then the
applicant's pro-rata contribution shall be 100% of the cost of such
improvements, and the board of jurisdiction may, in its sole discretion,
require the applicant to install all of such improvements at the applicant's
own cost and expense.
§ 106-6. Off-tract street improvements benefitting applicant and
others.
A. Where required off-tract street improvements will provide additional
capacity that is in excess of what is necessary to accommodate the
§ 106-3 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 106-6
104:605
§ 106-7. Right of judicial review.
In order to preserve the right to a judicial review and determination as
to the reasonableness and fairness of the amount determined as its prorata
contribution pursuant to § 106-5 or 106-6, the applicant must pay such
amount and indicate, in writing, that it is paying such amount under protest,
and must institute legal action within one year of such payment.
applicant's proposed development and/or the additional traffic to be
generated as a result of such development, the applicant's pro-rata
contribution shall be determined by the board of jurisdiction's traffic
consultant utilizing either 1) the square footage of the proposed
development or 2) the formula [A/B x Cost], where:
(1) "A" equals the additional traffic to be generated as a result of the
applicant's proposed development, utilizing trip generation
research data in the most current edition of Trip Generation
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and as
accepted by the board of jurisdiction based on the testimony and
reports of the applicant's traffic consultant and any testimony or
reports of the board of jurisdiction's traffic consultant; and
(2) "B" equals the total traffic design capacity of the installed off-tract
street improvements less the traffic currently using the streets and
intersections required to be improved (background traffic), as
determined by the board of jurisdiction's traffic consultant utilizing
traffic counts, the traffic circulation plan element of the Township's
Master Plan, if available, or trip generation research data in the
most current edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE), as applicable; and
(3) "Cost" equals the cost of the required improvements as determined
in accordance with §§ 106-8 and 106-9; and
(4) "Excess capacity" equals B-A.
B. If the approved development is to be constructed in phases, the
applicant's pro-rata share may be calculated separately for each phase
if the board of jurisdiction determines that each phase warrants
separate treatment because of the length of time of the phasing
schedule and other pertinent factors. The board of jurisdiction may, in
its sole discretion, require the applicant to install all of such
improvements; provided, however, that the applicant shall be entitled to
recapture the amount incurred in excess of its pro-rata share,
determined pursuant hereto, with the assistance of the Township as
provided in this chapter, from other developers and owners benefitted
by such excess capacity.
§ 106-6 FLORENCE CODE § 106-8
104:606
§ 106-8. Estimated costs.
When off-tract street improvements are required as a condition of final
subdivision or final site plan approval, the Township Engineer shall initially
estimate the cost of permitting, design and installation of such
improvements, in writing and on an itemized basis, in accordance with
the cost estimates, if any, set forth in the circulation plan element of the
Township Master Plan, or, if no cost estimates are set forth in the Master
Plan, then in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. The
Township Engineer may be guided by the highway bid price index for
the State of New Jersey, as published by McGraw Hill Publishing Co., or
its successor, in the Dodge Building Cost Indexes for United States and
Canadian Cities, and shall be the average of the Philadelphia area and
the New York metropolitan area, or the Federal Highway Administration's
bid price index. The Township Engineer also may be guided by detailed
costs estimates for the required improvements submitted by the applicant's
engineer, allocating costs to each of the components of the required
improvements on a line item basis; provided, however, that the burden of
proof as to the reasonableness, necessity and relatedness of such costs
shall be on the applicant. In addition to and without duplication of such
costs, the Township Engineer may include reasonable amounts proposed
by the applicant that are directly related to such improvements and are
likely to be incurred by the applicant on account of the following: planning,
surveying, permit acquisition, design, specification, bidding, demolition,
clearing, site work, construction, construction management, inspection,
approval, property and easement acquisition, related legal fees, and any
other reasonable costs customarily incurred in connection with similar
street improvements ("additional costs"); provided, however, that no
interest or overhead and profit of the applicant shall be included in such
additional costs, and provided further, that the burden of proof of the
reasonableness, necessity and relatedness of such additional costs shall be
on the applicant. The applicant shall provide all documents and information
relating to such additional costs, if any, within 30 days after written request
from the Township Engineer, and, if the applicant fails to do so, the
applicant shall be deemed to have waived the right to claim any such
additional costs. The applicant may appeal the Township Engineer's written
cost estimate to the Burlington County Construction Board of Appeals
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 and N.J.A.C. 5:23A-2.1 et seq.; provided,
however, that the applicant shall have no right of appeal with respect to any
additional costs deemed waived pursuant hereto. The costs so estimated
shall be used for all purposes of this chapter unless and until actual costs
are certified in accordance with § 106-9.
§ 106-9. Actual costs.
Upon completion of the required off-tract street improvements and
acceptance thereof by the Township, including pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53j, including on a phase-by-phase basis, if applicable, the Township
Engineer shall prepare, or the applicant shall provide to the Township
Engineer, for his or her review and acceptance or rejection, in whole or in
§ 106-8 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 106-9
104:607
part, a certified, itemized list of all costs of the type and nature described
in § 106-5 that were actually incurred by the Township or the applicant,
as the case may be, in connection with the design and installation of such
improvements; provided, however, that the applicant shall not include any
additional costs which are deemed to have been waived pursuant to § 106-8.
If the improvements were installed by the applicant, the burden of proof
shall be on the applicant as to the reasonableness, necessity, relatedness
and incurrence of such costs, and the applicant shall submit genuine copies
of all contracts, purchase orders, invoices and proof of payment necessary
to support all of such costs claimed on its certified, itemized list within
30 days of completion and acceptance of the improvements. Failure of
the applicant to submit such certified, itemized list and supporting
documentation within the said thirty-day period shall be deemed a waiver
and release of the right to recapture or reimbursement of any amount
paid or incurred in excess of the applicant's pro-rata share of the cost of
such improvements. The Township Engineer shall issue his or her decision
as to the acceptance or rejection, in whole or in part, of the applicant's
costs in writing, and shall certify the costs as accepted, within 30 days
of receipt of the applicant's submission. The applicant may appeal the
Township Engineer's written decision to the Burlington County
Construction Board of Appeals pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23A-2.1 et seq.;
provided, however, that the applicant shall have no right of appeal with
respect to any costs deemed waived pursuant to § 106-8 or this section.
Once certified pursuant hereto, the actual costs shall be substituted for the
costs estimated pursuant to § 106-8 and shall be used for all purposes of
this chapter.
§ 106-10. Recapture.
In the event that the applicant pays or incurs more than its pro-rata share
of the cost of required off-tract street improvements which provide excess
capacity for other developers or owners, the applicant shall be entitled to
recapture the amount paid or incurred in excess of its pro-rata share from
the party or parties benefitted by such excess capacity. Each such party
shall be assessed its respective pro-rata share of the cost of the required
off-tract street improvements installed by the applicant based on § 106-6;
provided, however, that "A" shall represent the benefitted party's traffic
or additional traffic using or which shall use the subject improvements, as
determined based on traffic counts, the traffic circulation plan element of
the Township's Master Plan, if available, or trip generation research data
in the most current edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE), as applicable. If the party benefitted is
another applicant developer, such developer shall be assessed its pro-rata
share at the time of signing of the final subdivision plat or final site plan
applicable to its development application, as a condition precedent to such
signing, together with an administrative fee of 2%, not to exceed $2,000,
and the Township shall remit the amount of such assessment to the initial
applicant entitled thereto within 10 days of receipt of payment thereof.
§ 106-9 FLORENCE CODE § 106-11
104:608
§ 106-11. Time limit for recapture.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, no right
of recapture or reimbursement of any costs paid or incurred by the initial
applicant in excess of the its pro-rata share of the costs of required offtract
street improvements shall subsist after 10 years have elapsed from
the date of certification of actual costs by the Township Engineer pursuant
to § 106-9; provided, however, that if the applicant's pro-rata share shall
have been determined on a phase-by-phase basis pursuant to § 106-6, then
the ten-year period shall apply to each phase, and shall run from the
certification of actual costs by the Township Engineer as to each phase.
§ 106-12. Performance guarantee.
Before recording of the final subdivision plat or as a condition of final site
plan approval, or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, the applicant shall be required by the board of
jurisdiction or the Township, as the case may be, to provide a performance
guarantee with respect to the required off-tract street improvements in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 et seq.
§ 106-13. Developer's agreement.
The amount of an applicant's pro-rata share of required off-tract street
improvements and the amount of excess capacity, if any, as well as the
method of computation thereof in accordance with Section 6 of this chapter,
shall be memorialized in a municipal developer's agreement ("developer's
agreement") to be reviewed and approved by the Township Attorney, who
may request advice and assistance from the attorney of the board of
jurisdiction. The developer's agreement also shall memorialize the
applicant's rights set forth in §§ 106-10 and 106-11 hereof, as well as the
applicant's obligations set forth in § 106-12, all of which shall be subject
to specific performance. The developer's agreement also may require
completion of all or a specified portion of the off-tract street improvements
as a condition precedent to issuance of a construction permit or certificate
of occupancy for the applicant's development, or, if the applicant's
development is to be constructed in phases or units, as a condition
precedent to the issuance of construction permits or certificates of
occupancy for more than a specified number of units or for any phase
or phases beyond a specified phase or phases, at the discretion of the
Township.
§ 106-14. Failure to pay pro-rata share.
Should any party fail to pay its pro-rata share of the cost of required off-tract
street improvements as determined pursuant to this chapter, the amount
due shall be deemed a municipal charge and debt collectible in the same
way and manner as real property taxes in the State of New Jersey. The
Clerk shall certify the amount due to the Tax Collector, who shall record the
same as a lien against the real property of the delinquent party. Payment
§ 106-11 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 106-14
104:609
in full of the amount of such lien shall be a condition of approval of any
land use development application by such delinquent party or in which
such delinquent party has an interest, and shall be a condition precedent
to issuance of any construction permits, certificates of occupancy or other
permits or approvals to such delinquent party, directly or indirectly. If a
delinquent party already has commenced construction, then non-payment of
the delinquent party's pro-rata share or any portion thereof shall be grounds
for the Township to stop such construction until the amount due shall have
been paid in full.
Chapter 108
PARKING; PLACEMENT OF DUMPSTERS; PORTABLE
STORAGE UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boats and boating — See Ch. 53.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 110.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Solid waste — See Ch. 122.
Towing and storage of motor vehicles — See
Ch. 130.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 131.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 133.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 134.
§ 106-14 FLORENCE CODE § 106-14
104:610
ARTICLE I
Parking and Storage of Vehicles, Boat Trailers, Recreation Vehicles
and Trucks
§ 108-1. Storage and parking on private property.
The storage and parking of vehicles on private property is hereby made
subject to the following provisions:
§ 108-2. Storage and parking on streets.
The storage and parking of vehicles on streets is hereby made subject to the
following provisions:
A. Recreational vehicles, trailered boats, and nontrailered boats may only
be parked in side or rear yard setback areas in any zone in the Township
of Florence. Exception: For the purpose of this chapter, no more than
one recreational vehicle or boat may be parked in the driveway in the
front setback of a property. Driveways located in the front setback and
so used for this purpose must be overlaid with an approved surface
preparation as described herein.102 Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit additional recreational vehicles and boats from being parked
or stored indoors of a permanent structure on a given property or in
side or rear yard areas. This requirement shall not prohibit the parking
of additional recreational vehicles and boats on areas that are not in the
front-yard setback and not overlaid with an approved surface
preparation.
B. It shall be unlawful to park, or permit to be parked, any vehicle, trailers
of any type, trailer devices, campers, motorized or vehicle-drawn
recreation vehicles with or without sleeping quarters, vehicles in tow,
boat or boat trailers, or non-passenger-type vehicles on lawn or
unimproved areas within the front setback of any property in any zone
of the Township of Florence for more than two consecutive hours in any
one-week period.
C. Commercial motor vehicles with a gross vehicle registered weight
(GVRW) of four tons or more shall not be parked out of doors on private
property within any residential zone or in the (NC) Neighborhood
Commercial Zone for more than two consecutive hours, with the
following exceptions:
(1) Commercial motor vehicles used in conjunction with a thenoccurring
service function or delivery are exempt from this section
while actually being used for the service function or delivery.
(2) The provisions contained in this section herein shall not apply to
those properties that are actively used as farms.
102. Editor's Note: See Art. II.
§ 108-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-2
104:611
§ 108-3. Parking at parks and municipal facilities.
The following standards are hereby established for parking of vehicles in
parks and at municipal facilities:
§ 108-4. Parking at service stations and service-oriented facilities.
The following standards are hereby established for parking of vehicles at
motor vehicle service stations and service-oriented facilities:
A. Only legally registered passenger automobiles, motorcycles and
commercial motor vehicles with a gross vehicle registered weight
(GVRW) of four tons or less shall be parked on any public street or
municipal parking facility within the Township of Florence. Exception:
Non-passenger vehicles used in conjunction with a then-occurring
service function or delivery are exempt from this section while actually
being used for the service function or delivery.
B. No trailers of any type, trailer devices, campers, motorized or vehicledrawn
recreation vehicles with or without sleeping quarters, vehicles in
tow, boat or boat trailers, vehicles that cannot move under their own
power and which can be operated legally on the highways of the State
of New Jersey, or non-passenger-type vehicles, may be parked on any
street located in any zone for more than two hours in any one-week
period except where actively engaged in loading or unloading
operations.
C. No vehicles, trailers of any type, trailer devices, campers, motorized or
vehicle-drawn recreation vehicles with or without sleeping quarters,
vehicles in tow, boat or boat trailers or vehicles that cannot move under
their own power shall be parked in or upon any, alley, sidewalk, public
easement or right-of-way. Exception: Boat trailers attached to a pulling
vehicle may park on Front Street in front of Block 59 Lot 1, Block 60
Lots 1, 2 and 6, Block 47 Lots 2.01,5,2.02,3 and 4 and a portion of Block
59 Lot 2.01 as posted by appropriate signage and as indicated on the
attached site map and consistent with Chapter 134 of the Township
Code, entitled "Vehicles and Traffic".
A. No person shall operate or drive any vehicle of any type on any area of a
public park except those that are improved with concrete, bituminous
asphalt, stone or other durable and nondecaying material in such a way
as to promote and are specified as to permit vehicular operations.
Exceptions: The Township Council may, from time to time, allow some
open space areas to be utilized for special events parking. Such
designation shall have definite beginning and ending times established
and shall be so posted.
A. Service stations with and without fuel-dispensing facilities may park
vehicles awaiting repair on the premises in rear yard and side yard
areas only and only in accordance with an approved site plan.
§ 108-2 FLORENCE CODE § 108-4
104:612
B. Vehicles parked awaiting repair may remain on site for no more than 30
days at a time, provided that each such vehicle is parked in an approved
and marked parking space. Parking spaces shall conform to the
Florence Township Land Use Code.103
C. Vehicles having been repaired and deemed complete shall not be stored
on site for more than five days after completion, and further provided
that each such vehicle is parked in an approved and marked parking
space. Parking spaces shall conform to the Florence Township Land Use
Code.
D. No dismantled parts shall be placed outside within the front yard or
side yard setbacks unless they are so placed in an area where the
collection of waste and/or recyclables usually occurs for the purpose of
waste collection or recycling on the day of placement.
E. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof no new or used cars offered for
sale, no unregistered motor vehicle or not more than ten motor vehicles
incapable of normal operation on the highway shall be permitted
outside of an enclosed service station, except that not more than six
motor vehicles may be located outside a building for a period not to
exceed 30 days for each vehicle, provided that the owners are awaiting
the repair of the motor vehicle.
F. The exterior display and parking of equipment or vehicles for rent or
sale in any zone of the Township of Florence shall be permitted only
when the use is approved by the Code of the Township of Florence or
when such use has been conditioned by approval of either the Planning
or Zoning Board of the Township of Florence.
G. Vehicles awaiting repair or pickup shall not be parked on public streets.
H. Vehicles towed for storage until claimed by the owner, destroyed or
offered for sale shall not be parked on public streets.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 91, Land Development.
§ 108-4 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-4
104:613

ARTICLE II
Off-Street Parking Areas
§ 108-5. Construction standards.
The following standards are hereby established for off-street parking of
vehicles:
A. Off street parking areas shall be overlaid with an approved surface
preparation of concrete, bituminous asphalt, stone or other durable and
nondecaying material in such a way as to prevent said material from
entering adjacent properties, sidewalks, roadways or lawn areas.
B. No person shall drive over, across or on any curb, sidewalk or
handicapped access ramps and aprons that are not configured or
constructed for vehicular crossing. The crossing of a full-height curb
without a depression engineered for vehicle operation is not permitted.
Where no curb exists or where curbs are depressed in such a way as to
promote erosion of surrounding surfaces, the curb shall be
reconstructed and an appropriate driveway apron installed to prevent
disturbance of streets and sidewalks.
C. Only concrete or bituminous asphalt shall be permitted as approved
surface material when constructing driveway aprons between the
roadway and the sidewalk or, in the absence of a sidewalk, the end of
the right-of-way and the beginning of the private property being
improved with a driveway.
§ 108-5 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-5
104:615

ARTICLE III
Storage of Tires
§ 108-6. Restrictions on storage.
It shall be unlawful to store or permit the storage of tires in any zoning
district of the Township of Florence. Exception: Tires may be stored in a
fully enclosed structure or when placed in a location where the collection
of waste and or recyclables usually occurs on the days designated for the
collection of tires when the tires will be completely removed for proper
disposal.
§ 108-6 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-6
104:617

ARTICLE IV
Placement of Dumpsters
§ 108-7. Standards for placement.
The following standards are hereby established for the placement of
dumpsters and certain waste collection containers:
A. Dumpsters and waste containers that require placement by a
transporting vehicle may be placed curbside when no driveway or other
approved off-street area is available at the location where work will be
performed. The containers must fully comply with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 27:51-1 with respect to displaying reflective markers. The
placement shall be allowed only after review and approval by the Chief
of Police or his designee. Such placement shall be reviewed so as to
minimize any impact on safety for motorists and pedestrians and, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 27:51-1, shall be for a period of not more than
30 days. The permit may be renewed upon application therefor.
§ 108-7 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-7
104:619

ARTICLE V
Definitions
§ 108-8. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, automobiles includes all
motor vehicles except motorcycles.
BOAT — Any vessel that is used to carry cargo or passengers in or upon
water and which, by nature of its design, displaces water so as to stay afloat
or by use of air flow is kept aloft to travel without contact with the land or
water surface.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 and by
additions specifically listed herein, includes every type of motor-driven
vehicle used for commercial purposes on the highways, such as the
transportation of goods, wares and merchandise, excepting such vehicles as
are run only upon rails or tracks and vehicles of the passenger-car-type used
for touring purposes or the carrying of farm products and milk, as the case
may be. For the purpose of this chapter, commercial motor vehicles also
include those vehicles used in conjunction with a service function that is
offered at a premium, i.e., cleaning, plumbing, electrical, landscaping, etc.
MOTOR-DRAWN VEHICLE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, includes
trailers, semi-trailers, or any other type of vehicle drawn by a motor-driven
vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 30:1-1, includes all vehicles
propelled otherwise than by muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run
only upon rails or tracks and motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, includes motor bikes,
bicycles with motor attached and all motor-operated vehicles of the bicycle
or tricycle type, except motorized bicycles as defined in this section,
whether the motive power be a part thereof or attached thereto and having
a saddle or seat with driver sitting astride or upon it or a platform on which
the driver stands.
OMNIBUS — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, includes all motor vehicles used
for the transportation of passengers for hire, except commuter vans and
vehicles used in ridesharing arrangements and school buses, if the same are
not otherwise used in transportation of passengers for hire.
PASSENGER AUTOMOBILE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, all automobiles
used and designed for the transportation of passengers, other than
omnibuses and school buses.
RECREATION VEHICLE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, a self-propelled
or towed vehicle equipped to serve as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel purposes and used solely as a family or
personal conveyance.
§ 108-8 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-8
104:621
SCHOOL BUS — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, every motor vehicle operated
by, or under contract with, a public or governmental agency, or religious
or other charitable organization or corporation, or privately operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from school for secular
or religious education, which complies with the regulations of the
Department of Education affecting school buses, including "School Vehicle
Type I" and "School Vehicle Type II" as defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
TRAILER — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, every vehicle with or without
motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no
part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
VEHICLE — As defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, every device in, upon or by which
a person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks or motorized bicycles.
§ 108-8 FLORENCE CODE § 108-8
104:622
ARTICLE VI
Portable Home Storage Units
[Added 6-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-16; amended 9-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-16]
§ 108-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following term shall apply:
PORTABLE HOME STORAGE UNIT — Portable sheds (commonly referred
to as "pods") that are loaded with materials and placed on a residential
property for the purpose of storing materials. The use of the reference
to "pods" shall not be construed to be limited to a particular brand or
company providing the portable home storage unit, but is referenced for
easy identification of the type of unit regulated.
§ 108-10. Permit required; application; insurance; fee.
Before placing a portable home storage unit on his or her property, a
person must submit an application and receive a permit from the Township.
An insurance certificate confirming liability insurance in the amount of
$100,000 provided by the company supplying the portable home storage
unit must accompany the application. If the placement of the portable home
storage unit is on a street, right-of-way or other public property, the permit
shall be valid for a period of 10 days. If the unit is placed on private
property, the permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days. There is a fee of
$25 for a permit. Applications can be acquired from the Construction Code
Office.
§ 108-11. Duration.
Permits will be granted for a period of 30 days on private property or for
a period of 10 days if the unit is placed on a street, right-of-way or other
public property. At the expiration of the permit period, applicants may,
for good cause, seek one thirty-day extension for units placed on private
property or one seven-day extension for units placed on a street, right-ofway
or other public property. Extension of a permit will cost $15. An initial
permit for a portable home storage unit can only be issued once in any
twelve-month period.
§ 108-12. Location.
Portable home storage units are prohibited from being placed in streets or
the front yard of a property. Portable home storage units must be kept in
the driveway of the property at the furthest accessible point from the street.
All locations must be paved off-street surfaces. No pod can be placed on a
property if it is deemed to be a sight obstruction for motorists. The applicant
must obtain preapproval of the location by the Township Code Enforcement
Officer in the following situations:
A. If the property does not have a driveway.
§ 108-9 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-12
104:623
§ 108-13. Number of units.
Only one portable home storage unit may be placed at any residential
property at one time.
§ 108-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall place a portable home storage unit in violation of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-10
of the Florence Township Code.
B. If the location of the unit in the driveway is in the front yard of the
property.
C. If the property is a corner lot.
D. Any container to be placed on a street or right-of-way shall be placed on
the street in a legal parking space, not designated for use as a handicap
parking space as designated by the Township and shall not cause a view
obstruction for motorists. A container parked on or along any street,
right-of-way or other public property shall be equipped with and display
markers consisting of all-yellow reflective diamond-shaped panels
having a minimum size of 18 inches by 18 inches. These panels shall be
mounted at the edge of the container at both ends nearest the path of
passing vehicles and facing the direction of oncoming traffic. These
markers shall have a minimum mounting height of three feet from the
bottom of the panels to the surface of the roadway. The Police
Department in exercise of its discretion may direct that additional
markings, their location or nature, shall be supplemented or altered if
the police determine such actions are necessary for the protection of
the motoring public.
§ 108-12 FLORENCE CODE § 108-14
104:624
Chapter 110
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 36.
Amusements and entertainments — See Ch.
39.
Animals — See Ch. 41.
Boats and boating — See Ch. 53.
Curfew — See Ch. 66.
Drugs, drunk-driving-, and sex-offender-free
zones — See Ch. 70.
Firearms — See Ch. 73.
Noise — See Ch. 102.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 112.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 114.
Littering, stormwater quality — See Ch. 123.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 134.
§ 108-14 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 108-14
104:625

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-12 as Ch. 107 of the 1983
Code]
§ 110-1. Unlawful acts.
A. No person in any public park or recreation area shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings;
paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent; or monuments; or take stake posts or
other boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities
or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary manner. No person over the age of six years shall
use the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark, pick flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree, walk, stand or sit upon monuments, bases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch any animal to any tree or plant or other stationary or
movable object not designated for such purpose.
(8) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird, nor shall
any person remove or have in his or her possession the young of
any wild animal or the eggs or nests or young of any reptile or bird.
Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes, known to be
deadly poisonous, or deadly reptiles may be killed on sight.
(9) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, river or any other body
§ 110-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 110-1
104:627
of water in or adjacent to any park, recreation area or other
tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such water any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result
in the pollution of said waters.
(10) Have brought in or shall dump in, deposit or leave any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or recreation area
or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles
are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away
from the park by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(11) Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas or such areas as may, on occasion, be specifically
designated as temporary areas by the Council or the Business
Administrator of the township.
(12) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park areas.
(13) Park a vehicle in any other than an established or designated
parking area, and such shall be in accordance with the posted
directions there, at and with the instruction of any attendant who
may be present.
(14) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(15) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others or
ride a bicycle in areas where signs prohibit bicycles and other
vehicles.
(16) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or pavement or set against
trees or other objects or in any place or position where it may
constitute an obstacle to persons lawfully therein.
(17) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park or recreation area, except in such waters or at such places
as are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations
as are herein or hereinafter made or adopted, nor shall any person
frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate therein when such
activities are prohibited by the rules and regulations published by
the Business Administrator upon the finding that such use of the
water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(18) Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing or congregate therein, except between such
§ 110-1 FLORENCE CODE § 110-1
104:628
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Business
Administrator for such purposes for each individual site.
(19) Erect, maintain, use or otherwise occupy on or in any beach or
bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind, unless there
shall be an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure
from at least two sides, nor shall any guide wire, rope or extension
brace or support be connected or fastened on any such structure to
any other structure, stake, rock or any other object outside thereof.
(20) Allow himself or themselves to be so covered with a bathing suit so
as to be indecently exposed.
(21) Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other
place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
(22) Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether
motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating by the Business Administrator. Such activity
shall be in accordance with the applicable regulations as are now
or hereafter adopted.
(23) Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupant or occupants of any other such boat.
(24) Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of the
park the following morning; nor shall any person be on or remain
on or in any boat during said closed hours of the park.
(25) Fish in any waters, except in waters designated by the Business
Administrator for that use and under such rules and regulations
and restrictions as have or may be prescribed by the Business
Administrator.
(26) Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
(27) Carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring
guns, bows and arrows, slings or other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond
park boundaries is forbidden.
(28) Picnic, lunch or dine in any place other than those designated for
such purposes. Attendants and other authorized personnel shall
have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas, when
necessary, to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use
thereof for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply
with any such directions given to achieve this end.
§ 110-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 110-1
104:629
(29) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(30) Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles, where
provided.
(31) Set up tents, shacks or other temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in any park or
recreation area after closing hours any movable structure or
special vehicle to be used or which could be used for such purpose,
such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the like, except
in those areas designated by the Business Administrator for those
purposes.
(32) Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, javelins, arrows,
horseshoes or model airplanes, except in those areas set apart for
such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively
dangerous games, such as football, baseball and lacrosse, is
prohibited, except on the fields and courts or areas designated
therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically
designated for such purpose. Golfing and hitting of golf balls is
prohibited unless otherwise specifically provided for in a particular
park or location by the display of appropriately displayed signs.
[Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
(33) Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails where permitted.
Horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained and
ridden with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go
unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree, shrub or
other object.
(34) Bring into, possess or consume alcoholic beverages at any time in
any park or recreation area. [Amended 10-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-18]
(35) Have in his possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material or
discharge them or throw them into any such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition shall include any
substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with
any other substance or compound, will be dangerous for any of the
foregoing reasons. At the discretion of the Business Administrator,
a permit may be given for conducting properly supervised
fireworks in a designated park or recreation area.
§ 110-1 FLORENCE CODE § 110-1
104:630
(36) Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas clearly marked by the Business Administrator by signs
bearing the words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area."
Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of
dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are
permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not
greater than six feet in length.
(37) Occupy any seat or bench or enter into or loiter or remain in any
pavilion or any other park structure or section thereof which may
be reserved and designated for the use of the opposite sex.
(38) Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
(39) Solicit alms or contributions for any purposes, whether public or
private.
(40) Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under
such regulations as may be designated.
(41) Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public."
(42) Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance, except in
such areas and under such regulations as may be designated.
(43) Go onto the ice on any of the waterways, except in such areas as
are designated as skating areas, and then provided only that a
safety signal is displayed.
(44) Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas
or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to breach the public peace.
(45) Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the township for any
purposes permitted under the terms of this Article.
(46) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(47) Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, individually or by use
of any stand, cart or vehicle, except by any regularly licensed
concessioner acting by and under authority of the rules and
regulations promulgated herein or hereafter adopted.
(48) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever in or adjacent to the park or recreation
area.
§ 110-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 110-2
104:631
§ 110-2. Hours of operation; exceptions.
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and
closing hours for each individual park or recreation area shall be posted
therein for public information and shall be determined from time to time
by resolution of the Mayor and Council. Any section or part of any park
or recreation area may be declared closed to the public by the Business
Administrator in the event of an emergency or by the Mayor and Council by
resolution at any time and for any interval of time, either temporary or at
regular and stated intervals and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as
shall be reasonably necessary.
§ 110-3. Permits for special events.
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Business Administrator in accordance with the following procedure:
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Business Administrator stating the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or recreation area or portion thereof for which the permit
is desired.
(5) Any other information which the Business Administrator shall
reasonably require.
B. Standards for issuance of a permit by the Business Administrator shall
include the following findings:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation area will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of those areas.
(2) That the proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or uses will not include violence, crime
or disorderly conduct.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the township.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date now requested in the application.
§ 110-2 FLORENCE CODE § 110-3
104:632
§ 110-4. Enforcement.
The Business Administrator, Township Police and park attendants shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, have the authority to eject
from the park or recreation area any person or persons acting in violation of
this Article and shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property,
thing or device used or employed in violation of the terms of this Article.
§ 110-5. Use of premises and facilities by Board of Education.
The Mayor and Council of the Township of Florence reserves the right, with
respect to any and all public parks and recreation areas and any facilities
located therein or thereon, to enter into any agreement with the Board
of Education of the Township of Florence concerning the use and control
thereof, anything contained in this Article to the contrary notwithstanding.
Any such use of the premises or facilities therein or thereon by the Board
of Education pursuant to such an agreement shall be free and exclusive
from any control or supervision by the Business Administrator; provided,
however, that said Administrator shall continue to have the power to adopt
C. Within five days after the receipt of an application, the Business
Administrator shall apprise an applicant, in writing, of the reasons for
refusing a permit, and an aggrieved person or organization shall have
the right to appeal to the Mayor and Council of the Township of
Florence by serving written notice thereof on the Township Clerk within
five days of said refusal. A copy of said notice shall also be served on the
Business Administrator within the same time, and the Administrator
shall immediately forward the application and reasons for its refusal to
the Mayor and Council, which shall consider the application under the
standards set forth under Subsection B hereof, and the Mayor and
Council shall sustain or overrule the Business Administrator's decision
within 10 days from the receipt of the appeal by the Township Clerk.
The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be final.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances of the township.
E. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injuries sustained by any person whatever by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall
have been issued. The Business Administrator shall have the right to
require any permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering
injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted
activities in such amount or amounts as may be from time to time
determined by the Business Administrator prior to the commencement
of any activity or issuance of any permit.
F. The Business Administrator shall have the authority to revoke a permit
upon a finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause shown, and the permittee shall have the right to appeal as is set
forth in the procedure in Subsection C hereof.
§ 110-3 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 110-5
104:633
reasonable rules and regulations in connection with the use and enjoyment
thereof.
§ 110-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to a jail term in the county jail not
exceeding 90 days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 110-7. Construal of provisions.
This Article is in addition to and not in derogation of any other ordinance
involving or affecting any of the subject matters contained in this Article.
§ 110-5 FLORENCE CODE § 110-7
104:634
ARTICLE II
Waterworks Men's Softball Field
[Adopted 8-15-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-36]
§ 110-8. Permit required.
Any team using the Waterworks Men's Softball Field at night which requires
that the field be illuminated by the lighting located thereon shall be
required to obtain a permit from the Township Clerk for the use of the field
and lighting facilities and pay the fees set forth in § 110-9 of this Article.
§ 110-9. Fees.
Any team required to obtain a permit pursuant to § 110-8 of this article will
be charged the following permit fees for the use of the Waterworks Men's
Softball Field and lighting facilities located thereon:
A. Annual permit: $10 per player, per team. [Amended 4-2-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-11]
B. Daily permit: $15 per team.
§ 110-8 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 110-9
104:635

ARTICLE III
John A. Roebling Park
[Adopted 5-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-7]
§ 110-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to protect the John A. Roebling Park and the
public building and restrooms located thereon. It is also intended to provide
an orderly procedure for using the facilities in the park and to protect those
facilities as well the general health, safety and welfare of the residence of
Florence Township and the visitors to the John A. Roebling Park.
§ 110-11. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLORENCE TOWNSHIP RESIDENT — A person owning a valid New Jersey
drivers license which lists upon it the applicant's name and an address
located within the geographic boundaries of the Township of Florence.
NEW JERSEY STATE RESIDENT — A person owning a valid New Jersey
drivers license which lists upon it the applicant's name and an address
located within the State of New Jersey.
OUT-OF-STATE RESIDENT — All other person that are neither Florence
Township residents nor residents of the State of New Jersey.
§ 110-12. Permits; application for use.
§ 110-13. Fees; security deposits.
There shall be no fee for the use of the John A. Roebling Park. However,
the township will charge a fee for custodial maintenance of the building
located in the park and will require the deposit of a security deposit to cover
A. No person or persons will be allowed to use the John A. Roebling Park
for public gatherings unless a permit is obtained from the office of the
Township Clerk. Applicants for a permit must provide proof of residency
and pay the appropriate fee and security deposit.
B. The application for a permit to utilize the John A. Roebling Park shall
contain at a minimum the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name and address of the person, persons, corporations or
association sponsoring the activity.
(3) The date and time for which the activity is proposed.
(4) Any other information which the Township Clerk shall reasonably
require.
§ 110-10 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 110-13
104:637
the cost of the repair of any damage caused by the applicant, his or her
guests or any other persons during the event for he or she has obtained the
permit. The following custodial maintenance fees and security deposits will
be charged for the use of the park building and its rest room facilities:
§ 110-14. Return of security deposits.
Within three working days following an event for which a permit has been
issued at the John A. Roebling Park, the township shall inspect the premises
and rest room facilities for damage. In the event that damage has occurred,
the cost of repair of the damage will be deducted from the security deposit.
The security deposit less any deduction for damages shall be returned to the
permit applicant within two weeks following the date of the event for which
the permit was issued.
§ 110-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this Article shall be subject
to the penalties imposed under § 110-6 of the Code of the Township of
Florence.
A. Florence Township residents.
(1) Custodial maintenance fee: $25 per permit.
(2) Security deposit: $150 per permit.
B. New Jersey State residents.
(1) Custodial maintenance fee: $50 per permit.
(2) Security deposit: $300 per permit.
C. Out-of-state residents.
(1) Custodial maintenance fee: $75 per permit.
(2) Security deposit: $500 per permit.
§ 110-13 FLORENCE CODE § 110-15
104:638
Chapter 112
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 110-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 110-15
112:639

ARTICLE I
Urination and Defecation in Public
[Adopted 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-26 (Ch. 109 of the 1983
Code)]
§ 112-1. Unlawful acts.
No person shall urinate or defecate on any public street, public sidewalk or
on any other public place or in any other place opened to and used by the
public or in public view upon any private property.
§ 112-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-22]
A violation of this Article shall be punishable by imprisonment of not more
than 90 days or a fine not to exceed $1,000 or a period of community service
of not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 112-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 112-2
112:641

ARTICLE II
Sleeping in Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 9-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-20]
§ 112-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in a motor vehicle, whether
registered or unregistered with the State of New Jersey, Division of Motor
Vehicles, when parked on any public property, including but not limited
to streets, parks, parking lots, ball fields, schoolyards, and public right-ofways,
in the Township of Florence.
§ 112-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 90 days, or by community service for a period not exceeding
90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 112-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 112-4
112:643
Chapter 114
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions, markets and casual sales — See Ch.
43.
Criminal history background checks — See
Ch. 65A.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Littering — See Ch. 95.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 98.
Newspaper vending boxes — See Ch. 100.
Noise — See Ch. 102.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 110.
§ 112-4 FLORENCE CODE § 112-4
112:644
ARTICLE I
Solicitors
[Adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-12 as Ch. 110 of the 1983
Code]
§ 114-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR — Includes itinerant vendors of merchandise who shall go from
door to door or from house to house in this township selling, causing to be
sold, offering for sale or causing to be offered for sale or taking orders for
present or future delivery of merchandise of any description whatsoever,
and shall include persons going from door to door for the purpose of
obtaining alms, orders, subscriptions, making canvasses or surveys or other
solicitations.
§ 114-2. Registration required.
No person shall solicit or act as a solicitor from door to door within this
township without first registering with the Chief of Police of the Township
of Florence as provided in this Article.
§ 114-3. Information required.
Each such registrant shall, at the time of registering, give to the Chief
of Police, in writing, his name, address and such other personal data as
is required to identify him, together with two recent photographs of his
face, approximately two and one-half by two and one-half (2 1/2 x 2 1/2)
inches in size, together with the purpose of his proposed canvassing or
solicitation, the route, date and approximate hours of his itinerary in the
township (which shall be between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.),
any prior convictions of crime and his fingerprints, together with sufficient
information to determine whether or not the business he is to transact is
intrastate or interstate commerce.
§ 114-4. Issuance of registration certificate.
Each registrant, upon being so registered, shall be issued a registration
certificate by the Chief of Police, upon which shall be affixed one
photograph of the applicant, signed by the Chief of Police so that part of his
signature covers part of the photograph; provided, however, that no person
who has been convicted of a crime shall be issued any such certificate.
§ 114-5. Possession and/or exhibition of certificate required at all
times.
Each registrant shall carry the registered certificate at all times and shall
exhibit it to any person upon request.
§ 114-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 114-6
112:645
§ 114-6. Surrender of certificate to Chief of Police.
Each registrant shall, at the conclusion of each day's canvassing or
solicitation, deposit his registration certificate with the Chief of Police.
§ 114-7. Compliance with state and township regulations required
prior to issuance.
No such registration certificate shall be issued to any person who has
not complied with any law of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of
this township regulating soliciting, canvassing or itinerant vendors of
merchandise.
§ 114-8. Solicitation at private residences restricted.
No person, whether registered or not, shall visit or call at any private
residence for the purpose of solicitation, as defined in this Article, when
banned by the householder by a sign bearing words to the effect that
solicitors or peddlers are not invited or are prohibited.
§ 114-9. Revocation of certificate.
Any such registration certificate so issued may be revoked by the Chief of
Police for violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the township
regulating solicitors, canvassers or itinerant vendors of merchandise or for
any false information given in said application.
§ 114-10. Hours of solicitation.
No person shall solicit within the meaning of this articlebefore the hour of
10:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m.
§ 114-11. Fees.
A fee of $5 per day, per certificate, shall be paid by the registrant for each
such registration certificate issued.
§ 114-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person or persons violating this article or any of the provisions hereof
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to
imprisonment in the Burlington County Jail for a term not exceeding 90
days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof, at the discretion of the Judge before whom such
conviction is made.
§ 114-6 FLORENCE CODE § 114-13
112:646
§ 114-13. Construal of provisions.
These provisions are in addition to any other ordinance or ordinances
regulating itinerant vendors of merchandise, solicitation or canvassing
within the Township of Florence.
§ 114-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 114-13
112:647

ARTICLE II
Transient Merchants and Temporary Businesses
[Adopted 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-31; amended in its entirety
5-17-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-14104]
§ 114-14. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Transient Merchant and Temporary
Business Licensing Ordinance of the Township of Florence."
§ 114-15. Findings; purpose.
It is hereby found and determined by the Township Council of the Township
of Florence that, in order to protect the citizens of the Township from
improper sales techniques engaged in by transient merchants and in order
to protect the public health and safety of the citizens utilizing the services
of transient merchants and temporary businesses that offer for sale food
and drink for public consumption, it is necessary to regulate the operations
of transient merchants and temporary businesses operating within the
Township of Florence in order to preserve and protect the good of the
public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township. It is also
the intent of this article to preserve the intent of the Master Plan and
zoning regulations of the Township of Florence by prohibiting temporary
businesses from engaging in commercial uses in those areas in the
Township where those uses are prohibited by Chapter 91, Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Florence. This article is
designed to provide for the licensing and regulation of transient merchants
and temporary businesses. It is the purpose and intent of the article to
protect the people of Florence Township from improper sales techniques
and to provide for the regulation of transient merchants and temporary
businesses by the Board of Health, where appropriate, to provide for the
preservation of the intent of the Master Plan and Land Development
Ordinance of the Township as to the uses engaged in by transient merchants
and to provide for the orderly conduct of transient merchant and temporary
business operations by providing for the licensing and regulation of
transient merchants and temporary businesses.
§ 114-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, association or other entity
TEMPORARY BUSINESS — Any business conducted for the sale or offer
for sale of goods, wares, merchandise or food or drink for consumption on
or off the premises which is carried on in or on any building, structure,
motor vehicle, railroad car or real estate for a period not to exceed 30
104. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 9-1-2006.
§ 114-14 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 114-16
112:649
consecutive calendar days in any calendar year. The thirty-day period may,
with the approval of the Council, be divided into three periods of 10 days
each. "Temporary business" shall also include any person who, as a private
enterprise, schedules, organizes or promotes entertainments, concerts,
athletic events, contests or competitions or beauty pageants to be held on
a nonregular basis and which require the payment of a fee for entry or
admission, where such event is to take place within the confines of the
Township of Florence; provided, however, that no such person shall be
classified as a temporary business if he is sponsored by any bona fide civic,
fraternal, educational or religious organization having a local chapter in the
Township of Florence.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
other entity which engages in, does or transacts any transient business in
the Township of Florence by traveling from place to place in the Township,
offering for sale or selling goods, wares, merchandise or services.
§ 114-17. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or
selling agents in the usual course of business.
(2) Wholesale trade shows and/or conventions.
(3) Sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample catalog or
brochure for future delivery.
(4) Any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar sponsored by any civic,
fraternal, educational or religious organization.
(5) Garage sales held on premises devoted to residential use.
(6) Sales of crafts or items made by hand and sold or offered for sale by
the person making such crafts or handmade items.
(7) Any new home construction contractor, residential developer,
plumber or electrical contractor who is licensed or regulated by
any state, county or municipal agency, division, department or
professional board and any contractor of home improvements as
defined in N.J.A.C. 13:45A-16.1 who, in the normal course of
business, advertises or performs his services in the Township of
Florence, provided that any such tradesman complies with all state,
county and municipal regulations enforceable by the Township
Construction Code Official.
(8) Sale of produce, flowers or other agricultural products from
buildings or from roadside stands where the premises in question is
owned by the farmer, it being the express intention of the article
that nothing herein shall prohibit the sale of agricultural products
on lands owned by the farmer unless prohibited by Chapter 91,
Land Development.
§ 114-16 FLORENCE CODE § 114-17
112:650
§ 114-18. License required; violations and penalties.
§ 114-19. License application.
Any transient merchant or temporary business desiring to transact business
within the confines of the Township of Florence shall make application for
and obtain a license therefor. The application for license shall be filed with
the Township Clerk and shall include the following information:
B. A transient merchant or temporary business not otherwise exempted
from the provisions of this article shall not be relieved or exempted
from the provisions of this article by reason of associating himself
temporarily with any local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or
merchant or by conducting such temporary business in connection with
or in the name of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or
merchant.
A. It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant or temporary business to
transact business within the confines of the Township of Florence
unless such merchant and the owners of any goods, wares,
merchandise, food or drink to be offered for sale or sold, if such are not
owned by the merchant, shall have first secured a license and shall have
otherwise complied with the requirements of this article.
B. Any person or entity that transacts a transient or temporary business as
defined herein without having first obtained a license in accordance
with the provisions of this article or who knowingly advertises, offers
for sale or sells any goods, wares, merchandise, food or drink or
services in violation of the provisions of this article shall be a disorderly
person. The penalties prescribed herein shall be in addition to any other
penalties prescribed by law for any criminal offense committed by the
licensee.
A. The name and permanent address of the transient merchant or
temporary business making the application and, if the applicant is a
firm or corporation, the name and business and home addresses of the
members of the firm or the officers of the corporation, as the case may
be. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all the
partners. Post office box addresses will not be accepted.
B. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, there shall
be stated on the application form the date of incorporation or
formation, the state of incorporation or registration and, if the applicant
is a corporation or limited liability company formed in a state other than
the State of New Jersey, the date of which such corporation or limited
liability company qualified to transact business in the State of New
Jersey.
C. A statement showing the kind of business proposed to be conducted,
the length of time for which the applicant desires to transact such
§ 114-17 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 114-19
112:651
§ 114-20. Registered agents; service of process.
business and, for a temporary business, the location or locations of such
proposed place of business.
D. The name and permanent address of the applicant's registered agent.
Post office box addresses will not be accepted.
E. Proof that the applicant has acquired all Board of Health approvals and
is in compliance with all Board of Health regulations.
F. Proof the applicant is in compliance with all Fire Code regulations.
G. Proof that the applicant has acquired all other required Township,
county and state permits and licenses.
H. Proof that the applicant, if utilizing a motor vehicle as part of the
transient merchant operation, maintains minimum combined single
limit liability insurance in the amount of $100,000, naming the
Township of Florence as an additional insured.
A. Each registered agent designated by a transient merchant or temporary
business in the application for a license shall be a resident of the State
of New Jersey and shall be agent of the transient merchant or
temporary business upon whom any process, notice or demand
required or permitted by law to be served upon the transient merchant
or temporary business may be served. The registered agent shall agree,
in writing, to act as such agent, and a copy of the agreement to so act
shall be filed by the applicant with the application for a license.
B. The Township Clerk shall maintain an alphabetical list of all transient
merchants and temporary businesses in the Township and the names
and addresses of their registered agents.
C. If any transient merchant or temporary business doing business or
having done business in the Township of Florence shall fail to have or
maintain a registered agent in the State of New Jersey or if such
registered agent cannot be found at his permanent address, the
Township Clerk shall be an agent of such transient merchant for service
of all process, notice or demands. Service on the Township Clerk shall
be made by delivering to him, or any person designated by the Clerk to
receive such service, duplicate copies of the process, notice or demand.
When any such process, notice or demand is served on the Clerk, he
shall immediately cause one copy thereof to be forwarded by certified
mail to the permanent address of the transient merchant or temporary
business. The provisions of this section shall not limit or otherwise
affect the right of any person to serve any process, notice or demand in
any other manner now or hereinafter authorized by law.
§ 114-19 FLORENCE CODE § 114-21
112:652
§ 114-21. Application fee.
Each applicant for a transient merchant license or temporary business
license shall be accompanied by a license fee of $250.
§ 114-22. Issuance, transferability and term of license.
A transient business license or temporary business may be issued
hereunder only by the Township Council and only when all requirements
of this article have been met. Such license shall not be transferable, shall
be valid only within the territorial limits of the Township of Florence, shall
be valid only for a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall
be valid for the business stated in the application. A license so issued shall
be valid for only one person, unless such person shall be a member of a
partnership or employee of a firm or corporation obtaining such license.
The application shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall provide
the Township Council with a report as to whether or not the applicant has
a criminal record upon completion of a background check of the applicant.
The applicant must report to the Police Department and provide information
needed to conduct the background check. The applicant must provide a
money order, or certified check, in the amount set by the New Jersey State
Police that will be sent in with the applicant's fingerprint card to the New
Jersey State Police. The Township Council may deny the issuance of a
transient merchant license if it determines that the applicant has a criminal
record, is engaging in criminal activity or has violated the Consumer Fraud
Act, N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq., or previously violated regulations promulgated
by the Board of Health or previously violated the provisions of this article or
any other governmental regulation governing mercantile operations, such
that the issuance of said license will be harmful to the health, safety and/or
welfare of the people of Florence Township.
§ 114-23. Location where transient merchant and temporary
business operations are permissible.
A. Temporary businesses shall conduct their business operations in the
following districts as established on the Zoning Map of Florence
Township:
(1) HC Highway Commercial District.
(2) NC Neighborhood Commercial District.
B. Any temporary business located on any lot within the Township of
Florence, without regard to the amount of time located on the lot, shall
first obtain approval for a minor site plan specifically providing for
adequate off-street parking, landscaping and buffering from adjacent
uses.
C. Prior to conducting operations on property located in the aforesaid
districts, the temporary business must first obtain the written
§ 114-21 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 114-23
112:653
§ 114-24. Revocation of license.
The Township Council may revoke any license issued hereunder if it finds
that the licensee has engaged in criminal conduct or engaged in conduct in
violation of the Consumer Fraud Act, N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq., or violated the
regulations of the Board of Health or violated the provisions of this article
or any other governmental regulation governing the merchant's operations.
Prior to revoking the license, the Township Council shall first serve upon
the licensee through his registered agent a notice of its intent to revoke the
license and setting forth the reasons therefor. This notice shall be served
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be effective within 20
days of the date of the notice unless, prior thereto, the licensee requests a
hearing before the Township Council to show cause why the license should
not be revoked. A request for a hearing shall stay the revocation of the
license until such time as the hearing has been conducted and a final
permission of the owner of the property. This written permission shall
be submitted as part of the license application.
D. Transient merchants may conduct their business operations on
property located in all zoning districts established on the Zoning Map of
Florence Township during periods of construction activity, provided
that the transient merchants first obtain the written permission of the
property owner. Transient merchants may also conduct their business
operations on property located in the Special Manufacturing (SM) and
General Manufacturing (GM) Zones, provided that they first obtain the
written permission of the property owners. The transient merchant may
only conduct business at any site for a period of not more than 20
consecutive minutes in any two-hour period of time, except, however,
that the aforesaid time limitation for transient merchants shall not
apply to any person honorably discharged from active military service
in the United States who holds a valid license issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq., and possesses corresponding identification in
conformity with said statute. Transient merchants may only conduct
business at construction sites from the time of the issuance of a
building permit until the last certificate of occupancy is granted on the
construction site. [Amended 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-28]
E. Transient merchants may conduct their business operations in all
districts established on the Zoning Map of Florence Township, provided
that the business operation is mobile and is conducted on a public rightof-
way. "Mobile" is defined to mean stationary for a period of not more
than 20 minutes, however, this definition shall not apply to transient
merchants that hold a valid license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9
et seq., and possess corresponding identification in conformity with
said statute. The mobile operation must move a minimum of 600 feet
prior to resuming sales activities. The mobile operation may not return
to any one location within 600 feet of a prior location where operations
were conducted for a minimal period of one hour's time. [Amended
11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-28]
§ 114-23 FLORENCE CODE § 114-24
112:654
decision rendered by the Township Council. The licensee shall be entitled to
appear at the hearing with an attorney and to present witnesses and other
proofs intending to show that the license should not in fact be revoked.
§ 114-25. Enforcement.
It is the duty of the Township Police Department, the Township Construction
Code Official and the Board of Health to enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 114-26. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any section of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in § 1-10 of the Florence Township Code.
B. Each day on which a violation occurs shall be deemed to constitute a
distinct and separate violation of this article.
§ 114-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 114-26
112:655
Chapter 116
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 41.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 56.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Housing — See Ch. 87.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Soil removal — See Ch. 120.
Solid waste — See Ch. 122.
§ 114-26 FLORENCE CODE § 114-26
112:656
ARTICLE I
Standards and Inspections
[Adopted 5-1-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-7]
§ 116-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Township of Florence" and may be referred to in this chapter as the
"Property Maintenance Code."
§ 116-2. Purpose.
§ 116-3. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein, shall have the respective
meanings assigned them hereunder unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building or use that is on the same lot as,
subordinate to, under the same ownership as or control of and used for the
purpose customarily incident to the use of the main structure.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to:
(1) Protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing
minimum standards governing maintenance, appearance, condition
and occupancy of rental units and residential resale properties,
commercial and industrial properties.
(2) Avoid, prevent and eliminate maintenance or creation of hazards to
the public
(3) Prevent the creation, continuation, extension or aggravation of
blight.
(4) Prevent and eliminate physical conditions in or on property which
constitute nuisances and are potentially dangerous or hazardous to
the life, health or safety of persons on or near the premises where
such conditions exist.
(5) Establish minimum standards governing the maintenance and
condition of land, buildings, structures and premises in the
township.
(6) Fix responsibility and duties upon owners, lessees, operators and
occupants of property.
(7) Provide enforcement and administration and fix penalties.
B. All existing dwelling units, commercial and industrial properties not
covered by resale and rental unit inspections will be included for
exterior inspections only.
§ 116-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-3
112:657
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner by this chapter. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesperson of the State of New Jersey as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed real
estate broker or salesperson of the State of New Jersey if such person is
designated by the owner as the owner's agent.[Added 4-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-05]
APARTMENT or DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or
apartment thereof, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or
intended, arranged, or designated to be occupied for sleeping and dwelling
purposes by one or more persons, including but not limited to the owner
thereof or any of his servants, agents or employees, and shall include
all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and
improvements connected with the use or occupancy thereof, and which shall
include a single-family detached residence designed for use by one family
or household unit for living and sleeping purposes.[Amended 4-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-05]
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or any part of any premises
which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a building which are
exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots and the
open space of any premises outside of any building erected thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents and
vermin.
FAMILY — An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
marriage or law, living together in a dwelling unit. Servants having common
housekeeping facilities with a family consisting of an individual or two (2)
or more persons related by blood, marriage or law are a part of the family
for this chapter.
FRONT YARD — The space on the same lot with a principal building situated
between the front street line or lines and the front line of the building
projected to the side property lines. The depth of the front yard shall
be measured along a line perpendicular to the front street line from the
furthest point of the foundation of the structure or building furthest from
such street line.
LANDLORD — The legal entity listed upon the title as it appears in the
public records after the deed is properly recorded.[Added 4-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-05]
LANDLORD REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE — The certificate issued by the
Construction Code Official of the Township of Florence or his designee
authorizing the certificate holder to maintain, operate, or otherwise conduct
the business of landlord in the Township of Florence attesting that the
rental unit has been properly registered in accordance with the
article.105[Added 4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
§ 116-3 FLORENCE CODE § 116-3
112:658
LET — Includes the leasing, rental or other granting of occupancy for any
period of time where title to the residential unit is not transferred to the
actual occupant at the time such occupancy commences.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person residing, living or sleeping in or on the premises
or having actual possession or use of the premises or any part thereof,
whether or not the owner thereof and regardless of the duration of time of
such possession or use.
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity who is not the owner who has
charge, care or control of a premises or part thereof, with or without the
knowledge, consent or authority of the owner.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership, association, or trust which owns, operates, exercises
control over or is in charge of a rental facility.[Amended 4-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-05]
OWNER-OCCUPIED — A portion of a rental facility, dwelling, commercial
unit or dwelling unit shall be considered owner-occupied if the owner makes
his primary residence therein.[Added 4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.[Added 4-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-05]
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the township.
A.
An unattractive nuisance or physical condition which proves
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the persons whether
in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot.
This includes, but is not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any
structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris
or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a
hazard.
B.
Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or
unsecured as to endanger life, limb or property;
C.
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration
or decay, faulty construction, overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned,
damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of
collapse or failure and is dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
D.
105. Editor's Note: See Art. III, Landlord Registration, in this chapter.
§ 116-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-3
112:659
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof
which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where
living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for
pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals and is meant to
include apartments and apartment complexes.[Added 4-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-05]
RENT or RENTED — An apartment or dwelling unit occupied by any person
or persons other than the owner, regardless of whether there is a written or
oral agreement and regardless of whether the owner receives consideration
for occupancy, and regardless of whether there is a written lease, sublease
or oral understanding.[Added 4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — Any building or part thereof, whether
furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or
designed to be occupied for sleeping or living purposes by one (1) or more
persons, and shall include all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture,
equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or
occupancy thereof.
STRUCTURE — Anything that is built or constructed and affixed on or under
the ground or upon another structure or building.
§ 116-4. Continued certificate of occupancy. [Amended 12-17-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-21; 4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05; 6-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-15]
A. No owner, owner of rental properties, agent of owner, buyer, real estate
agent or broker, firm, company, partnership, corporation or person or
persons shall buy, sell, rent, transfer, grant, lease, let, mortgage with
right of occupancy or otherwise dispose of the ownership or occupancy
thereof, whether or not for a consideration and whether such disposal
of ownership or occupancy is temporary or permanent, any residential
dwelling unit, motel apartment, rental unit or premises on which a
building is located and is used for human occupancy or commercial
purposes unless a continued certificate of occupancy (CCO), certifying
that the building and premises are in compliance with all ordinances of
the Township of Florence, shall first be obtained from the Construction
Code Official or the appropriate official as designated by the governing
body of the Township of Florence.
B. The Construction Code Official, or the appropriate official as designated
by the governing body of the Township of Florence, shall cause to be
prepared appropriate application forms and certificates to be issued
upon successful completion of inspections for such continued certificate
of occupancy (CCO). Such application forms and information shall be
available at the office of the Construction Code Official.
(1) In the case of a resale of any residential unit or nonresidential
building, structure, or rental unit and the premises or part of the
premises on which they are situated in the Township of Florence,
compliance with the following standards shall be utilized as a basis
§ 116-3 FLORENCE CODE § 116-4
112:660
for determining the appropriateness of issuance of a continued
certificate of occupancy.
(a) Smoke detectors: required on all house levels (habitable attic,
second floor, first floor, basement, etc.) and outside of each
sleeping area. The alarms are not required to be
interconnected. All detectors must operate by battery or house
current and must be replaced after 10 years due to changes in
the State Fire Codes and NFPA 72, National Fire Protection
Association standards. Ten-year sealed battery-powered singlestation
smoke alarms shall be installed and shall be listed in
accordance with ANSI/UL 217. However, A/C powered or
multiple-station smoke alarms installed as part of the original
construction or rehabilitation project shall not be replaced
with battery-powered smoke alarms.
(b) Carbon monoxide detectors: required in all buildings that
contain fuel-burning appliances or that have an attached
garage. They must be listed in accordance with UL-2034. At
least one detector must be installed in the immediate vicinity of
the bedrooms per NFPA-720, alarms may be battery operated.
Reference: N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3.
(c) Kitchen: Stove burners, oven and broiler must operate.
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) requires gas
and electric ranges to have an anti-tilt bracket installed. Wall
oven must operate. Stove hardware and knobs must be intact
and serviceable.
(d) Fire extinguisher: minimum size of 2A:10B:C (see additional
information in housing application packet).
(e) Electrical: visual inspection of service cable at entrance to
home to make sure it is solid, secured to the structure and that
the jacket protecting the wiring is not frayed. Existing GFI
outlets must be functioning at the time of the inspection.
(f) Handrails: required for steps and stairways and must be tightly
fastened and graspable.
(g) Plumbing: protection of the potable water supply in
accordance with the current adopted codes and standards with
amendments (i.e., backflow prevention devices installed for
irrigation, boilers, cross connections). Water heater must have
a pressure relief valve discharge pipe (same diameter)
reaching six inches above floor. Hot water temperature at the
kitchen sink must be between 120° F. to 140° F. Water meter
must be installed in accordance with § 140-42 of the Township
Code.
§ 116-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-4
112:661
(h) Roof: If there is any interior visual evidence of active leaks, a
roofing certification from a licensed roofing contractor will be
required.
(i) Exterior: must be in compliance with the municipal code and
free of maintenance violations. Grass must be mowed; any
junk, trash and debris must be removed. All significant
overgrowth must be removed.
(j) Structure: If there is a visible structural deficiency, then it
must be properly addressed prior to release of CCO.
(k) Heater certification: Heater certification is required to be done
by a licensed contractor and must be on the specified form
(included in housing application packet). The original heating
system certification form must be submitted. Fax or copies will
not be accepted. Florence Tollgate Condominiums only do not
require heater certification. Inactive oil fill pipes and inactive
aboveground or in-basement fuel tanks are to be removed.
NOTE: Boiler systems shall be certified by a licensed master
plumber or licensed HVACR contractor. Hot-air furnace system
shall be certified by a licensed HVACR contractor. The
certifications shall be signed and shall bear a raised
professional seal.
(l) Chimney certification: required for solid-fuel stove or
woodburning fireplaces. Certification to be performed by a
qualified chimney sweep company.
(m) Work done without permits. If any work has been performed
without permits (when necessary), you will be required to
obtain the proper permits and have all inspections completed
before a CCO will be issued, as per state requirement.
(n) Other: Any visible life-safety hazards must be addressed before
issuance of CCO.
(o) "No occupancy" letter request. The Florence Township
Housing Office does not issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy. The buyer can request a "no occupancy" letter if
the property is being purchased "as-is" and occupancy will not
occur and is prohibited until the buyer completes all repairs,
renovations, permits and certifications as may be required and
a continued certificate of occupancy is issued. The housing
inspection application form and $60 inspection fee must be
submitted prior to processing a "no occupancy" letter. Also a
copy of the signed contract stating as-is purchase and an
original letter written and signed by the buyer stating they are
purchasing the property as-is and will not occupy until a CCO
is issued must be submitted to the Housing Inspection Office.
The buyer is required to sign the "no occupancy" letter at the
§ 116-4 FLORENCE CODE § 116-4
112:662
§ 116-5. Compliance required.
Every resale of a residential unit and nonresidential building, structure,
rental unit, lot and the premises or part of the premises on which they are
situated in the Township of Florence, all properties previously or presently
used or intended to be used for dwelling, public, professional or industrial
occupancy, commercial, research, recreational, service, transportation,
institutional, religious or charitable use or uses accessory thereto shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter. Vacant lots, vacant buildings
and lands and premises are also required to comply with the provisions
of this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter are
not intended to interfere with the otherwise lawful and permitted operation
(pursuant to state law or township ordinance) of a business in the zoning
district or those which, by virtue of application of the New Jersey Land Use
Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., may continue.
§ 116-6. Abrogation; greater restrictions to apply.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than those set forth in any other ordinance or regulation of the Township
of Florence or under the laws or regulations of the State of New Jersey or
its agencies, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the
provisions of this chapter impose a lower standard than any other ordinance
or regulation of the Township of Florence or of the laws and regulations of
Florence Township Housing inspection Office and a notarized
copy will be given to the buyer for the closing procedure.
(2) In the case of a rental of any residential unit or nonresidential
building, structure, or rental unit and the premises or part of the
premises on which they are situated in the Township of Florence,
there shall be inspections and verification of compliance with the
entirety of Chapter 116 to include those standards established in
§ 116-4B(1) of the Township Code.
(3) Negotiation for repairs prior to selling a property or the issuance of
a continued certificate of occupancy (CCO) is at the discretion of
the Construction Code Official, or the appropriate official as
designated by the governing body of the Township of Florence, with
the owner and potential buyer in agreement. Agreements will be in
writing and will follow the requirements under § 116-18 of this
chapter.
C. A continued certificate of occupancy (CCO) shall be granted or denied
within 10 business days from the day of the application for same. In
instances where, as a result of initial review of the landlord registration
form, a continued certificate of occupancy (CCO) inspection is deemed
to be required, a landlord registration certificate shall be issued within
three business days following the successful completion of the CCO
inspection.
§ 116-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-6
112:663
the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the higher standard
contained in such other ordinances, regulation or law shall prevail.
§ 116-7. Compliance with other provisions required.
Compliance with this chapter shall not constitute a defense against any
violation of any other ordinance of the Township of Florence applicable to
any structure or premises.
§ 116-8. Responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants.
Owners, operators and occupants shall have all the duties and
responsibilities as prescribed in this chapter, and no owner, operator or
occupant shall be relieved of any such duty, obligation or responsibility
hereunder and shall not be entitled to assert as a defense against any
charge made against them for violation of this chapter for the fact that
another owner, operator or occupant or any third person or entity is also
responsible and in violation thereof.
§ 116-9. Applicability of building standards.
Any alterations to buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto or
changes of use therein which may be caused directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this chapter shall be done in accordance with all applicable
sections and regulations of Chapter 64, Construction Codes, Uniform, of the
Code of the Township of Florence.
§ 116-10. Applicability of zoning provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter or any requirement of compliance
herewith shall be deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of
Chapter 91, Land Development, or other ordinances regulating the use of
land in the Township of Florence.
§ 116-11. Duties of owners, operators and occupants. [Amended
4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, operator, or
occupant of the premises to comply with any and all of the requirements
and standards hereof, to keep the premises free of conditions which
constitute violations hereof and to promptly remove, prevent, and/or
abate such conditions and violations.
B. Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a manner
which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the
surrounding properties and property owners or of the public in general,
such that it shall constitute a nuisance as defined in the ordinances of
the Township.
C. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities and
the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
§ 116-6 FLORENCE CODE § 116-11
112:664
§ 116-12. Condemnation procedures.
Dwellings or multifamily dwellings shall be condemned as dangerous
structures or unsafe for human habitation as herein provided:
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Township and with all applicable
state and federal laws.
D. All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code and the current Township Property Maintenance
Code.
A. Dangerous structures. If all or part of any building or structure
(including signs) or the equipment for the operation thereof (including,
among others, the heating system, plumbing, electric wiring, moving
stairway and fire extinguishing apparatus) shall be found, in the opinion
of the Construction Code Official, or the appropriate official as
designated by the governing body, to be in an unsafe condition or
dangerous to life, limb or property, he shall proceed to have the same
condemned pursuant to the application provisions of the law pertaining
to unsafe structures.
B. Structures unfit for human occupancy.
(1) Whenever the Construction Code Official, or the appropriate
official as designated by the governing body, finds that any dwelling
constitutes a hazard to the safety, health or welfare of the
occupants or to the public because it lacks maintenance; or is in
disrepair, unsanitary, vermin infested or rodent infested; or
because it lacks sanitary facilities or equipment or otherwise fails
to comply with the minimum provisions of this chapter, but has not
yet reached such state of complete disrepair as to be condemned as
a dangerous structure as hereinbefore provided, he may declare
such dwelling, multifamily dwelling or rental unit as unfit for
human occupancy.
(2) If any dwelling, rental unit or multifamily dwelling or any part
thereof is occupied by more occupants than permitted under this
chapter or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law, such
dwelling, rental unit or multifamily dwelling shall be deemed an
unlawful structure and the Construction Code Official, or the
appropriate official as designated by the governing body, may
cause such dwelling to be vacated. It shall be unlawful to again
occupy such dwelling until it or its occupants, as the case may be,
has conformed to the law.
C. Vacant buildings. Where for any reason a building remains vacant or
untended for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days, or other than
for sale, it shall be the duty of the owner to close all windows, doors and
other openings with plywood or by other suitable means so that access
§ 116-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-12
112:665
to the building is prevented. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any such dwelling to cause or permit same to be used in whole or
in part for living purposes until the structure has been rehabilitated
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and a continued
certificate of occupancy (CCO) has been issued by the Construction
Code Official, or the appropriate official as designated by the governing
body. Whenever a structure deemed unfit for human habitation or
dangerous to life and health remains vacant for a period of one (1) year,
enforcement proceedings shall be instituted against the owner. The
owner or contractor shall not enter vacant buildings without written
authorization from the Construction Code Official or the appropriate
official as designated by the governing body. Entrance to said building
shall be daily from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern standard
time and 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. daylight saving time.
D. Posting of notice. Any dwelling or multifamily dwelling declared as unfit
for human habitation shall be posted with a placard by the Construction
Code Official or the appropriate official as designated by the governing
body. The placard shall include the following:
(1) Name of the Township. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
(2) The name of the authorized department having jurisdiction.
(3) The chapter and section of the Code under which it is issued.
(4) An order that the dwelling or multifamily dwelling when vacated
must remain vacant until the provisions of the order are complied
with and the order to vacate is withdrawn.
(5) The date the placard is posted.
(6) A statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the placard.
(7) The phone number for the Construction Code Official.
E. Form of notice to owner. Whenever the Construction Code Official, or
the appropriate official as designated by the governing body, has
declared a dwelling or multifamily dwelling as unfit or human
habitation, he shall give notice to the owner of such declaration and
placarding of the dwelling or multifamily dwelling as unfit for human
habitation. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
(3) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued.
(4) State the time to correct the conditions.
F. Service of notice on owner. Service of notice to vacate shall be as
follows:
§ 116-12 FLORENCE CODE § 116-12
112:666
§ 116-13. Exterior maintenance standards.
(1) By delivery to the owner personally or by leaving the notice at the
usual place of residence of the owner with a competent member of
his household of the age of fourteen (14) years or older then
residing therein.
(2) By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner, at his last
known address with postage prepaid thereon, or his agent.
(3) By posting and keeping posted for twenty-four (24) hours a copy of
the notice in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises.
G. Removal of placard or notice. No person shall deface or remove the
placard from any rental unit and residential unit which has been
declared as unfit for human habitation except by authority, in writing,
from the Construction Code Official or the appropriate official as
designated by the governing body.
H. Occupancy of building. No rental unit or residential resale unit which
has been declared as unfit for human habitation shall be used for
human habitation until written approval is secured from the
Construction Code Official or the appropriate official as designated by
the governing body. The Construction Code Official, or the appropriate
official as designated by the governing body, shall remove such placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the declaration and
placarding action were based have been eliminated and the proper
continued certificate of occupancy (CCO) obtained from the
Construction Code Official or the appropriate official as designated by
the governing body.
A. Exterior maintenance inspections shall be made by a formal written
complaint by a resident of that particular area of concern only. All
complaints shall be kept anonymous, either by tenant complaints or
landlord complaints. The written complaint shall be waived for unsafe
conditions only.
B. The following conditions for maintenance of the exterior property shall
be the minimum conditions, and no person or entity shall occupy as an
owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy or use premises which
do not comply with the following:
(1) The exterior of the premises, the exterior of the structures and the
condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the
appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a
good level of maintenance and in good repair keeping with the
standards of that particular area and such that the appearance of
the premises and structures shall not constitute a depressing factor
for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the
progressive deterioration and downgrading of the particular area
with the accompanying diminution of property values.
§ 116-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-13
112:667
(2) All structures and premises or vacant land shall be maintained in a
clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition, as provided herein, so as
not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public
health and safety.
(3) All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of
garbage, refuse or rubbish (as per Chapter 122, Solid Waste, of the
Township Code.)
(4) Operators and occupants of every residential, commercial and
industrial establishment shall provide and at all times cause to be
used leakproof containers with close-fitting covers for the storage
of garbage, refuse or rubbish (as per Chapter 122, Solid Waste, of
the Township Code.)
(5) All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any structures
located on the premises.
(6) Commercial and industrial areas shall have all driveways, parking
areas and loading areas paved with concrete or bituminous
concrete or equivalent surfacing and shall be free of dirt and other
litter and in good repair. Pavement which is severely cracked with a
deteriorated surface, frost-heaved or with potholes shall be
repaired.
(7) All traffic flow and control signs and structures shall be maintained
in a functional condition. Directional and parking bay stripes shall
be readable and control guardrails and fencing replaced when
broken or severely damaged.
(8) Extermination of the exterior of a structure or property shall be
undertaken whenever infestation exists on the premises, whether
infestation is exterior or interior.
(9) All sidewalks, steps, driveways and similar paved areas for public
use shall be kept in good repair, and deteriorated, uprooted,
cracked or dilapidated sidewalks shall be repaired by the owner
prior to sale or rental.
(10) All areas shall be kept free from weeds or plant growth which are
noxious, dangerous or detrimental to the public health and safety.
The landscaping or premises shall be maintained in an orderly state
with lawns and bushes trimmed and free from becoming
overgrown, littered and unsightly where such would constitute a
blighting effect, depreciating any adjoining and nearby property.
Open areas shall be graded evenly to eliminate holes, depressions,
gullies, mounds, accumulations or debris or other unsightly or
unsafe conditions (as per Chapter 122, Solid Waste, of the
Township Code).
§ 116-13 FLORENCE CODE § 116-13
112:668
(11) All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and
walls, shall be maintained structurally sound.
(12) The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of the following
materials and conditions:
(a) Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound wells, shafts,
towers, cellar openings, basement hatchways, foundations or
excavations.
(b) Animal excrement.
(c) Hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards such as holes,
sudden depressions, sharp or jagged projections or
obstructions.
(d) Dangerously loose and overhanging objects, including but not
limited to dead trees or tree limbs, accumulations of ice or any
object, natural or made-made, which could threaten the health
and safety or persons if caused to fall, or other similar
dangerous loose and overhanging objects which, by reason of
their location above the ground level, constitute actual hazard
to persons or vehicles in the vicinity thereof.
(13) Exterior structures shall be maintained structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the
occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the
environment, including but not limited to:
(a) All supporting structural members of all structures shall be
kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and maintained
capable of safely bearing the safety loads imposed upon them.
(b) Every foundation, exterior walls, roofs and other exterior
surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as
to exclude rats.
(c) All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe
design and operating safety loads and shall be maintained
plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, so as not to be
detrimental to public safety and welfare.
(d) Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or
rotting boards or timbers and any other condition which might
admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or
to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface
materials, including wood, composition or metal siding, shall
be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surfacecoated
when required to prevent deterioration.
(e) Roofs, gutters and downspouts shall be structurally sound and
tight and shall not have defects which might admit rain, and
§ 116-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-13
112:669
roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from
causing dampness in the walls or interior portions of the
building.
(f) Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be
maintained structurally sound, free from defects and so
maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions for
which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other
draft-producing equipment shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases.
(g) Every stair, porch, balcony, railing and all appurtenances
attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use
and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. All stairs and
handrails shall conform to Uniform Construction Code
standards.
(h) There shall be no structurally unsound, loose, dangerous,
crumbling, missing, broken, rotten or unsafe exterior portions
of building or structures, including but not limited to porches,
landings, balconies, stairways, handrails, steps, walls,
overhangs, roofs, fences, supporting members, timber
abutments, cupolas, fire escapes, signs or loose, crumbling or
falling bricks, stones, mortar or plaster.
(i) There shall be no broken glass or windows, rotted, missing or
substantially destroyed window frames or sashes, door frames,
exterior doors or other major exterior component parts of
buildings or structures.
(j) Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door
and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall
be kept in sound condition and repair. Every window sash shall
be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved
substitute which are without open cracks or holes. Every
window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonable tight
within its frame. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in
position by window hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge
and door latch shall be maintained in good condition. Every
exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its
frame. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and
maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction
so as to exclude rain as completely as possible and to
substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling or
multifamily dwelling. Every basement hatchway shall be
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of
rodents, rain and surface drainage water into the dwelling or
multifamily dwelling. Every door available as an exit shall be
§ 116-13 FLORENCE CODE § 116-13
112:670
§ 116-14. Interior standards.
capable of being opened from the inside easily and without
the use of a key. Guards and screens shall be supplied for
protection against rodents and insects in accordance with the
following requirements. Every basement or cellar window
which is openable shall be supplied with corrosion-resistive
rodent-proof shields, wire mesh screens or storm windows or
with other materials affording equivalent protection against
entry of rodents. From June 1 to October 15 of each year,
every door opening directly from any dwelling or multifamily
dwelling to the outdoors, and every window or other outside
opening used for ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with a
screen and every swinging screen door shall have a self-closing
devise in good working condition; except that no such screen
shall be required for a dwelling unit on a floor above the fifth
floor.
A. Required space in dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
minimum gross floor area of not less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet for the first occupant and one hundred (100) square feet for
each additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis
of the total area of habitable rooms.
B. Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two (2) or
more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes of one (1)
occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space
and every room occupied for sleeping purposes of more than one (1)
occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for
each additional occupant thereof.
C. Electrical outlets required. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall
contain at least two (2) separate wall-type electric convenience outlets,
or one (1) such convenience outlet and one (1) supplied ceiling-type
light fixture. One (1) ground-fault interrupter outlet may be installed in
lieu of two (2) outlets. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly
installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition and
shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
(1) The electrical system in existing structures must be brought up to
this standard when rented or sold.
(2) Minimum house service shall be one-hundred-ampere 120/240-volt
electric service with breaker system.
(3) Smoke detectors shall be installed outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on
each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and
cellars. All detectors shall be connected to a sounding device or
other detectors to provide, when activated, an alarm which will be
audible in all sleeping areas. All detectors shall be approved and
§ 116-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-14
112:671
§ 116-15. Rental units.
listed and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions. All smoke detectors may be battery operated in
existing buildings.
(4) Sump pumps shall be grounded in accordance with the New Jersey
Electrical Code. All pumps shall be inspected for proper use.
D. All ceiling walls and woodwork shall be sound and free of loose paint or
wall covering.
E. All floors shall be sound and painted or covered with an approved floor
covering.
F. All stairs and hand railings shall be in sound condition.
G. All operable windows shall open easily and stay in an open position
without the help of a prop.
H. All doors shall open and close easily. Bathroom and bedroom doors shall
stay closed when in the closed position by an approved latch.
I. All sinks, showers and tubs shall have hot and cold water and all shall
drain properly.
J. All water closets shall flush properly and shall be free of leaks.
K. All hot-water heaters shall be in sound condition and free of leaks.
L. All water and sewer lines shall be in sound condition and free of leaks.
M. Heating systems shall be in a sound and working condition and shall be
properly vented. Inspection and certification of the heating system shall
be made by the seller or negotiated with the buyer.
A. Every person who rents to another for occupancy, after adoption of this
chapter, any residential rental units shall register the unit with the
Township Construction Code Official, who shall maintain a registry
thereof. The registration, on forms provided by the Township
Construction Code Official or the appropriate official as designated by
the governing body, shall include the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of owner.
(2) Address of residential rental unit.
(3) Term of existing or anticipated lease.
(4) Names of occupants, their ages and their relationship.
B. Rental properties shall be required to have regular inspections
annually. The registration shall be renewed with each change of
occupancy. When the owner shall no longer rent the premises to
another for occupancy, the owner shall notify the Construction Code
§ 116-14 FLORENCE CODE § 116-15
112:672
§ 116-16. Requests for status reports.
Where, in lieu of an inspection, an owner, operator, occupant, lessee,
prospective purchaser, mortgagee or prospective occupant requests a
status report as to whether or not there are any known violations presently
pending on the said premises, a copy of any notice or order of any violation
shall be sent to the applicant.
Official, or the appropriate official as designated by the governing
body, in writing, of such fact. Upon a conveyance of ownership of the
residential rental unit, the new owner shall, within ten (10) days after
settlement, notify the Construction Code Official, or the appropriate
official as designated by the governing body, in writing, of the change
in ownership.
C. No residential rental unit which is subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
55:13A-1 et seq. (Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law) shall be subject to
the provisions of this section.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this section by letting to
another for occupancy any residential rental unit without first having
obtained a certificate of inspection or failing to register shall, upon
conviction hereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in this chapter.
Each day over ten (10) that such condition shall exist shall be deemed a
separate violation of the terms of this section and is retroactive from
the tenth day of occupancy.
E. Access for inspections and repairs. [Amended 4-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
(1) The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections
to determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and
rooming houses or boardinghouses in order that they may promote
the purposes of this article to safeguard the health, safety and
welfare of the occupants of rental facilities, rental units and
rooming houses/boardinghouses and of the general public. For the
purpose of making such inspections, the inspecting officers shall be
vested with the authority set forth in this article. The owner or
occupant of every rental facility, rental unit and rooming house or
boardinghouse shall give the inspecting officer free access to the
rental facility, rental unit and rooming house or boardinghouse at
all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections,
examinations and surveys.
(2) Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental
unit and rooming house or boardinghouse access to any part of
such rental facility, rental unit and rooming house or
boardinghouse at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this article or any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.
§ 116-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-17
112:673
§ 116-17. Significance and scope of status report.
Status reports under this chapter shall not be construed as providing a
defense against any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
Township which may be discovered thereafter whether or not the condition
or violation existed at the time of any such status report. The status report is
provided as a convenience to the public and shall not constitute a limitation
on the full enforcement of this chapter. The status report shall include only
such matters as are embraced in this chapter.
§ 116-18. Enforcement.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Construction
Code Official, or the appropriate official as designated by the governing
body, with the assistance of the Chief of Police, Fire Official and Health
Official as the Construction Code Official shall determine.
B. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there is or has been
a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person, persons or entities responsible therefor under
this chapter. Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise
statement of the reasons for its issuance. Service of the notice shall be
deemed sufficient if sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the last known address of the person or entity as shown by the most
recent tax lists of the municipality, or personal service, or a copy
thereof being left at the usual place of abode or office of such person or
entity. Such notice may be served either within or outside the
municipality. The notice shall direct that the violation be removed,
abated, cured, prevented or desisted within forty-five (45) days of the
date of service of the notice, exclusive of the date of service, or
summons will issue for such violation. The enforcement officer may
extend the time for compliance with the notice for up to one (1) year,
provided that, in his judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention,
cessation or cure of the condition violated cannot reasonably be
effected within the forty-five-day period; and in such cases, the
enforcement officer shall state such reasonably required period, not
exceeding one (1) year, which shall then be applicable instead of the
aforesaid forty-five (45) days. In the event that the violation is not
abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully
remedied within the forty-five-day period or extended period as set
forth in the notice, a summons shall then be issued against the person,
persons, entity or entities so notified. The owner will not be permitted
to sell or rent until repairs are completed or a written negotiation has
been accepted by the Construction Code Official, or the appropriate
official as designated by the governing body, regarding completion of
repairs.
C. Emergency conditions which are violations of this chapter requiring
immediate attention to protect the public health and safety shall be the
subject of an order and notice prepared and served as set forth in
Subsection B above, which shall state the nature of the emergency and
§ 116-17 FLORENCE CODE § 116-18
112:674
§ 116-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person or entity who shall violate any provision of this chapter or
any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons issues under the
terms hereof, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.) or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding
ninety (90) days or to a period of community service not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or any combination thereof. Each violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter and each day that each such violation shall
continue shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 116-20. Coordination of enforcement.
Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith
under the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive responsibility
of the Construction Code Official in the Township of Florence, County of
Burlington. Wherever, in the opinion of the Construction Code Official,
it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any
other department, he shall arrange for this to be done in such manner
that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits
by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order
for correction of any violation under this chapter shall be issued without
the approval of the Construction Code Official, or the appropriate official
as designated by the governing body, and it shall be the responsibility of
that official, before issuing any such order, to determine that it has the
concurrence of any department or officer of the government concerned with
any matter involved on the case in question.
§ 116-21. Nonliability of enforcement officials.
Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or ordinance,
no officer, agent or employee of the Township of Florence in the County
of Burlington charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter. No person who institutes or assists in the
prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this chapter shall be liable
to damages hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without
shall order immediate remediation. If a person or entity to whom such
notice for immediate remediation files an objection immediately, in
writing, to such a notice, such person or entity shall be afforded a
hearing within forty-eight (48) hours and decision by the Construction
Code Official, or the appropriate official as designated by the governing
body, as to the existence or nonexistence of the emergency condition.
The Construction Code Official or the appropriate official as designated
by the governing body may continue such order in effect or modify or
withdraw it, subject to the issuance of a summons for violation thereof,
if such order is continued.
§ 116-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-21
112:675
reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused or prosecuted
was guilty of an unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any
officer, agent or employee of the Township of Florence in the County of
Burlington, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the legal representatives
of the Township of Florence in the County of Burlington until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 116-22. Blockage of visibility. [Added 10-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-25]
In accordance with the authority granted under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.26, the owner of any property, and the tenant of the property if the
property is not occupied by the owner, shall maintain the property so that no
wall or fence and no brush, hedge, or other plant life growing within 10 feet
of any roadway and within 25 feet of any intersection of two roadways shall
be cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it shall be necessary
and expedient, as determined by the Chief of Police, for the preservation of
the public safety. The owner or tenant shall cut the brush, hedge or plant life
within 10 days after notice to cut the same and, if the owner or tenant shall
refuse, fail or neglect to cut the same within the 10 days, then the Chief of
Police shall arrange to have the brush, hedge or plant life cut under by or
under the direction of the Township with the costs to be assessed back to
the owner or tenant of the property. The costs of cutting shall be in addition
to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this provision.
§ 116-23. Maintenance of property in accordance with approved site
plan. [Added 1-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-31]
A. Whenever any property has been the subject of site plan review and
approval, that property shall be maintained in accordance with the
approved site plan. All parking areas shall be maintained with clearly
visible striping for parking areas, handicapped parking spaces, and fire
zones. All pavement, curbing and sidewalks shall be maintained free of
broken and uneven surfaces. The property owner shall be responsible
for making all necessary repairs. All landscaping shall be maintained in
accordance with the approved plan. The property owner shall replace
any shrubbery or trees that die within the next planting season with
shrubs or trees of a size comparable to the shrub or tree that is being
replaced.
B. Penalty. Any failure to maintain the property in accordance with the
approved site plan shall subject the property owner to a fine not to
exceed $1,000 for each violation. On a repeat violation occurring within
18 months of a conviction, the penalty shall be not less than $250 for
each violation.
§ 116-21 FLORENCE CODE § 116-23
112:676
ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance by Creditors
[Adopted 4-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
§ 116-24. Creditor responsibility.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Public Laws of 2014, Chapter 35, a
creditor filing a summons and complaint to foreclose a lien on a residential
property that is vacant and abandoned, whether the filing of the summons
and complaint is made before or after a determination that the property
is vacant and abandoned, shall be responsible for the care, maintenance,
security, and upkeep of the exterior of the residential property. This
obligation applies whether the determination that the property is vacant
and abandoned is made by the public officer pursuant to the provisions of
this article, any other chapter of the Code of the Township of Florence,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73 or otherwise.
§ 116-25. Notice to creditor; time to correct violations.
If the public officer, or other authorized municipal official, determines that
a creditor obligated to care, maintain, secure and keep up a vacant and
abandoned property has failed to do so in violation of the provisions of
this article or any other chapter of this Code, the public officer or other
authorized municipal official shall issue a notice of violation to the creditor
that has filed a summons and complaint to foreclose on the property in
question. The notice shall require the person or entity to correct the
violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt
of the notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health
and safety. The issuance of this notice shall constitute evidence that a
property is "vacant and abandoned" for purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73.
§ 116-26. Designated representative of out-of-state creditor;
violation.
An out-of-state creditor shall include the full name and contact information
of the in-state representative or agent in the notice required to be provided
to the municipal clerk pursuant to paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.
An out-of-state creditor found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have
violated this provision shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of
the violation commencing on the day after the ten-day period set forth in
paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 with respect to notifying the municipal
clerk that an action to foreclose on the property has been filed.
§ 116-27. Violations and penalties.
Except as set forth in § 116-26 and herein, any person, firm, corporation
or entity violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of this
Code. A creditor required to care, maintain, secure and keep up a property
§ 116-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-27
112:677
under this article cited in a notice issued pursuant to § 116-25 shall be
subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation.
§ 116-28. Additional notice required.
Notice of violations of property maintenance, building or other property
codes for any property declared vacant and abandoned pursuant to this
Article shall be given to a foreclosing creditor pursuant to the procedures
of § 116-25 of this Code as required by P.L. 2014, c. 35.
§ 116-27 FLORENCE CODE § 116-28
112:678
ARTICLE III
Landlord Registration
[Adopted 4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
§ 116-29. Landlord registration required.
§ 116-30. Rental property registration.
A. Registration required. No person(s), corporation or business entity
shall offer any residential property for rent, lease or let any residential
property to any person(s) without first obtaining a landlord registration
certificate from the Township. The landlord registration form, which is
required to be completed in order to obtain a landlord registration
certificate, may be obtained from the Construction Code Official or his
designee during normal business hours. Registration shall not be
required for individual units contained within an entire structure
containing three or more units that are owned by one person or party
and where none of the individual units is a stand-alone parcel as defined
by having a unique lot identifier on the tax rolls of the Township of
Florence.
B. The initial registration shall occur within 30 days following the final
adoption of this chapter. The initial term for the landlord registration
certificate shall be for a term not to exceed 18 months, or December 31,
2018. Thereafter, the landlord registration certificate shall be renewed
annually and amended, as necessary, within 20 days of each change of
ownership or occupancy of any rental unit. No rental unit shall
hereafter be rented unless the rental unit is registered in accordance
with this chapter. The landlord registration certificate shall not include
approval for the use and occupancy of a rental unit. Consistent with
§ 116-4 and § 116-5, a continued certificate of occupancy inspection is
required for each unit. Such landlord registration certificate shall be
granted or denied within 10 business days from the day of the
application for the same to determine whether or not a continued
certificate of occupancy (CCO), certifying that the building and
premises are in compliance with all ordinances of the Township of
Florence, shall first be obtained from the Construction Code Official or
the appropriate official as designated by the governing body of the
Township of Florence.
A. The owner of every rental property, with the exception of owneroccupied
properties in the Township of Florence shall file a landlord
registration form with the Construction Code Official or his designee.
The Construction Code Official or his designee shall provide a copy of
same to the Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety, Township Clerk
and Fire Chief. When providing a copy of same to any other person or
entity requesting same, the Township Clerk, Construction Code Office
and Fire and Police Departments shall redact the names and addresses,
age and gender of the tenants.
§ 116-29 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-30
112:679
B. The landlord registration form shall be filed on an annual basis on or
before the 31st of January of each year.
C. Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28, all rental units shall be registered and licensed as
provided herein. Every owner shall file with the Construction Code
Official or his designee a landlord registration form, for each unit
contained within a building or structure, which shall include the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or owners
of the premises and the record owner or owners of the rental
business, if not the same person(s). In the case of a partnership, the
names and addresses of all general partners shall be provided,
together with the telephone numbers for each individual partner,
indicating where such individual may be reached both during the
day and evening hours. If the record owner is a corporation, the
name and address of the registered agent and corporate officers of
said corporation shall be provided, together with the telephone
number for each such individual, indicating where such individual
may be reached both during day and evening hours. If the record
owner is an LLC, the name and address of the managing member(s)
shall be provided, for each such member, indicating where such
member (or its principal officers if a corporation) may be reached
both during day and evening hours. All registration addresses shall
be physical addresses; post office boxes are insufficient.
(2) If the address of the owner of record is not located in the County of
Burlington, the name, address and telephone number of a person
who resides in the County of Burlington and who is authorized to
accept notices from a tenant and to issue receipts therefor and to
accept service of process on behalf of the owner of record.
(3) The name and address of the managing agent of the premises, if
any, and the telephone number where such individual may be
reached both during day and evening hours.
(4) The name and address of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or
other individual employed by the owner of record or managing
agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any, and telephone
number where such individual may be reached both during day and
evening hours.
(5) The name, address and telephone number and cellular telephone
number of at least one individual representative of the owner of
record or managing agent who may be reached or contacted at any
time in the event of an emergency affecting the premises or any
unit of dwelling space therein, including such emergencies as the
failure of any essential service or system, and who has the authority
to make emergency decisions concerning the building and any
repair thereto or expenditure in connection therewith and shall, at
§ 116-30 FLORENCE CODE § 116-30
112:680
all times, have access to a current list of building tenants that shall
be made available to emergency personnel as required in the event
of an emergency.
(6) The names and addresses of all holders of recorded mortgages on
the property.
(7) The owner shall be obligated to supply the required fuel type or
energy utilized by the heating system and maintain said heating
system in good operating condition so that it can supply heat as
required, notwithstanding any contractual provision seeking to
delegate or shift responsibility to the occupant or third person,
except that the owner shall not be required to supply fuel or energy
for heating purposes to any unit where the occupant thereof agrees
in writing to supply heat to his own unit of dwelling space and the
said unit is served by its own exclusive heating equipment for
which the source of heat can be separately computed and billed.
(8) For each such rental unit the landlord shall provide:
(a) A description by number or letter and floor of each such rental
unit.
(b) The name, age and gender of each and every tenant in each
unit, including children. The information contained in the
landlord registration form must set forth information for each
unit within the rental property and must include all tenants in
each unit.
(c) The square footage of living space within each such rental unit
and the number of rooms.
(d) Provide a detailed floor plan with the exact number of sleeping
rooms contained in each rental unit and the exact number of
sleeping accommodations contained in each of the sleeping
rooms, identifying each sleeping room specifically by number
and location within the apartment or dwelling and by the
square footage thereof. This information shall be provided with
the initial landlord registration form and shall be updated as
part of the annual renewal process should the floor plan
change. If no changes to the floor plan were made during the
course of the preceding year, then the registrant shall not be
required to submit an updated floor plan.
(e) Whether such rental unit is equipped with a kitchen.
(f) Whether the rental unit is equipped with a fire-suppression or
fire sprinkler system, a fire extinguisher, a carbon monoxide
alarm, a smoke detector alarm, fixed fire escape ladders or
systems for emergency egress.
§ 116-30 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-30
112:681
§ 116-31. Amended registration certificate.
Every person required to file a landlord registration form pursuant to this
chapter shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any
change in the information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be
required for the filing of an amendment, except where the ownership of the
premises has changed.
§ 116-32. Occupancy of unregistered premises prohibited.
No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit
occupancy of any rental unit within the Township, which is not registered
and licensed and for which a registration certificate has not been issued in
accordance with this article.
§ 116-33. Issuance of landlord registration certificate.
(g) The term on the lease and a copy of the current continued
certificate of occupancy (CCO).
(h) A copy of the most recent valid certificate of inspection issued
by the State of New Jersey Bureau of Housing, Department of
Community Affairs, if applicable.
(i) A certification as to who is paying the property taxes and
water/sewerage charges.
(j) The information referenced in Subsections C(8)(a) through (i)
hereof may be provided by attaching the landlord registration
statement mandated by N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 certifying that the
information contained therein remains true and accurate or, in
the event of any change, amend said registration certificate
accordingly.
(k) A copy of the completed Federal Lead Based Paint Disclosure
Form, if applicable.
(l) Such other information as may be prescribed by the Township
on the appropriate landlord registration form or otherwise by
ordinance or resolution.
A. Upon the filing of a completed landlord registration form, payment of
the prescribed fee, and a satisfactory inspection, when required and as
necessary, the owner shall be entitled to the issuance of a certificate
commencing on the date of issuance and expiring on December 31 of
that calendar year. A landlord registration form shall be required for
each rental unit, and a landlord registration certificate shall be issued
to the owner for each rental unit, even if more than one rental unit is
contained in the property.
B. At the time of the filing of the registration form, the owner or agent of
the owner must pay a registration fee as provided in Chapter 2, Fees.
§ 116-30 FLORENCE CODE § 116-33
112:682
§ 116-34. Inspections.
After the initial registration, there shall be no fee for an amended
registration regarding a change of occupancy; the registration fee for a
change of ownership is as provided in Chapter 2, Fees.
C. Providing registration form to occupants and tenants. Every owner
shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit with a
copy of the landlord registration form required by this article. This
particular provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guest house
registered with the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and
Multiple Dwelling Act as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This section may
be complied with by posting a copy of the landlord registration
certificate in a conspicuous place within the rental unit(s).
D. Maximum number of occupants; posting. The maximum number of
occupants shall be posted in each rental unit. It shall be unlawful for
any person, including the owner, agent, tenant or registered tenant, to
allow a greater number of persons than the posted maximum number of
occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight the rental unit for a period
exceeding 29 days. Any person violating this section shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of § 116-9 of this chapter.
E. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the Township as
required in this section may reside in the licensed premises. It shall be
unlawful for a nonregistered person to reside in said premises and any
owner, agent, tenant or registered tenant allowing a nonregistered
person to reside in said premises and the nonregistered person shall be
in violation of this subsection.
A. Complaint-based inspections, inspection following a finding of nonvalid
continued certificate of occupancy and/or those inspections required as
a result of a finding of no prior continued certificate of occupancy, shall
be performed by such person, persons or agency duly authorized and
appointed by the Township pursuant to the direction of the
Construction Code Official. Inspections made by persons or an agency
other than the duly authorized and appointed person, persons or
agency of the Township shall not be used as a valid substitute.
B. Such inspection shall be for purpose of determining if the property
complies with the Uniform Construction Code, the current Township
Property Maintenance Code, housing code and/or building code and the
Uniform Fire Safety Act. Upon compliance, the Construction Code
Official shall cause to be issued a landlord registration certificate
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
C. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit indicates the need for maintenance and/or repairs, such property
shall not thereafter be registered, and the landlord of the property, or
his agent, shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall any tenant
occupy the property, until the necessary maintenance, repairs and
§ 116-33 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 116-34
112:683
corrections have been made so as to bring the property and rental
unit into compliance with the applicable code(s) and the property is
thereafter subsequently reinspected, approved, registered and
licensed. In the event that the property is occupied when such
conditions are discovered, all such corrections shall be made within
30 days, and if not made within that time period, the owner shall be
deemed in violation of this article and every day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to
the penalty provisions of § 116-19 of this chapter.
§ 116-34 FLORENCE CODE § 116-34
112:684
Chapter 118
REAL ESTATE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 91.
§ 118-1. Display of preliminary and final plan; written statement.
The developer of land receiving major subdivision approval shall
prominently display a copy of the approved preliminary plan and final plan,
containing all conditions, in the sales office and shall provide a reduced
copy of the same to any and all interested persons. Also, developers of land
receiving major subdivision approval shall provide a written statement to a
contract purchaser at the time of the execution of the agreement of sale of
a particular lot setting forth the following information:
§ 118-2. Survey plan.
The developer shall provide all purchasers of real estate in the development
at the time contracts are presented with a copy of the survey plan of the real
estate being purchased, which survey plan shall identify all setback lines
effecting the property as well as the building envelope.
§ 118-3. Compliance.
The Planning Board shall condition the preliminary and final approval of a
major subdivision upon compliance with the terms of this chapter.
Chapter 119
SCHOOLS
A. The location of the house/lot to be purchased on the preliminary and
final approval plans.
B. The location of all wetlands and the relationship to the property.
C. A description of all encumbrances, liabilities and restrictions on the use
of land, including but not limited to easements and wetlands and
recreation areas.
D. The location of all recreation facilities and the relationship of the same
to the property and the date when the facilities will be commenced and
completed.
§ 116-34 REAL ESTATE SALES § 118-3
118:685

ARTICLE I
Residency Requirement for Enrollment
[Adopted 2-4-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
§ 119-1. Nonresident student enrollment prohibition; violations and
penalties.
A. Purpose. An article to prohibit and penalize any parent or other person
from enrolling a nonresident student in the Florence Township School
District.
B. Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of
18 to:
(1) Assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, suffer or encourage a student to
register or enroll in the Florence Township School District where
the student is ineligible to attend; or
(2) Knowingly permit his or her name, address or other residencedesignating
documentation to be utilized in the registration or
enrollment of any nonresident student in the Florence Township
School District.
C. Enrollment. Subsections A and B shall be enforced by the
administrative officials of the school district and/or school facilities
where such prohibited activities are undertaken and the attendance/
residency officer and/or the attendance/residency investigator. All
residents hosting other families in their residence must register with
the Township Housing Authority.
D. Penalty and restitution. Any person violating or failing to comply with
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
the penalties as provided in § 1-10 of the Florence Township Code and
shall, further, be required to make restitution to the Florence Township
Board of Education. In determining the amount of restitution, the court
shall include amounts incurred by the Florence Township Board of
Education, including but not limited to tuition costs, investigation
expenses and attorneys' fees.
E. Restitution to be a lien. Restitution ordered by the Municipal Court of
the Township of Florence, Burlington County, shall be entered as a
judgment in the Municipal Court and shall be docketed in the New
Jersey Superior Court as a lien against the property of the offending
party.
§ 119-1 REAL ESTATE SALES § 119-1
118:687
Chapter 120
SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 91. Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permit — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
§ 120-1. Permission required; exemptions. [Amended 12-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-31; 3-16-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-9]
A. No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil or earth whether for
sale or for any other use nor shall soil be deposited on any land in the
Township other than on the premises from which the soil or earth shall
be taken without first having procured permission therefor from the
Township Council. The term "premises" shall mean a lot as identified on
the Florence Township Tax Map, except that where there is a
comprehensive development plan, the term shall be applied to the area
proposed for development so that the restrictions shall not apply to soil
moved within the development project while the project is in the
process of development.
B. No soil or earth shall be removed from the Township of Florence unless
the Township Council shall have determined that there is no location
within the Township of Florence where the soil or earth can be put to
public use. Where there is a public use for the soil or earth, the person
excavating or otherwise removing the soil or earth shall be required to
transport it to the location designated by the Township Council. The
Township Council may waive this requirement where there is no pubic
use for the soil or earth. Where the soil or earth is to be put to public
use, or where the Township Council determines that there is good
cause, the Township Council may waive the permit fee provided for in §
120-5.
C. The following activities are exempt from this requirement:
(1) Activities where the extent of soil disturbance does not exceed
10,000 square feet in area or 100 cubic yards in volume.
(2) Normal farming activities as more fully described in Chapter, 34,
Agriculture, Art. I.
(3) Any soil disturbance, grading or construction associated with a
plan approved by the Florence Township Planning Board, Zoning
Board, Township Council or any other governmental agency having
jurisdiction, be it local, county, state or federal, provided that the
soil or earth being removed is relocated for use in the Township of
Florence as provided in Subsection B of this section.
§ 119-1 FLORENCE CODE § 120-1
120:688
§ 120-2. Requests for approval; plans required. [Amended
12-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-31]
Any person wishing to obtain permission in accordance with § 120-1 shall
file with the Township Clerk a letter requesting such permission stating
the location, amount and purpose of the soil removal or soil depositing.
The letter shall be accompanied by a plan that generally shows the area
to be excavated, extent and depth of excavation areas where soil is to be
deposited and the extent and depth of the soil to be deposited. In addition,
the areas and extent of steep slopes, floodplains, wetlands and water bodies
(if any) shall be indicated on the plan. The letter and accompanying plan
shall contain sufficient information for the Township Council and/or its staff
to determine that the standards of § 120-4 will be met.
§ 120-3. Hearing; review of application; decision.
(4) Any soil activity directly related to the installation or repair of a
septic system.
A. Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the Mayor
and Council, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted within thirty
(30) days thereafter, and the Mayor and Council, in considering and
reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision, shall be guided
and take into consideration the public health, safety and general
welfare, and particular consideration shall be given to the following
factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the township.
B. If, after examining the application and the map provided for in § 120-2
of this chapter and after the hearing, in the event that a hearing is
requested by the applicant, the Mayor and Council shall be of the
opinion that the proposed soil removal will not create conditions
inimical to the public health, welfare and safety and will not result in
the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or
fertility problems or depressed land values nor create any drainage or
sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission to remove
the soil shall be granted.
§ 120-1 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 120-4
120:689
§ 120-4. Requirements of excavation and deposit operations.
[Amended 12-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-31]
Permission to remove or deposit soil in Florence Township shall be granted
only when the following standards and requirements are met:
§ 120-4.1. Permit application fee. [Added 12-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-31]
A. At the end of the soil removal or depositing activity there shall be an
adequate top soil covering the disturbed area to assure that healthy
vegetation can be supported. A minimum of six (6) inches shall be
considered necessary for this purpose.
B. Steps shall be taken so that there shall be no soil erosion by water or
wind resulting from the activity.
C. Soil shall not be removed or deposited so as to create drainage
problems on or off the site.
D. There shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions created at the
end of the activity. The area of disturbance shall be properly leveled and
graded in a manner that is free of debris and suitable for a healthy
vegetative cover.
E. There shall be adequate lateral support of adjacent streets, buildings
and lots.
F. There shall be no depositing of soil contaminated with chemicals or
materials that may be harmful to waterways, groundwater, vegetation,
livestock, wildlife or citizens of Florence Township. The Township
Engineer or Construction Code/Zoning Official may require soil tests
from a reputable testing laboratory to confirm that there is no harmful
contamination.
G. This disturbed area shall be covered with a suitable vegetation at the
end of the activity.
H. The activity shall be concluded within a reasonable period of time
taking into account the nature and extent of the activity. The Township
Council may impose a limit on the time that the soil shall be disturbed
and uncovered by vegetation in accordance with its approval, as it
determines may be necessary or appropriate.
A. An application fee of five dollars ($5.) per one hundred (100) cubic
yards shall be paid to the Township of Florence prior to the issuance of
a soil removal or depositing permit. The minimum permit application
fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.).
B. For applications to remove over twenty-five thousand (25,000) cubic
yards of soil, the Township Council may negotiate the deferred payment
of the application fee over the term of the permit at a fee agreed to
§ 120-4 FLORENCE CODE § 120-4.1
120:690
§ 120-5. Bond. [Amended 12-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-31]
Before any permission for soil or earth removal or deposit shall be granted,
the applicant shall file with the township a bond, in form and with surety
acceptable to the Township of Florence, in such amount as, in the opinion
of the Council, with the advice of the Township Engineer, shall be sufficient
to insure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to
the permission granted in accordance with this chapter.
§ 120-5.1. Escrow fund. [Added 12-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-31]
The applicant shall establish an escrow fund in the amount of six percent
(6%) of the bond guaranty amount required to be filed with the township
pursuant to § 120-5 of this chapter. Said fund shall be used to pay the fees of
any professional personnel employed to process, review, inspect and make
recommendations on the application. If at any time the escrow fund shall be
deemed insufficient by the township to cover actually anticipated expenses,
said fund shall be subject to increase on demand. Any excess of the funds
in the escrow account at the time of final completion of the project will be
returned to the owner or applicant upon his request, in writing, and upon
certification by the Township Engineer.
§ 120-6. Permit required prior to excavation.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have been first
obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 120-7. Waiver of filing map and/or bond.
On good cause shown, the Mayor and Council may waive the filing of a map
showing contour grades as requested in § 120-2 of this chapter and may also
waive the filing of the bond required in § 120-5 of this chapter.
§ 120-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.) or to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days or to a period of community service not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the Judge before
whom such conviction shall be had. Each and every violation of and
nonconformance with the provisions of this chapter or each day that any
provision of this chapter shall have been violated shall be construed as a
separate and distinct violation thereof.
between the applicant and the Township Council but in no event shall
the fee be less than five dollars ($5.) per one hundred (100) cubic yards.
§ 120-4.1 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 120-8
120:691
Chapter 122
SOLID WASTE
§ 120-8 FLORENCE CODE § 120-8
120:692
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-4-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-10]
§ 122-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of foods; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
TRASH — Combustible matter, including but not limited to paper other than
newspaper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard
trimmings, wood furniture and bedding; noncombustible matter, including
but not limited to metals other than tin cans and cans required to be
recycled, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of
concrete, crockery and other mineral waste; street rubbish, including but
not limited to street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt and contents
of litter receptacles, provided that trash shall not include earth and wastes
from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from
industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food-processing
wastes, boilerhouse cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.
§ 122-2. Uncovered garbage or trash prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the Township
any garbage, trash or other material subject to decay, other than leaves or
grass, except in a tightly covered metal or plastic container or bags tied or
sealed.
§ 122-3. Nonconforming receptacles.
A. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements may be treated as rubbish and collected and disposed of
as such by the Township responsible for the collection thereof. In lieu
thereof, the Township may affix a notice to containers which do not
qualify under the requirements of this article, indicating that the
containers do not qualify and that further use of said containers may
result in confiscation of the containers, refusal to make the collection as
specified in this article and/or fines.
B. If, at the next regularly scheduled collection date, said containers still
do not conform to the requirements of this article, the Township may:
(1) Collect the containers as specified above;
(2) Refuse to make the collections as specified in this article; and/or
(3) Issue complaints cognizable in the Township Municipal Court of
violations of this article.
§ 122-1 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-4
120:693
§ 122-4. Windblown trash prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate anywhere in the
Township any garbage, trash, dust, ashes or refuse of such a material that it
can be blown away by the wind, except in a covered container or bags tied
or sealed.
§ 122-5. Deposits on streets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage,
trash or ashes on any public street or alley in the Township, provided
that this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, trash
or ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this article
preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner
provided herein.
§ 122-6. Preparation for collection.
A. Garbage shall be thoroughly drained of all water and placed in a
receptacle, can or barrel made of metal or plastic of a substantial
nature with a tight-fitting cover so constructed as to prevent spillage or
leakage of its contents. No metal, glass or any foreign substance shall
be placed in the garbage receptacle.
B. Trash must be packed in containers. Empty cartons and newspapers
must be securely tied. Where the materials are of such a nature that
they cannot be deposited in any container, the same shall be securely
and properly tied into bundles or packages to prevent any spilling while
being handled by such persons designated to collect the same or while
such bundles or packages are located on the sidewalk awaiting
collection. The bundles or packages shall be of a size and weight to
permit ease of handling by one man, and no receptacle, package,
bundle or plastic container shall weigh more than 50 pounds. No person
shall place more than six (in the aggregate) trash containers,
receptacles, bundles, packages or plastic containers in front of or
alongside his property for collection or removal on any one collection
day. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-29]
C. No trash container or garbage container shall be placed in front of any
street, alley or public place or in front of or alongside of the property
occupied by another without the consent of such occupant. No garbage
container or trash container or matter to be collected shall be placed on
the curb for collection prior to 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the
nearest collection day, and such containers must be removed from the
curb by 9:00 a.m. the day following the collection.
§ 122-4 FLORENCE CODE § 122-7
120:694
§ 122-7. Noncollectible items. [Amended 12-7-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-25; 3-1-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-6; 7-5-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
The following refuse shall be considered not acceptable for collection by the
Township:
§ 122-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-6]
A. Industrial, general manufacturing and special manufacturing uses:
waste materials generated by industrial, general manufacturing and
special manufacturing uses, as defined in Chapter 91, Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Florence, or substances
such as poisons, acids, caustics, noxious chemicals, infected materials,
explosives and ammunition or any other materials likely to cause injury
to persons employed or damages to equipment used in making
collections.
B. Neighborhood commercial, highway commercial and general
commercial uses: waste materials generated by neighborhood
commercial, highway commercial and general commercial uses, as
defined in Chapter 91, Land Development, of the Code of the Township
of Florence, where such materials or substances are in excess of four
fifty-gallon containers each collection day. Neighborhood commercial,
highway commercial and general commercial waste material in the
amount as above-listed will be collected only if the neighborhood
commercial, highway commercial or general commercial waste
generator is in compliance as follows:
(1) Participation in the Township of Florence recycling program as
established in Article IV, Recycling, of this chapter.
(2) Participation in the Township of Florence cardboard recycling
program, if such a program is established and maintained.
(3) All containers used in the disposal of the commercial waste
material shall be clear plastic bags securely tied with no interior
containers which would prevent external inspection of the
contents.
A. Violations of § 122-7B.
(1) Violations of § 122-7B shall carry the following sequence of
penalties:
(a) First offense: refusal of collection that collection day.
(b) Second offense: suspension of collection for a period of one
month.
(c) Third and subsequent offense: suspension of collection for a
period of six months.
§ 122-7 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-8
120:695
(2) Reinstatement of collection will be granted only if justifiable
reasons can be provided to the Township of Florence.
B. Other violations. Any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court. For any violation which is of a
continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct defense. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
§ 122-8 FLORENCE CODE § 122-8
120:696
ARTICLE II
Truck Access to County Solid Waste Facilities Complex
[Adopted 3-15-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-8]
§ 122-9. Mandatory access routes.
All truck traffic entering the Burlington County Solid Waste Facilities
Complex shall utilize the mandatory routes set forth in Amendment 87-2 to
the Burlington County Solid Waste Management Plan and is thus prohibited
from gaining access to the facility by roadways located within the
boundaries of the Township of Florence.
§ 122-10. Mandatory egress routes.
All truck traffic exiting the Burlington County Solid Waste Facilities
Complex shall utilize the mandatory routes set forth in Amendment 87-2 to
the Burlington County Solid Waste Management Plan and thus is prohibited
from utilizing the roadways within the boundaries of Township of Florence.
§ 122-11. Exceptions.
The mandatory access and egress routes set forth in §§ 122-9 and 122-10 of
this article shall not apply to the following vehicles:
§ 122-12. Emergency routes.
During emergencies or times when the prescribed access or routes are
closed, all vehicles shall comply with the alternate routes set forth in
Amendment 87-2 to the Burlington County Solid Waste Management Plan
and, more specifically regarding roadways within the Township of Florence,
as follows:
A. Pickup trucks driven by employees working at the county complex for
the purpose of traveling to and from their employment.
B. Vehicles hauling materials generated within the Township of Florence.
C. Vehicles traveling to the Burlington County Solid Waste Facilities
Complex from a destination within the Townships of Florence,
Mansfield and Springfield. [Amended 5-20-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-13]
D. Vehicles traveling from the Burlington County Solid Waste Facilities
Complex to a destination within the Townships of Florence, Mansfield
and Springfield. [Added 5-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-13]
A. In the event of the closure of the northbound lanes of Interstate I-295
between Interchange 47 and Interchange 52, vehicles traveling north
shall be permitted to use Route 130 north in the Township of Florence
to County Road 656 east (Florence-Columbus Road), turn right onto
County Route 656 spur and turn right and travel west on County Route
543 to the entrance of the county complex.
§ 122-9 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-12
120:697
§ 122-13. Transportation of deterred sludge.
All vehicles transporting dewatered sludges to the Burlington County Solid
Waste Facilities Complex shall comply with the access and egress
requirements set forth in §§ 122-9 through 122-10 of this article.
§ 122-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
Any person who violates any section of this article shall be subject to a
penalty of a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
or any combination thereof.
B. In the event of the closure of the southbound lanes of Interstate I-295
between Interchange 55 and 52, all vehicles shall be permitted to utilize
Route 130 south in the Township of Florence to County Route 656 east
(Florence-Columbus Road), turn right onto County Route 656 spur and
turn right and travel west on County Route 543 to the entrance of the
county complex.
C. In the event that the segment of the access route between Interchange
52 and the entrance of the complex is closed, all vehicles shall be
permitted to exit Interstate I-295 via exit 52, travel west on County
Route 656 (Florence-Columbus Road), turn left on to Old York Road,
turn left on to Burlington Columbus Road (County Route 543) and
proceed to the facility entrance.
§ 122-12 FLORENCE CODE § 122-14
120:698
ARTICLE III
Collection of Bulky Items
[Adopted 8-2-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-21]
§ 122-15. Major appliances.
Major appliances, such as refrigerators, stoves, air conditioners, washers,
dryers and freezers, will be collected and removed by the Township of
Florence as a service to its residents, provided that all doors are removed
from the appliances and an appointment is made with the Clerk of the
Township of Florence and a fee paid at least two days in advance of a
scheduled collection and the major appliance is not placed on the sidewalk
or street more than one day prior to the scheduled collection.
§ 122-16. Sticker required. [Amended 5-19-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-18]
Any resident who desires to have a major appliance collected and removed
by the Township of Florence shall apply to the Clerk of the Township who
will provide the applicant with a collection, removal and disposal sticker,
which sticker must be affixed to the major appliance prior to the same being
placed on the sidewalk, street or curb for collection. The sticker must be
visible from the road.
§ 122-17. Designated collection days.
Major appliances will be collected on such days as are designated by the
Mayor or Business Administrator.
§ 122-15 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-17
120:699

ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted 5-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09106]
§ 122-18. Findings.
The Township of Florence finds that reducing the amount of solid waste
and conservation of recyclable materials is an important public concern and
is necessary to implement the requirements of the SWMA and the County
Plan. The recycling of certain materials from the residential, commercial
and institutional establishments in the Township of Florence will conserve
existing landfill capacity, facilitate the implementation and operation of
other forms of resource recovery and conserve natural resources through
reduced energy consumption, reduced water and air pollution, as well as
reduce the demand on raw material extraction.
§ 122-19. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to P.L. 1987, c. 102 (effective April 20,
1987), N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, N.J.S.A. 40:66-1 and N.J.S.A. 40:49-2.1 and any
amendments adopted thereto.
§ 122-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACT or SWMA — The Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.,
as amended and supplemented.
ALUMINUM CAN — Empty food and beverage containers comprised of
aluminum. Excluded from this definition are aluminum aerosol cans,
aluminum foil and trays.
ANTIFREEZE — Liquid used in an engine cooling system that is mixed with
water and prevents the water from freezing. The solution serves as the
engine coolant.
BURLINGTON COUNTY REGIONAL PROGRAM — The program utilized
for the collection of those recyclable materials as designated by the
Department of Solid Waste from residential curbside, participating
multifamily and participating school collection programs.
CERTIFIED RECYCLING COORDINATOR — A person who shall have
completed the requirements of a course of instruction in various aspects
of recycling program management, as determined and administered by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
CLASS A RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Source-separated, nonputrescible,
metal, glass and plastic bottles coded No. 1 and No. 2; and paper and
corrugated and other cardboard.
106. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Recycling, adopted 4-4-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990-13; amended in its entirety 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-9.
§ 122-18 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-20
120:701
CLASS B RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Source-separated, nonputrescible
waste concrete, asphalt, brick, block, asphalt based roofing, scrap wood,
wood waste; source-separated, nonputrescible waste materials other than
metal, glass, paper, plastic containers, corrugated and other cardboard
resulting from construction remodeling repair and demolition operations
on houses, commercial buildings, pavements and other structures; sourceseparated
whole trees, tree trunks, tree parts, tree stumps, brush and
leaves, provided that they are not composted; source-separated scrap tires;
and sourc-separated petroleum-contaminated soils.
CLASS C RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Source-separated compostable or
anaerobically digestible material such as source-separated food waste,
biodegradable plastic, and yard trimmings.
CLASS D RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Used oil, antifreeze, latex paints,
thermostats, fluorescent lamps (light bulbs), oil-based finishes, batteries,
mercury-containing devices and consumer electronics.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — All commercial and industrial
activities that operate for profit and are involved in retail or manufacture of
goods and services provided for sale.
COMMINGLED — A combining of source-separated recyclable materials for
the purpose of recycling.
COMMON AREA RECYCLING STORAGE LOCATION — A location designed
in accordance with the Land Use Ordinances of this municipality as
required for multifamily dwellings with more than 20 residential units
where curbside collection is not provided under the Burlington County
Regional Program.
CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX — A group of units, arranged horizontally or
vertically, where the form of ownership of real property under a master
deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvements together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
CONSUMER ELECTRONICS — Computer equipment, including desktop
and laptop computers and related components, including monitors, circuit
boards, terminals, and CPUs, and peripheral equipment, including
keyboards, printers, copiers, and fax machines. It shall also include flat
screen televisions with displays using LCD, plasma or LED technology,
VCRs, CD players, DVD players, and cellular phones. Consumer electronics
shall not include televisions that use tube technology as defined herein until
such time as such devices are banned at solid waste disposal facilities in
accordance with the Electronics Waste Recycling Act, P.L 2008, c.130 et
seq. and any amendments thereto.
CONTAMINANT — Solid waste, food waste, or other material which
adheres to, or which is otherwise contained on or in, source-separated
recyclable materials.
CORRUGATED AND OTHER CARDBOARD — All corrugated cardboard
normally used for packing, mailing, shipping or containerizing goods or
§ 122-20 FLORENCE CODE § 122-20
120:702
other merchandise and other material, but excluding plastic, foam, foilcoated
or soiled corrugated cardboard.
COUNTY — The Burlington County Board of Chosen Freeholders, and its
successors and assigns, acting through the Burlington County Division of
Solid Waste Management.
CURBSIDE DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES — Those designated recyclables
that are placed for collection within the parameters of the curbside
collection program as outlined herein.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING CONTAINER — A container(s) provided by the
municipality or other persons or groups which are used for the temporary
storage of recyclable materials within the residential unit(s).
DE MINIMIS — Less than 1% by volume.
DEP or DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials to
be source separated in the Township of Florence, including but not limited
to aluminum cans, antifreeze, consumer electronics, corrugated cardboard,
fluorescent lights, glass containers, lead acid batteries, leaves, metal
appliances, paper, plastic bottles (coded No. 1 and No. 2), rechargeable
batteries, steel (tin) cans, textiles, tires and used motor oil, and wood waste.
DISPOSITION or DISPOSITION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS — The transportation, placement, reuse, sale, donation,
transfer or temporary storage for a period not exceeding six months, or for
a period of time as mandated by law, of designated recyclable materials for
all possible uses except for disposal as solid waste.
DSW — The Burlington County Department of Solid Waste, its successors
and assigns.
FIBER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books, chipboard, corrugated and other cardboard and similar
cellulosic material whether shredded or whole, but excluding wax paper,
plastic- or foil-coated paper, thermal fax paper, carbon paper, blueprint
paper, food-contaminated paper, soiled paper and soiled cardboard.
FLUORESCENT LIGHTS — A lighting system which works by creating
electric arcs inside a gas-rich tube to produce ultraviolet light, then
converting this to visible fluorescent light by its passage through a layer of
phosphor on the inside of the glass.
GENERATOR — Any person(s) who causes solid waste to be produced for
any purpose whatsoever.
GLASS — All clear (flint), green, and brown (amber) colored glass
containers. Glass shall not include crystal, ceramics, light bulbs, plate,
window, laminated, wired or mirrored glass.
§ 122-20 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-20
120:703
INK JET CARTRIDGE — A replaceable unit that holds ink and the print
nozzles for inkjet printers.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any entity, either public or private,
either for profit or nonprofit, who operates for educational, charitable,
religious, fraternal or other public purpose.
LEAD ACID BATTERY — Storage batteries with lead electrodes and that
contain dilute sulfuric acid as the electrolyte. These include starting
batteries, such as vehicle batteries, marine batteries, small sealed lead
acids and deep cell batteries used to power vehicles or marine accessories,
such as trolling motors, winches or lights.
LEAVES — Vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn, which
fall from trees and are collected for removal from a property.
METAL APPLIANCES — Appliances composed predominantly of metal,
including stoves, washing machines, dryers and water heaters. Also
included are all Freon-containing appliances including air conditioners,
freezers, refrigerators and dehumidifiers.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any park, including a trailer park or camp,
equipped to handle mobile homes sited on a year-round basis as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.7 et seq.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which three or more dwelling units are rented
or leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes; whether
privately or publicly financed, except hotels, motels or other guesthouses
serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under
subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L.
1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq) and N.J.S.A. 40:66-1.2 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Florence located within the County of
Burlington, State of New Jersey.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING DEPOT — A site owned and operated by a
municipality for the receipt and temporary storage of certain designated
Class A Recyclable materials delivered by residents, small commercial and
nonprofit establishments for a period not exceeding two months, prior to
their transport to a recycling center or end-market.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Residential, commercial and institutional
solid waste generated within a community.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE STREAM — Residential, commercial and
institutional waste in the context of the Statewide Solid Waste Management
Plan Update, which constitutes the waste stream, used to calculate the
state-mandated recycling rate of 50%. This waste stream includes waste
types 10 and 23.
PAPER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books and similar cellulosic material whether shredded or whole,
but excluding tissue and towel paper, wax paper, plastic- or foil-coated
§ 122-20 FLORENCE CODE § 122-20
120:704
paper, thermal fax paper, carbon paper, NCR paper, blueprint paper, foodcontaminated
or soiled paper.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental agency
of any other entity or any group of such persons, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — All bottles that are labeled as made from
polyethylene terapthalate (PET) and coded as No. 1 and high-density
polyethylene terapthalate (HDPE) and coded as No. 2. Specifically excluded
are bottles that formerly contained hazardous materials, including, but not
limited to, paint, solvents, motor oil and pesticides and herbicides.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE — Organic material which is capable of, and prone
to, a rapid process of biological and biochemical decomposition, under
anaerobic or aerobic conditions, resulting in the formation of malodorous
byproducts.
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative or fee simple community or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association or council of coowners,
wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively
of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or garden
apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly
rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered
a qualified private community. No "proprietary campground facility," as
defined in section 1 of P.L. 1993, c.258 (N.J.S.A. 45:22A-49), shall be
considered to be a qualified private community.
RECHARGEABLE BATTERIES — Batteries used in portable electronic
devices composed of nickel cadmium (Ni-Cd), nickel metal hydride (Ni-MH),
lithium ion (Li-ion) and small sealed lead (Pb).
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that would otherwise become solid
waste that can be separated, collected and/or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials, which would otherwise
become solid waste, are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing or transferring source-separated recyclable
material (Class A, Class B, Class C and/or Class D recyclable materials).
RESIDENT — Any person residing within the Township of Florence on a
temporary or permanent basis, but excluding persons residing in hotels or
motels.
§ 122-20 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-20
120:705
SCRAP METAL — Bits and pieces of metal parts (for example, bars,
turnings, rods, sheets, wire) or metal pieces that may be combined together
with bolts or soldering (for example, radiators, scrap automobiles, railroad
boxcars) which, when worn or superfluous, can be recycled. Included are
all ferrous and nonferrous metals, including appliances and appliances
containing refrigerants.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 48:13A-1 et seq.
SOURCE SEPARATED — Recyclable materials separated from the solid
waste stream at the point of generation.
STEEL CAN — Empty food, beverage and aerosol containers comprised
of tin, steel or a combination thereof, which formerly contained only
nonhazardous substances or such other substances as have been approved
for recycling by the Department of Solid Waste.
SWMA or ACT — The New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act, as
amended.
TELEVISION — A stand-alone display system containing a cathode ray
tube or any other type of display primarily intended to receive video
programming via broadcast, having a viewable area greater than four
inches measured diagonally, able to adhere to standard consumer video
formats and having the capability of selecting different broadcast channels
and support sound capability.
TEXTILES — Clean dry clothing or other fabric measuring at least one foot
by one foot in size. It shall not include material that is wet or mildewed.
TIRES — Rubber wheels used on motorized transport or equipment whether
bias-ply, cross-ply or radial.
TONER CARTRIDGE — An exhausted replaceable cartridge containing
toner powder and sometimes the photosensitive drum on which a laser
printer generates the image to be printed.
TYPE 10 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Waste originating in the community
consisting of household waste from private residences, commercial waste
which originates in wholesale, retail or service establishments, such as,
restaurants, stores, markets, theatres, hotels and warehouses, and
institutional waste material originated in schools, hospitals, research
institutions and public buildings.
TYPE 13 BULKY WASTE — Large items of waste material, such as
appliances and furniture. Discarded automobiles, boats, trucks and trailers
and large vehicle parts, and tires are included under this category.
USED OIL — Any oil that has been refined from crude oil, or any synthetic
oil, that has been used and, as a result of such use, is contaminated
by physical or chemical impurities, or unused oil that is contaminated
by physical or chemical impurities through storage or handling and is
determined to be a solid waste by the generator.
§ 122-20 FLORENCE CODE § 122-20
120:706
USED OIL COLLECTION CENTER — The municipal recycling center that
manages used oil and accepts and/or aggregates and stores used oil
collected from used oil generators regulated under N.J.A.C. 7:26A-6.4 that
bring used oil to the collection center in shipments of no more than 55
gallons pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26A-6.4(f). Used oil accumulation centers may
also accept used oil from household "do-it-yourselfer" used oil generators.
§ 122-21. Requirements applicable to source separation of
designated recyclables.
Notwithstanding the limitations to the Burlington County Regional Program
(BCRP) or the Municipal Recycling Depot as outlined within this article,
every person is required to source separate and recycle each of the
designated recyclable materials outlined within this article.
§ 122-22. Establishment of curbside program.
A. In order to facilitate the collection of certain designated recyclable
materials, there is hereby established a curbside program for the
collection of source-separated recyclable material from residents of the
municipality.
B. Designated recyclable materials for the curbside program are those
materials designated by the DSW for collection within the BCRP. These
materials are aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard, glass containers,
paper, plastic bottles (coded 1 and 2), steel (tin) cans and other
recyclable materials as may be designated from time to time by the
DSW.
C. Multifamily complexes of 20 or more units, condominium complexes of
20 or more units or mobile home parks of 20 or more units, or any
commercial or institutional establishment shall not receive collection
under this program unless the collection location and type of containers
are approved by the DSW.
D. Collections of recyclable materials pursuant to this section shall be in
accordance with a schedule of recycling collection areas and dates
promulgated by DSW and publicly advertised by the municipality or
county.
E. All residents served by the curbside program shall source separate all
designated recyclables for curbside collection and shall place them at
the side of the road fronting their residence in the manner designated
by § 122-23 of this article and on the date specified for collection.
F. Residents who are physically unable to place recyclable materials out
for collection within the Burlington County Regional Program shall be
exempt from requirements for participation within the program.
Determinations for this exemption shall be at the discretion of the
municipality.
§ 122-20 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-23
120:707
§ 122-23. Requirements applicable to source separation and
collection of designated recyclables for curbside program.
All recyclables placed for collection pursuant to the curbside program
established within § 122-22 of this article shall be source separated and
prepared for collection in accordance with the following conditions:
A. Except where automated carts are utilized for collection, cardboard and
paper shall be placed in paper bags or tied in bundles not exceeding 35
pounds in weight nor exceeding one foot in thickness.
(1) Cardboard and paper shall not be set out for recycling collection in
plastic bags, recycling buckets, or in boxlike containers unless
specifically approved by the municipality.
(2) In those locations where carts are provided for the collection of
corrugated cardboard and paper, those materials shall be placed in
the carts that are provided by the municipality.
(a) Boxes shall be flattened as to fit into the cart.
(b) Where cardboard boxes are too large to be placed in the cart
and where there are too many boxes to fit within the cart,
cardboard boxes must be flattened and placed alongside the
cart for collection.
(3) Carts shall be placed at the curb with the lid opening facing the
street.
(4) Carts shall be placed in such a manner so as to leave at least two
feet of clear space around each side of the cart.
(a) Carts shall be placed in such a manner so as to avoid
interference from overhead obstructions.
(5) Carts shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition so as to
deter vermin and odors.
(6) Carts are the property of the municipality and may not be used for
any other purpose or to contain any other material.
B. Glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and plastic bottles.
(1) Remove all caps and lids and dispose of as solid waste.
(2) Glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and plastic bottles
shall be rinsed free of contaminants.
(3) Glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and plastic bottles
shall be placed in a recycling container provided by the
municipality.
§ 122-23 FLORENCE CODE § 122-23
120:708
§ 122-24. Establishment of municipal recycling depot program.
(4) Plastic and/or paper garbage bags shall not be utilized as
containers for glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and
plastic bottles.
C. Municipally provided recycling carts/containers may not be used for
any other purpose whatsoever.
D. Removal or exchange of recycling carts or containers provided by the
municipality by any person is prohibited.
E. Recyclables shall not be placed for collection earlier than the evening of
the day preceding a scheduled collection day. Recyclables must be
placed at the roadside by 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day.
F. All other terms and phrases shall be as defined in the SWMA and
regulations promulgated thereunder and the County Plan, unless
content clearly requires a different meaning.
A. There is hereby established a municipal depot program for the
convenience of the residents. Source-separated recyclables listed below
may be brought to 875 Summer Street during the times and days
advertised.
B. The following source-separated recyclables will be accepted at the
Municipal Recycling Depot:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Corrugated cardboard.
(3) Glass containers.
(4) Paper.
(5) Plastic bottles (coded 1 and 2).
(6) Steel (tin) cans.
(7) Used motor oil.
(8) Consumer electronic devices.
(9) Textiles.
(10) Metal appliances.
(11) Leaves.
(12) Lead acid batteries.
(13) Paint.
(14) Brush, wood waste and tree parts.
§ 122-23 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-24
120:709
§ 122-25. Requirement to provide common area recycling storage
locations.
(15) Other recyclable materials as may be designated by the
municipality.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of every
multifamily, qualified private community and mobile home park to
construct and maintain, in a neat and sanitary condition, recycling
storage location(s) and recycling containers on their property in
accordance with Chapter 91, Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Florence within § 91-124 (design of containment areas for
designated recyclable materials on residential sites) and in accordance
with the requirements of the Burlington County Department of Solid
Waste Management.
B. Designated source-separated recyclables:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Corrugated cardboard.
(3) Glass containers.
(4) Paper.
(5) Plastic bottles (coded 1 and 2).
(6) Steel (tin) cans.
(7) And other recyclable materials as designated by the municipality.
C. The owner or manager of each and every one of the above-referenced
locations shall notify all new residents within 30 days of occupancy and
all other residents no less than two times each calendar year of the
recycling location(s), the list of materials that are required to be
recycled, the location of all recycling containers and the requirements
of recyclable material preparation.
D. The owner or manager of each and every one of the above-referenced
locations who elects not to participate in the Burlington County
Regional Program shall arrange for the collection and recycling of the
designated recyclable materials outlined within this section at their
own expense as allowed by law.
E. The owner or manager of each and every one of the above-referenced
locations shall be required to report recycling tonnages as described in
§ 122-27, Recycling reporting requirements, except where collection
services are provided by the Burlington County Regional Program.
§ 122-24 FLORENCE CODE § 122-26
120:710
§ 122-26. Mandatory commercial and institutional source
separation program.
All persons generating municipal solid waste within this Township of
Florence through the operation of a commercial or institutional
establishment shall source separate and arrange for collection of all
designated recyclables within 30 days of the effective date of this article.
A. Designated recyclable materials for the mandatory commercial and
institutional source separation program shall consist of the following
materials:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Antifreeze.
(3) Consumer electronics.
(4) Corrugated cardboard.
(5) Fluorescent lights.
(6) Glass containers.
(7) Lead acid batteries.
(8) Leaves.
(9) Metal appliances.
(10) Paper.
(11) Plastic bottles (coded 1 and 2).
(12) Rechargeable batteries.
(13) Steel (tin) cans.
(14) Textiles.
(15) Tires.
(16) Used motor oil.
(17) Ink jet cartridge.
(18) Toner cartridge.
(19) And other recyclable materials as designated by the municipality.
B. The owner or manager of each and every commercial and institutional
source shall be required to report recycling tonnages as described in
§ 122-27.
C. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables for disposition
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the individual(s) responsible for
§ 122-26 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-26
120:711
§ 122-27. Recycling reporting requirements.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26A-10.3, all multifamily housing owners, mobile
home parks, commercial and institutional housing owners or their agents
shall report the tonnage of designated recyclable materials collected for
recycling from their business or premises, as follows:
§ 122-28. Unlawful activities; nuisance.
the provision of solid waste or recycling services, including the
provision or maintenance of litter receptacles located on the property
of any commercial or institutional establishment generating designated
recyclables.
A. The management individual(s) responsible for the provision of recycling
services as herein defined at all residential, commercial, institutional
and industrial properties that contract for recycling services with a
private company shall submit to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator,
by the first day of February of each year, documentation verifying the
previous year's total recycling (expressed by weight) for each material
recycled.
B. Documentation shall take the form of a letter or report issued by the
recycling service provider or end market to the generator of the
recycled material. The generator must maintain weight slips or paid
invoices and make such records available for inspection by this
municipality, county or state for a period not to exceed five years.
C. Any solid waste or recycling service provider shall submit to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator, by the first day of February of each
year, documentation verifying the previous year's total recycling
(expressed by weight) for each material recycled as prescribed by the
DSW.
D. At a minimum, all reporting shall detail the municipality of origin, the
name and location of the market or recycling center and the amount of
each source-separated recyclable material, expressed in gallons, tons
or cubic yards, brought to each manufacturer or recycling center from
the municipality of origin. Those persons specifying this information in
cubic yards shall also indicate the conversion ratio utilized for
calculating the materials from cubic yards to tons.
A. It shall be unlawful for:
(1) Any person, other than those persons authorized, to collect any
designated recyclable which has been placed at the roadside for
collection or within a recycling depot pursuant to this article;
(2) Any person to violate, cause, or assist in the violation of any
provision of this article or any provision of the County Plan
concerning recycling;
§ 122-26 FLORENCE CODE § 122-28
120:712
§ 122-29. Noncollection of solid waste.
§ 122-30. Other means of disposal.
§ 122-31. Noninterference with existing contracts.
(3) Any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other
than a designated recyclable in or near a recycling depot.
(4) Any person to hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with this
municipality, the county or any other authorized persons in the
performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of
this article.
(5) Any person to offer to collect or knowingly collect designated
recyclable materials in any manner except as source-separated
recyclable materials as defined herein.
(6) Any person required to provide a report as required under this
article to fail to do so.
B. All unlawful conduct set forth in this section shall constitute a public
nuisance.
A. Any person collecting solid waste generated within this municipality
shall refuse to collect solid waste from any person who has failed to
source separate recyclables designated under any applicable section of
this article.
B. Any person collecting solid waste generated within this municipality
shall refuse to collect solid waste from any person who has placed solid
waste into a municipally issued recycling container.
A. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any resident of the
Township of Florence may donate or sell any recyclable to any other
person, whether operating for a profit or not for profit; provided,
however, that the person receiving the recyclables shall not, under any
circumstances, collect the donated or sold material from an established
curbside recycling collection route or from a recycling depot without
prior written permission from the Township of Florence for such
collection.
B. Permission for such collection shall not be given for any day other than
a Saturday or Sunday and, in no case, shall such permission be given to
collect recyclables from a recycling depot.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with or
in any way modify the provisions of any existing contract which is
consistent with N.J.S.A. 13:1E-29 and in force in the municipality on the
effective date of this article.
§ 122-28 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-31
120:713
§ 122-32. Enforcement.
§ 122-33. Violations and penalties.
B. No renewal of any existing contract upon the expiration of the original
term thereof and no new contract for the collection, transportation,
processing or purchase of solid waste or recyclables shall be entered
into after the effective date of this article, unless such renewal or such
contract shall conform to the requirements of this article.
A. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator.
B. In addition to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the Burlington
County Health Department and the DSW are hereby appointed as
Enforcement Officer(s) for enforcement of all recycling requirements of
this article.
C. Enforcement of this article shall be commenced in the Superior Court
or in the Municipal Court of the municipality, and penalty or fine shall
be collected with costs in a summary civil proceeding.
D. Any penalties or fines collected in an enforcement action shall be paid
to the municipality when the municipality brings such action.
E. Any penalties or fines collected in an enforcement action shall be paid
to the Treasurer of Burlington County when such action is brought by
the Burlington County Health Department or the DSW.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall upon
conviction thereof in a proceeding before a court of competent
jurisdiction be subject to the following fines:
(1) Misuse of recycling containers/carts for trash: a fine of not less
than $25 and not more than $1,000.
(2) Theft of recycling containers or carts: a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000.
(3) Residential recycling violation: a fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $1,000.
(4) Scavenging: a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $1,000.
(5) Commercial or institutional violation: a fine of not less than $500
and not more than $1,000.
(6) For any person who offers to collect or collects recyclable materials
in any manner except as prescribed within this article: a fine of not
less than $1,000 and not more than $4,500.
§ 122-31 FLORENCE CODE § 122-33
120:714
§ 122-34. Injunctions; concurrent remedies.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the Township of
Florence may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or public
nuisance exists as defined in this article for an injunction to restrain a
violation of this article or the County Plan. In addition to an injunction, the
court may impose penalties as authorized by § 122-33 hereof. The penalties
and remedies prescribed by this article shall be deemed concurrent. The
existence, exercise or any remedy shall not prevent the Township of
Florence or the county from exercising any other remedy provided by this
article or otherwise provided by law or equity.
§ 122-35. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with the SWMA and the County Plan.
(7) For any solid waste or recycling service provider who fails to report
as required within this article: a fine of not less than $500 and not
more than $1,000.
(8) For any management individual(s) responsible for the provision of
recycling services as herein defined at all residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial properties that contract for recycling
services with a private company who fails to report as required
within this article: a fine of not less than $500 and not more than
$1,000.
B. Each continuing day of violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 122-33 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 122-35
120:715
Chapter 123
STORMWATER QUALITY PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 41.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 56.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Solid waste — See Ch. 122.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 140.
§ 123-1. Findings.
The Township Council finds that the effective management of stormwater
and the improvement of the quality of stormwater has been declared to be
the public policy of the State of New Jersey and that it is both appropriate
and necessary for the Township of Florence to establish, consistent with
the recommendations of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, regulations that will improve the quality of stormwater runoff
and protect the environment, including regulations on litter, pet waste,
wildlife feeding, yard waste collection, containerized waste, improper
disposal and illicit connections to the stormwater system.
§ 123-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations for the protection
of the environment and to establish requirements to control littering, pet
waste, yard waste and for the protection of the stormwater system in the
Township of Florence so as to protect public health, safety and welfare.
§ 123-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
§ 122-35 FLORENCE CODE § 123-3
120:716
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Florence, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean at once, without delay.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Florence or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
§ 123-3 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 123-3
120:717
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PET SOLID WASTE PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.[Added 2-17-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-01]
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.[Added 2-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-01]
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.[Added 2-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 123-4. Littering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place
any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than in a litter
§ 123-3 FLORENCE CODE § 123-4
120:718
receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain. Whenever any
litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle or boat in
violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or both, of the motor vehicle
or boat shall also be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 123-5. Circulars, handbills, advertisements.
It shall be unlawful to scatter or throw upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys
or public places or to tack or nail upon any telegraph, telephone or trolley
poles or trees in the Township of Florence any posters, pamphlets, circulars,
handbills, advertisements or paper or to scatter or throw the same in or
upon any porch, step, stoop or vestibule of any building or upon the yard
or lot fronting or bordering on the streets, alleys or public places aforesaid,
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the delivery or
distribution of posters, pamphlets, circulars, handbills or advertisements
enclosed in envelopes or appropriately secured at the property entrance or
to apply to the delivery of the same to individuals personally or to the issue,
circulation and sale of newspapers.
§ 123-6. Use of litter receptacles.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas such that, at a
minimum, there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without receptacle:
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all
street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service station islands; shopping centers; parking lots;
campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations;
boat-launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 123-7. Illegal dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances or
furniture, or on private property, except by written consent of the owner
of said property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of
solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 123-8. Storage of household solid waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
§ 123-4 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 123-8
120:719
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential or on properties in
residential use, except in a fully enclosed structure or during days
designated for the collection of bulky items.
§ 123-9. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner or owner of
properties in residential use to store or permit the storage of tires in areas
zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed structure or on days designated
for the collection of tires.
§ 123-10. Storage of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to park or permit the
parking of any vehicle on his or her residential front lawn for more than two
consecutive hours in any one-week period.
§ 123-11. Requirements for transporting loads.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects
have fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs therefor.
§ 123-12. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 123-13. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 123-14. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter and other offensive materials. No person shall sweep into
§ 123-8 FLORENCE CODE § 123-14
120:720
or deposit into any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be collected
and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 123-15. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of yard
waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this chapter. If the prohibited placement of yard
waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must
remove the yard waste from the street or the party shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter.
§ 123-16. Yard waste control required.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of
yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall
be deemed in violation of this chapter.
§ 123-17. Pet waste.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person, except that any owner
or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section while the animal is being used for
that purpose.107
§ 123-18. Wildlife feeding prohibited.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township of Florence, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife.
§ 123-19. Illicit connection to stormwater system.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Florence any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
107. Editor's Note: See also § 41-12 which requires the proper disposal of pet waste.
§ 123-14 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 123-20
120:721
§ 123-20. Improper disposal through the stormwater system.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Florence is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited. The following
are exceptions to the prohibition:
§ 123-21. Refuse containers and dumpsters. [Added 2-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-01108]
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the equipment used in the application of salt and
de-icing materials immediately following salt and deicing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and
deicing materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the
maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g.,
shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to
storage for reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted
in the above situation is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
A. Prohibited conduct.
(1) Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a
refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such container or
dumpster is covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from
spilling out or overflowing.
108. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 123-21 as § 123-23.
§ 123-20 FLORENCE CODE § 123-21
120:722
§ 123-22. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting. [Added 2-17-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-01]
(2) Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container
or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not
leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Florence.
B. Exceptions to prohibition.
(1) Permitted temporary demolition containers.
(2) Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
(3) Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
(4) Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
(5) Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
A. Prohibited conduct. No person in control of private property (except a
residential lot with one single-family house) shall authorize the
repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes),
resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion
or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering of any surface
that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that
property unless the storm drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 123-22B prior to
the completion of the project.
B. Design standard. Storm drain inlets identified in § 123-22A shall comply
with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection,
"solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard, see § 123-22B(3).
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
§ 123-21 SOIL, REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT OF § 123-22
120:723
§ 123-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in § 1-10 of the Florence Code.
Chapter 124
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension. Examples of
grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets,
the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench
grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of
ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns,
fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches
across the smallest dimension.
(3) This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[1] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (This option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities.); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register-listed historic property.
§ 123-22 FLORENCE CODE § 123-23
124:724
(RESERVED)
Chapter 126
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 36.
Animals at large — See Ch. 41.
Blasting — See Ch. 47.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Littering — See Ch. 95.
Newspaper vending boxes — See Ch. 100.
Street closings — See Ch. 124.
Street trees — See Ch. 132.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 134.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 140.
§ 123-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 123-23
126:725

ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-12 as Ch. 123, Art. II, of the
1983 Code]
§ 126-1. Permit required; fee. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
It shall be unlawful for any person, company, firm or corporation to tear
up, dig into, break up, displace or excavate any of the streets, sidewalks,
curbs or gutters of the Township of Florence without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Township Clerk or her designee, who shall charge a fee
of $25 for each permit issued. A separate permit will be required for each
opening made. Any such permit shall state the location and approximate
size of the opening to be made. No permit shall be deemed to authorize
anything not stated in the permit, and the person to whom it is issued shall
confine his work within such limits so that the work of repaving shall be as
small as possible.
§ 126-2. Commencement of work; extensions.
The work on any opening to be made under any such permit shall be
commenced within 10 days from the date of such permit and the work
prosecuted with due diligence to its completion. If, for any reason, work
is not commenced within said period of 10 days, the permit shall be void,
unless, within such period of 10 days, the applicant shall present the permit
to the Township Clerk, who shall thereupon either return the deposit or
extend the time for the beginning of said work for another period of 10 days
by endorsement on the permit, and no permit so extended shall be valid
unless the work thereunder is commenced within 10 days from the date of
such endorsement.
§ 126-3. Surface restoration; backfilling.
Whenever any street, sidewalk, curb or gutter is broken up or excavated,
it shall be restored at the expense of the person or persons making the
opening, to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer or other duly
authorized designee, in compliance with the following requirements:
A. The excavation shall interfere as little as possible with travel along said
street or road, and no greater part of any street or road shall be opened
at any one time than the Township Engineer or other duly authored
designee shall allow in order to prevent such interference with travel.
B. The backfilling of trenches shall be performed by the applicant under
the supervision and direction of the Township Engineer or other duly
authorized designee. Inspection for each street opening application
shall be done in accordance with the directions of the Division of
Engineering. The applicant shall notify the officer instructed to perform
the inspection 24 hours before a street opening is ready for backfill, and
§ 126-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 126-3
126:727
the inspector shall have the right to, and it shall be his duty to, inspect
said street opening and be present to continuously inspect the backfill
and street surface restoration procedure. No backfill material, base
material or surface material shall be placed in the opening until 24
hours after the aforesaid notice has been given. Less than 24 hours may
be given in case of emergency openings.
C. When the Township Engineer or other duly authorized designee is
instructed to perform the inspection, the applicant shall pay to the
township such reasonable fee as may be charged by the Engineer or
other duly authorized designee for time actually spent in making such
inspection.
D. Neither such inspection nor anything else contained in this Article shall
relieve the applicant from the duty to remedy any defect in such
restoration of the opening as may then or thereafter appear or from any
other liability for such defects.
E. All fill material shall be deposited in layers not exceeding six inches,
and each layer shall be rammed with approved pneumatic or powerdriven
mechanical tampers. Flat-faced mechanical tampers may be
substituted for vibratory soil compactors where the shoring and bracing
of trenches make the use of vibratory compactors impracticable.
Shoring, bracing and sheathing shall be withdrawn as the filling
proceeds. Fill material used in the first two feet of cover shall be made
with earth, which shall be free from stones or rock fragments of a size
larger than two inches. Broken stone to be used in replacing the stone
base shall be cast in separate piles and kept clean and separated from
other excavation material. The broken stone shall be carefully replaced
to a minimum thickness of eight inches. If there is a deficiency in such
thickness, it shall be made up by adding clean stone not less than two
inches in diameter. The stone base shall be tamped and keyed with
mineral filler. In openings where the existing base consists of gravel or
native soil, a minimum of eight inches of pneumatically compacted Type
5 Grade A soil aggregate, as specified in the 1961 New Jersey State
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, shall be placed on top of the backfill. In openings where
the existing base consists of Belgian block, paving brick or concrete,
the soil aggregate method for restoring the base shall be used.
F. A temporary patch shall be constructed by the applicant consisting of a
sand and asphalt patch mixture two inches thick and thoroughly
tamped and rolled. The temporary patch shall be constructed within 24
hours after tamping of the backfill. When filled, the opening shall be
flush with the existing contour of the road. Within a period of not less
than four months nor more than six months, the applicant shall replace
the temporary patch with permanent pavement.
G. The temporary pavement shall be removed and additional soil
aggregate placed to bring the excavation to grade where settlement has
taken place. The openings shall be properly cleaned out and painted
§ 126-3 FLORENCE CODE § 126-3
126:728
§ 126-4. Fees.
with asphaltic oil or tar, then filled with a hot-mixed, hot-laid
bituminous concrete pavement, conforming to the FABC pavement
specifications of the State Highway Department Specifications
referenced in Subsection E hereof, thoroughly tamping and rolling the
material to obtain a dense, smooth surface, flush with the existing
road surface. The bituminous concrete surface, when compacted, shall
have a minimum thickness of two inches. The surface of the permanent
patch shall receive a wearing surface conforming to the existing road
surface, unless directed otherwise by the Township Engineer or other
duly authorized designee.
A. No permit shall be granted by the Township Clerk until the applicant
has paid to him the sum of $50 in cash or certified check, drawn to the
order of the Treasurer of the Township of Florence, if the opening is to
be made in the bituminous concrete, bituminous macadam, sheet
asphalt, brick or concrete surfaces and not wider than three feet in
width, or $25 if the opening is to be made in a macadam or gravel road
or street treated with bituminous dressing and for opening an earth
shoulder of road not wider than three feet in width. For excavation and
street openings in excess of 20 square yards, the applicant shall pay to
the Township Clerk the sum of $2 per square yard for each additional
square yard of excavation in excess of 20 square yards for improved
streets and $1.25 per square yard for each additional square yard of
excavation in excess of 20 square yards. These sums shall be in addition
to the above-mentioned amounts. This amount deposited shall be
retained by the township for a period of six months from the date of the
permit or from the date on which it is extended to guarantee the proper
performance of the work done by the applicant and the maintenance
thereof in good condition by the applicant. If the applicant shall fail to
restore the street, sidewalk, curb or gutter involved to its proper
condition as soon as practicable and within three days after the service
or mailing of a notice from the Township Clerk so to do, then the
Township Engineer or other duly authorized designee may cause such
restoration to be made and pay the cost thereof from said deposit, or in
case a bond has been filed in lieu of a cash deposit, the township shall
collect the cost of such restoration from the applicant or bonding
company. If, during such period of six months, the filling of the opening
shall settle or any street surface over such opening shall require
repairing and the applicant shall fail to make such repairs as are
required within three days after the service or mailing of a notice from
the Township Clerk so to do, then the Township Engineer or other duly
authorized designee may cause such repairs to be made and pay the
cost thereof from said deposit, or in case a bond has been deposited in
lieu of a cash deposit, the township shall collect the cost of such repairs
from the applicant or bonding company.
B. The security required shall not be less than $50 for each opening.
Deposits shall be retained for six months, except for curb and driveway
§ 126-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 126-4
126:729
§ 126-5. Permit requirements for plumbers and public utility
companies.
Whenever application for any such permit is made by a plumber or any
similar applicant or any gas, electric, telephone, water company or other
public utility, the Township Clerk may issue such permit without requiring
the cash deposit hereinbefore mentioned, provided that such plumber or
similar applicant or gas, electric, telephone or water company or other
public utility shall theretofore have filed a bond in the sum of $500 to
guarantee the proper restoration of any street, sidewalk, curb or gutter
broken up or excavated by the applicant at any time and the maintenance
thereof in good condition by the applicant for a period of six months after
such restoration.
§ 126-6. Excavations prohibited in new street improvements.
[Added 4-1-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-09]
openings, which may be released after 30 days following satisfactory
inspection.
(1) Bond/deposit for a permit to break the curb shall be $50.
(2) Bond/deposit for street opening. Bond will be required in a
minimum amount of $200, with a maximum amount of $1,500,
depending on the scope of the project and as recommended by the
Township Engineer or his designee.
A. Whenever the Township Council enacts any ordinance or resolution
providing for the paving or repaving of any street, the Township Clerk
shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to each person owning
sewers, mains, conduits or other utilities in or under said street or any
real property, whether improved or unimproved, abutting said street.
Such notice shall notify such persons that excavation permits for
openings, cuts or excavations and permits for work to be done prior to
such paving or repaving shall be submitted promptly in order that the
work covered by the excavation permit may be completed not later than
45 days from the date of enactment of such ordinance or resolution. The
Township Clerk shall also promptly mail copies of such notice to the
occupants of all houses, buildings and other structures abutting said
street for their information and to state agencies and departments or
other persons who may desire to perform excavation work in said
street.
B. Within said 45 days every public utility company receiving notice as
prescribed herein shall perform such excavation work, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, as may be necessary to install or repair
sewers, mains, conduits or other utility installations. In the event that
any owner of real property abutting said street shall fail within 45 days
to perform such excavation work as may be required to install or repair
utility service lines or service connections to the property lines, any and
all rights of such owner or his successors in interest to make openings,
§ 126-4 FLORENCE CODE § 126-6
126:730
§ 126-7. Emergency excavations. [Added 4-1-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-09]
§ 126-8. Safety precautions.
The excavation and all piles of excavated materials or any materials used in
the work to be performed in the opening for which a permit is issued shall
be carefully guarded and lighted by the applicant, who shall be liable for all
damages caused by the prosecution of the work or failure to properly guard
or maintain the same.
§ 126-9. Applicability of provisions.
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work done by the township
or under a contract with the township for the construction of water lines,
sewer lines or street improvements.
cuts or excavations in said street shall be forfeited for a period of
five years from the date of enactment of said ordinance or resolution.
During said five-year period, no excavation permit shall be issued to
open, cut or excavate in said street unless, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, an emergency, as described in this chapter, exists
which makes it absolutely essential that the excavation permit be
issued.
C. Every township department or official charged with responsibility for
any work that may necessitate any opening, cut or excavation in said
street is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such
excavation work within said forty-five-day period so as to avoid the
necessity for making any openings, cuts or excavations in the new
pavement in said township street during said five-year period.
A. In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility
in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such conditions
as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any
individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit
or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit
hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure
or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life,
health and safety of individuals.
B. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for
an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day
during which the Township Engineer's office is open for business and
shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder.
§ 126-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 126-10
126:731
§ 126-10. Violations and penalties.109
Any person, company, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof, for each offense.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 126-10 FLORENCE CODE § 126-10
126:732
ARTICLE II
Vacation of Public Right-of-Way
[Adopted 2-5-1992 as Ord. No. 1992-02]
§ 126-11. Procedure and regulations.
Any person desiring to have the Township Council vacate a public right-ofway
shall file an application with the Township Clerk and comply with the
following regulations:
§ 126-12. Fees.
The applicant will be required to reimburse the township for the cost of the
preparation by the Township Attorney of the ordinance vacating the public
right-of-way, the cost of filing and publishing the ordinance and the cost of
the township's professional staff in reviewing the application.
A. The applicant shall notify all adjacent property owners of the proposal
to vacate the right-of-way and advise them that they will be assessed
taxes on their prorated share of the vacated right-of-way.
B. The applicant must obtain a written statement from all adjacent
property owners as to whether they consent to the proposed vacation of
the right-of-way.
C. The applicant shall notify the Planning Board of the proposed vacation
of the right-of-way. Thereafter, the Planning Board shall have 60 days in
which to advise the Township Council of any objections it has to the
proposal. Failure of the Planning Board to transmit a report to the
Township Council within the aforesaid period of time shall be deemed
as a consent to the proposal.
D. The applicant must notify the Township Water and Sewer Engineer and
the Township Engineer who shall report to the governing body as to the
existence of any utilities within the public right-of-way as well as any
other pertinent information.
E. The applicant shall contact all utility companies operating within the
township of the proposal to vacate and obtain a written statement from
the utility company regarding their opinion on the proposal. The utility
companies shall include P.S.E.& G., New Jersey Bell and Garden State
Cable, their successors or assigns.
F. The applicant shall notify the Chief of Police and local Fire and
Emergency Squads who shall, within (60) days, advise the Township
Council of any objections they have to the proposal. Failure of the Chief
of Police or the local Fire and Emergency Squads to transmit a report to
the Township Council within the aforesaid time shall be deemed as a
consent to the proposal.
G. The applicant shall provide the Township Council a copy of the Tax Map
delineating the public right-of-way proposed to be vacated.
§ 126-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 126-12
126:733

ARTICLE III
Sidewalks, Graded Areas, Gutters and Curbs in Connection With
Residential Construction
[Adopted 2-18-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-3]
§ 126-13. Requirements for issuance of certain residential building
permits and certificates of occupancy.
A. Gutters and curbs, where required. The Township Construction Official
shall require that those who apply for and receive a building permit for
a single- or two-family dwelling located on an existing public street
shall install gutters and curbs in accordance with the following:
(1) Gutters and curbs shall be required wherever they are required by
the locational standards contained in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.3 entitled
"Curbs or Curbs and Gutters" of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (Statewide Standards).
(2) Gutters and curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the
construction standards contained in the Statewide Standards along
the entire frontage of the subject lot.
B. Sidewalks, where required. The Township Construction Official shall
require that those who apply for and receive a building permit for a
single- or two-family dwelling located on an existing public street shall
install sidewalks and graded areas in accordance with the following:
(1) Sidewalks and graded areas shall be required wherever they are
required by the locational standards contained in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.5
entitled "Sidewalks and Graded Areas" of the Statewide Standards.
(2) Whenever the Statewide Standards would require a sidewalk on
only one side of the street, the Construction Official shall determine
the side on which such sidewalk shall be installed based upon the
existing pattern of sidewalks in the area. Where no such pattern
requires, the Construction Official shall refer the question to the
Planning Board.
(3) Wherever required, sidewalks and graded areas shall be
constructed, in accordance with the construction standards
contained in the Statewide Standards, along the entire frontage of
the subject lot.
C. Enforcement. The Township Construction Official shall have the
following duties in connection with the issuance of building permits and
certificates of occupancy for single-family and two-family residential
dwellings:
(1) Whenever the Construction Official receives an application for a
building permit for any single-family or two-family dwelling that
has not been the subject of Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment approval, he/she shall consult the standards contained
§ 126-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 126-13
126:735
in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.3 and 5:21-4.5 to determine whether the subject
property is located in an area where a gutter, curb, sidewalk and/
or graded area would be required. Where a gutter, curb, sidewalk
and/or graded area is required, the Construction Official shall not
issue a building permit unless the building plans indicate that such
improvement(s) shall be installed by the applicant.
(2) Whenever a gutter, curb, sidewalk and/or graded area is required
by Subsection C(1) above, the Construction Official shall provide
written notice that such improvement(s) shall be installed by the
applicant prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
permit shall not be issued until after the applicant has
acknowledged the receipt of this notice.
(3) Whenever a gutter, curb, sidewalk and/or graded area is required
by Subsection C(1) above, the Construction Official shall not issue
the certificate of occupancy until such improvement(s) is/are
installed by the applicant and inspected by the Construction
Official or a performance guaranty in an amount sufficient to cover
the cost of such improvements is posted guaranteeing the
construction of such improvement(s).
§ 126-13 FLORENCE CODE § 126-13
126:736
ARTICLE IV
Street Naming
[Adopted 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
§ 126-14. Naming of streets reserved for Township Council.
The right to name or rename streets within the Township is reserved to the
Township Council.
§ 126-15. Street naming applications.
Any developer or individual seeking approval to name a new street or
rename an existing street shall make application to the Township Clerk on
the forms prescribed by Florence Township.
§ 126-16. New street name approval.
The Township Council shall not act to approve a new street name until the
Township Clerk shall report that the proposed name has been submitted
to the Chief of Police, the Florence Township Fire Marshal, the Burlington
County 911 Coordinator, and the United States Postal Service Postmaster
for the zip code in which the proposed street is located and that each has
confirmed that the proposed street name does not duplicate or so nearly
duplicates in spelling or phonetic sound as to be confused with the names
of existing streets served by all zip codes in Florence Township.
§ 126-17. Final approval required prior to preliminary subdivision
approval.
Applications seeking the designation of new street names shall be submitted
to and have final approval prior to the developer receiving preliminary
subdivision approval. Florence Township shall not be bound by any
proposed street names that are part of sales agreements between the
developer and the property owner(s). The approval shall be in the form of a
resolution adopted by the Township Council.
§ 126-18. Change of existing street names.
Applications seeking to change the name of an existing street shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk and shall be subject to the same
certification as required for new streets. The person requesting the change
in the name of an existing street shall be required to provide notice of the
application to all property owners on the existing street. Any change in the
name of an existing street shall be accomplished by ordinance.
§ 126-19. House numbers on new streets.
The Florence Township Engineer shall assign house numbers on any new
street and shall not sign any new subdivision plat until the Township Council
shall have properly approved the new street names, and those names shall
be shown on the subdivision plat.
§ 126-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 126-20
126:737
§ 126-20. Naming preferences.
A. The preference for the naming of streets by the Township Council shall
be from a list of individuals who have sacrificed their lives in service to
the United States in foreign wars. A separate list of names of those
eligible for the honor shall be maintained by the Township Clerk and
approved by resolution of the Council. The posthumous list of available
names shall be updated each time the Township names a new street or
renames an existing street.
B. Once the posthumous list is exhausted, the Township Council shall
retain the right to name all new streets and rename all existing streets.
The same approval process shall remain in place, but Council will
officially designate each new street or renamed street through a formal
resolution or ordinance.
§ 126-20 FLORENCE CODE § 126-20
126:738
ARTICLE V
Casting of Snow onto Public Streets
[Adopted 9-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
§ 126-21. Prohibition on casting of snow or ice into the public
streets.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street,
nor any person acting on behalf of such owner, tenant or occupant, shall
throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or on any street, it being the
intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing,
casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which accumulates within the
private property belonging to that person on the sidewalks or streets of the
Township.
§ 126-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 126-21
126:739
Chapter 129
TAXATION
§ 126-21 FLORENCE CODE § 126-21
126:740
ARTICLE I
Home Improvement Tax Abatement Program
[Adopted 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-12 as Ch. 127 of the 1983
Code]
§ 129-1. Program created.
There is hereby created in the Township of Florence a Home Improvement
Tax Abatement Program.
§ 129-2. Assessment of certain dwellings affected by home
improvements.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 et seq., as amended and
supplemented, in determining the value of real property for the purposes
of taxation throughout the Township of Florence, the first $10,000 in the
Tax Assessor's full and true value of home improvements for each dwelling
unit primarily and directly affected by a home improvement in a singledwelling
property more than 20 years old shall not increase the value of
such property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of
the dwelling to which such improvements are made is increased thereby;
provided, however, that during said period, the assessment on such dwelling
shall, in no case, except through damage by the elements sufficient to
warrant a reduction, be less than the assessment thereon existing
immediately prior to such home improvements.
§ 129-3. Application for exemption.
No exemption shall be granted or allowed except upon written application
therefor filed with the Tax Assessor of the Township of Florence. Action by
the Tax Assessor on such application shall be in compliance with N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.72 et seq.,110 together with the standards, guidelines, rules and
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs.
110. Editor's Note: Said law was repealed by L. 1991, c. 441, § 22, effective 1-18-1992. See now
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 129-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-3
126:741

ARTICLE II
Payment of Taxes Prior to Issuance of Permit
[Adopted 3-7-1990 as Ord. No. 1990-08]
§ 129-4. Payment required prior to issuance or renewal.
As a condition for the issuance or renewal of any license or permit issued
by or requiring the approval of the Township of Florence, the applicant, if
he is the owner of the license or permit, shall pay any delinquent property
taxes or assessment on the property wherein the business or activity for
which the license or permit is sought or wherein the business or activity is
to be conducted, provided that he is the owner of the property or has an
ownership interest in property.
§ 129-5. Revocation.
When any licensee who is the owner of or maintains an ownership interest
in the property therein upon which the licensed or permitted business or
activity is conducted has failed to pay the taxes or assessments due on the
property for at least three consecutive quarters, the license or permit shall
be subject to revocation. Prior to the revocation of the license or permit for
failure to pay taxes, the Township Clerk shall provide notice of the proposed
revocation of the license or permit at least 10 days prior to the effective date
thereof. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessments prior to the
effective date, the notice to revoke the license or permit shall be dismissed.
Subsequent to revocation, the former licensee must reapply for renewal of
the license or permit.
§ 129-6. Appeals.
The licensee or holder of a permit in the Township, upon the receipt of
a notice of revocation of that license or permit, may appeal the proposed
revocation to the Business Administrator, who shall, within 30 days of
said notice, provide a hearing for said licensee or holder of a permit. No
revocation shall occur during the period prior to the hearing by the Business
Administrator. Subsequent to the hearing of the appeal, the Administrator
shall render a final decision in regard to revocation of the license or permit.
§ 129-7. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 129-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-7
126:743

ARTICLE III
Five-Year Tax Exemption and Abatement for Commercial or
Industrial Structures
[Adopted 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-25111]
§ 129-8. Supersession; authority.
§ 129-9. Grant of exemption; term.
This article authorizes the Township of Florence to grant exemptions up
to a five-year period to commence and take effect in the 2020 tax year
and thereafter. This article shall lapse, unless readopted, in the 2029 tax
year and no exemptions shall be granted after December 31, 2029, tax year
without such readoption.
§ 129-10. Definitions.
A. All previous ordinances adopted by the Township of Florence and
relating to the Act112 are superseded by the within article; and
B. The Township Council hereby determines to utilize the authority
granted under Article VIII, Section I, Paragraph 6, of the New Jersey
Constitution to establish the eligibility of dwellings, and commercial
and industrial structures for exemptions as provided in the within
article and as permitted by the Act throughout the entire municipality.
A. For purposes of this article, the following definitions are incorporated
herein:
EXEMPTION — That portion of the assessor's full and true value of any
improvement, conversion, alteration, or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to the Act.113
QUALIFYING COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES —
Refer to structures or parts thereof used for the manufacturing,
processing or assembling of material or manufactured products,
or for research, office, industrial, commercial, retail, recreational,
hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or for any
combination thereof, which will tend to maintain or provide gainful
employment within the Township, assist in the economic
development of the Township, maintain or increase the tax base
of the Township and maintain or diversify and expand commerce
within the Township.
(1)
111. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Five-Year Tax Exemption and
Abatement for Commercial or Industrial Structures, adopted 4-18-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-13.
112. Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the Five-Year Exemption and Tax Abatement Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq.
113. Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the Five-Year Exemption and Tax Abatement Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 129-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-10
126:745
§ 129-11. Exemption for improvements.
This article authorizes the exemption for up to the assessor's full and
true value of the "improvements" to existing commercial and industrial
structures as may be granted only by the governing body on an individual
basis after review, evaluation and approval of each application by
resolution. The application procedure for seeking such an exemption shall
be consistent with the procedures outlined in § 129-11.3 of this article.
However, the granting of an exemption under this section shall not require
the adoption of an ordinance nor a written tax agreement. An
"improvement" is defined under N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3n, which definition is fully
incorporated herein, and includes the renovation, rehabilitation, repair, and
alteration of an existing building that improves the safety and attractiveness
of the building, but does not include ordinary painting, repairs, and
replacement of maintenance items nor the enlargement of the volume of an
existing structure by more than 30%.
§ 129-11.1. Exemption for construction of structures.
The Township Council hereby further determines to grant exemptions from
taxation for the construction of commercial and industrial structures
pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Act115 and in this article. The
term "construction" is defined under N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3g, which definition
is fully incorporated herein, and includes the construction of a new
commercial or industrial building or the enlargement of an existing
Not included as qualifying commercial or industrial structures are
structures or parts thereof used or to be used by any business
relocated from another qualifying municipality unless: the total
square footage of the floor area of the structure or part thereof
used or to be used by the business at the new site together with
the total square footage of the land used or to be used by the
business at the new site exceeds the total square footage of that
utilized by the business at its current site of operations by at
least 10%; and the property that the business is relocating to has
been the subject of a remedial action plan costing in excess of
$250,000 performed pursuant to an administrative consent order
entered into pursuant to authority vested in the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection under P.L. 1970, c. 33 (N.J.S.A. 13:10-1
et seq.), the Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 1977, c. 74 (N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1 et seq.), the Solid Waste Management Act, P.L. 1970, c. 39
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.), and the Spill Compensation and Control
Act, P.L. 1976, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.).
(2)
B. All other terms utilized in this article not specifically defined herein
shall conform to the meaning identified in the Act.114
114. Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the Five-Year Exemption and Tax Abatement Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the Five-Year Exemption and Tax Abatement Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 129-10 FLORENCE CODE § 129-11.1
126:746
commercial or industrial building by more than 30%, but shall not mean the
conversion of an existing building or structure to another use.
§ 129-11.2. Definition of "commercial structure."
For purposes of §§ 129-11 and 129-11.1, the term "commercial structure"
relates to office, retail and like uses, but does not include multiple dwelling
type (three or more rental units) structures. In the event a structure
includes a mix of commercial and multiple dwelling uses, the exemption
shall only apply to that component of the structure relating to commercial,
as opposed to multiple dwelling, use.
§ 129-11.3. Application for exemption.
Applicants for tax exemption under §§ 129-11 and 129-11.1 above shall
provide the governing body of the Township of Florence with an application
setting forth the following information:
A. A general description of a project for which exemption is sought;
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
D. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project;
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the project,
and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if a tax
agreement is granted;
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
G. A statement showing:
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site;
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of the agreement; and
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
agreement;
H. A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
users' businesses;
I. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require on
a case-by-case basis.
§ 129-11.1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-11.3
126:747
§ 129-11.4. Grant of exemption; term; applicable regulations;
valuation.
J. The original and six copies of the application shall be submitted to the
Clerk of the Township Council no later than 30 days following
completion of the project, including Saturdays and Sundays. An
application may be filed with the Township Clerk any time prior to such
deadline. "Completion" means that the subject improvement is
substantially ready for the intended use for which it is constructed.
Such completion may be evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or like document by the Township's building inspectors.
K. The Council shall have full discretion to accept, deny or revise the
application and shall not be subject to any time limitations to make a
determination.
L. Notwithstanding the deadline for filing exemption applications
reflected in Subsection J herein, which deadline is statutorily
mandated, this article is adopted with the intent of encouraging
applicants to seek approvals of tax exemptions for eligible properties as
early as possible, preferably prior to commencement of construction.
A. If the Council grants the exemption for the project, the Council shall
adopt an ordinance authorizing a tax agreement for a particular
project. The Council shall enter into a written agreement with an
applicant for the exemption of local property taxes. The agreement
shall provide for the applicant to pay the municipality in lieu of full
property taxes an annual amount to be computed in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10 utilizing one of the following: a) the cost basis; b) the
gross revenue basis; or c) the tax phase-in basis, as set forth therein.
B. All tax agreements entered into shall be in effect for no more than the
five full years next following the date of completion of the project.
C. All projects subject to tax agreement as provided herein shall be subject
to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on
pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing
provision, zoning, planning and building code requirements.
D. That percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes for a property bears
to the property tax which would have been paid had an exemption and
abatement not been granted for the property under the agreement shall
be applied to the valuation of the property to determine the reduced
valuation of the property to be included in the valuation of the
municipality for determining equalization for county tax apportionment
and school aid during the term of the tax agreements covering the
properties, and at the termination of an agreement for a property the
reduced valuation procedure required under this section shall no longer
apply.
§ 129-11.3 FLORENCE CODE § 129-11.5
126:748
§ 129-11.5. Copies of agreements.
The Clerk of the Township of Florence is authorized to forward a copy of all
executed agreements entered into pursuant to this article to the Director of
the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs within 30 days of the date of execution.
§ 129-11.6. Failure to meet qualifying conditions.
In the event a property owner subject to a tax agreement ceases to operate
or disposes of the property or fails to meet the conditions for qualifying for
the exemption, the local property taxes due for all the prior years subject to
exemption and for the current year shall be payable as if no exemption had
been granted. The Tax Collector of the Township of Florence shall notify the
property owner within 15 days of the date of disqualification of the amount
of taxes due. In the event the subject property has been transferred to a
new owner and it is determined that the new owner will continue to use the
property pursuant to the qualifying conditions, and no tax or payment in lieu
of tax shall be delinquent, the exemption shall continue and the agreement
shall remain in effect.
§ 129-11.7. Additional exemption for additional improvements.
The Township Council hereby determines that an additional improvement,
conversion or construction completed on a property already granted a
previous exemption pursuant to this article during the period in which the
previous exemption is in effect shall qualify for an additional exemption
under the standards identified in this article. The additional improvement,
conversion or construction shall be considered as separate for purposes of
calculating the exemption, except that the assessed value of any previous
improvement, conversion or construction shall be added to the assessed
valuation as it was prior to that improvement, conversion or construction
for the purpose of determining the assessed value of the property for which
any additional exemption is to be subtracted.
§ 129-11.8. Tax delinquent properties.
No exemption shall be granted or tax agreement entered into pursuant to
this article for any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 129-11.9. Conditions.
An applicant for tax exemption under this article shall agree, as a condition
to receiving the exemption, not to file a tax appeal challenging the
assessment granted under this article.
§ 129-11.10. Revaluation or reassessment.
In the event that the Township implements a revaluation or reassessment
during the exemption period for any property, the exemption shall continue
§ 129-11.5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-11.10
126:749
to apply but at a valuation level consistent with the revaluation or
reassessment.
§ 129-11.11. Right of revision.
The granting of an exemption for a particular property shall not prejudice
the right of the Township to appropriately examine and revise the
assessment during the five-year exemption period in the event the base
assessment is found to be improperly valued and assessed.
§ 129-11.12. Termination of agreement.
At the termination of an agreement for tax exemption authorized pursuant
to this article, the project or improvement shall be subject to all applicable
real property taxes as provided by state laws and regulations and local
ordinances, provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the
project or improvement at the termination of the agreement for tax
exemption from qualifying for and receiving the full benefits of any other
tax preference provided by law.
§ 129-11.13. When effective.
This article shall take effect for tax year 2020 upon final passage, approval
and publication as provided by law.
§ 129-11.10 FLORENCE CODE § 129-11.13
126:750
ARTICLE IV
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 8-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15]
§ 129-12. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114,116 which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt
an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but
before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every
occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to
taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A.
54:32B-3), which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed
pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 129-13. Establishment of tax.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room ooxcccupancy Tax in the
Township of Florence which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Florence on or after October 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004,
and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in
the Township of Florence on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in
a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L.
1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 129-14. Tax in addition to other taxes and fees.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 129-15. Payment; vendor responsibilities; violations and
penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
116. Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1 et seq.
§ 129-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-15
126:751
§ 129-16. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be $500 for
each offense.
§ 129-15 FLORENCE CODE § 129-16
126:752
Chapter 130
TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 133. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 134.
§ 130-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 130-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger motor vehicle, station wagon or sportutility-
type vehicle that is owned or hired, and is neither used as a public
livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver; and
a motor vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a van, or a panel
truck or camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned by an
individual, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business of
the owner(s); and solely for the purposes of this chapter, a motorcycle.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto. Basic towing service does not include recovery of vehicles from a
position outside the right-of-way or berm, or recovery from resting, impaled
upon, adhered or otherwise attached to, any other object within the rightof-
way or berm.
HEAVY DUTY — Used to tow and recover commercial-type vehicles over
26,000 pounds GVW, as well as passenger vehicles unable to be recovered
by other means.[Added 12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-25]
A. The purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To establish a requirement and procedure for the licensing of
individuals and entities providing towing and storage services to
the Florence Township Police Department.
(2) To establish, in the interest of public safety, a uniform policy for the
towing and storage of motor vehicles towed and stored at the
request of the Florence Township Police Department; and
(3) To establish uniform fees for towing and storage services.
B. This chapter shall apply to all motor vehicle towing and storage
operations performed at the request of the Florence Township Police
Department.
§ 129-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 130-2
126:753
HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, President's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
LIGHT DUTY — Used to tow and recover small light-duty vehicles up to
10,000 pounds.[Added 12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-25]
MEDIUM DUTY — Used to tow and recover small commercial-type vehicles
up to 26,000 pounds GVW (gross vehicle weight) or passenger vehicles
unable to be recovered with a light-duty tow truck or flatbed.[Added
12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-25]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks, or
motorized bicycles.
RECOVERY — When the tow operator applies his knowledge in a skillful
manner to preserve the condition of the motor vehicle while winching
and/or lifting the damaged vehicle back to a normal towing or loading
position.[Added 12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-25]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Florence.
TOW OPERATOR — A person engaged in the business of towing and storing
motor vehicles or offering the services of a tow vehicle or tow truck and
storage services.
TOW VEHICLES or TOW TRUCK — Those vehicles equipped with a boom
or booms, winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment
specifically designed by their manufacturer for the removal or transport
of motor vehicles, including flatbed vehicles and trailers, employed for
the purpose of towing, transporting, conveying and/or removing motor
vehicles which are unable to be operated under their own power from one
place to another, for which a charge or fee is extracted. All vehicles to be
used pursuant to this chapter shall be adequately designed and maintained
by the tow operator to transport this disabled vehicle safely and without
damage.
VEHICLE ACCESS FEE — Insurance representative or any interested
person (excluding vehicle owner or family member trying to retrieve
personal belongings) must be accompanied into the secured storage yard
facility to inspect, adjust or take photographs of a vehicle or when the tow
operator removes a vehicle out of the indoor/outdoor storage area so that it
may be towed by another towing company. Documentation such as business
card or driver's license must be photocopied and time-stamped when this
additional auxiliary service is performed.[Added 12-17-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-25]
WEEKDAY — Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:30 p.m.
WEEKEND — A Saturday or a Sunday.
WEEKNIGHT or NIGHT — Monday through Friday between the hours of
4:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 130-2 FLORENCE CODE § 130-2
126:754
WINCHING — The process of moving a motor vehicle by use of additional
chains, nylon slings and additional lengths of winch cable for a position that
is not accessible for direct hook-up by conventional means for towing and/or
loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching is not pulling a vehicle onto a flatbed
carrier or lifting a motor vehicle by conventional means (tow sling, wheel
lift, etc.).[Added 12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-25]
§ 130-3. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of towing or storing motor vehicles
at the direction of the Florence Township Police Department without first
obtaining a tow operator's license therefor. Nothing herein shall require
licensing for the rendering of road service or for the provision of towing
and storage services within the Township other than at the request of the
Township Police Department.
§ 130-4. Application for license.
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file with the Township
Clerk a sworn application on a form to be furnished by the Clerk, which
shall include the following information and certification:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is
made for a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of
the officers and directors thereof, its registered agent, and the
names and residential addresses of every stockholder owning more
than ten percent of the issued stock.
(2) The year, make and type of each tow vehicle used in said business,
its serial number, registration number and registered owner.
(3) The address where the tow vehicle or vehicles shall be regularly
garaged, the telephone number or numbers and the hours during
which service is available at those numbers, and the name,
address, and telephone number of an emergency contact for the
applicant. In addition, the operator shall maintain, available for
inspection by the Township, a list of active drivers containing their
names, addresses, New Jersey Driver's License number and
Commercial Driver's License number (if applicable).
(4) The location, size and security features of the storage lot or space
in which towed vehicles will be stored, including the number of
spaces available. The storage lot shall be designated as either
"inside secured storage," "outside secured storage," or "mixed
inside and outside secured storage." These terms are defined as
follows:
(a) Inside secured storage: A vehicle storage facility that is
completely indoors, having one or more openings in the walls
for storage and removal of vehicles, that is secured by a sturdy
locking device, and is locked and secure except when open for
§ 130-2 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 130-4
126:755
transport of vehicles in the presence of the tow vehicle
operator, suitable for twenty-four-hour, seven-day-per-week
storage.
(b) Outside secured storage: A vehicle storage facility that is not
indoors and is secured by a fence, walls or other manmade
barrier that is at least six feet high, having one or more gates
or openings that is secured by a sturdy locking device, and is
locked and secure except when open for the transport of
vehicles in the presence of the tow vehicle operator, suitable
for twenty-four-hour, seven-day-per-week storage. The facility
is to be lighted at night so that all vehicles may be plainly
visible.
(c) Mixed inside and outside secured storage: A vehicle storage
facility having both inside secured storage and outside secured
storage as herein defined.
(5) The name and address of the insurance carriers, and the policy
numbers of all insurance policies as required by § 130-9 of this
chapter.
(6) A copy of the operator's current fee schedule for towing and
storage services, separately listing towing and storage fees for
automobiles and other motor vehicles.
(7) A certification that on-call towing and storage services will be
available 24 hours per day, every day of the year.
(8) A certification that the fees and procedures required by this
chapter will be paid and followed at all times.
(9) A statement that the Chief of Police or his designee may at any
reasonable time conduct an inspection of the tow vehicles or
storage facility of any applicant or licensee for the purpose of
determining compliance with this chapter.
(10) A certification that neither the applicant nor any tow vehicle
operator shall have any criminal convictions for crimes involving
fraud, dishonesty, or moral turpitude, or prior motor vehicle
infractions related to the towing, licensing, repairing, registration,
or titling of motor vehicles or motor vehicle towing operations
which might adversely affect public safety or welfare.
(11) An agreement to abide by and accept the terms and conditions of
this chapter and the rules and policies adopted pursuant to this
chapter.
(12) Satisfactory proof that any and all applicable business and or trade
licenses have been obtained.
(13) A statement of hours during which the facility is open and available
for the retrieval of vehicles or the transaction of business by
§ 130-4 FLORENCE CODE § 130-4
126:756
§ 130-5. Application review; performance standards.
members of the public. The hours of business shall be not less than
six hours per day weekdays and at least four hours on Saturday.
(14) Such other information as the Township Administrator or Chief of
Police may reasonably prescribe.
B. All applications for tow operator's licenses shall be accompanied by a
fee of $100 to cover the Township's costs in processing the application.
The fee of $100 shall be a yearly fee which is due to the Township of
Florence. All fees are nonrefundable whether or not the license is
denied or revoked for any reason.
C. All licenses are subject to annual review and renewal as set forth in
§ 130-6(b).
A. The Township Clerk shall forward all complete applications to the Chief
of Police, who shall conduct or cause to be conducted such investigation
as he deems necessary to determine the truth and accuracy of the
information contained in the application and whether the applicant
meets the following minimum performance standards:
(1) The applicant has the ability to respond to the scene in response to
a request for basic towing service within 15 minutes after
notification.
(2) The applicant can provide on-call towing services 24 hours per day,
every day of the year.
(3) The tow trucks and equipment are in safe and sound condition and
in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations,
capable of transporting disabled vehicles safely and without
damage. All applicants must meet minimum standards of operator
performance, including but not limited to standards concerning the
adequacy of the applicant's equipment and storage facilities and
availability.
(4) The applicant owns or has a valid lease to a storage facility within
five miles of the Township, in an area legally zoned for such use,
and such storage facility shall have a minimum of 10 spaces for
passenger automobiles and will be either an inside secured
storage, outside secured storage, or mixed inside and outside
secured storage facility as defined in § 130-4A(4) above for storage
of all vehicles towed or impounded.
(5) The tow operator shall prominently display his license as set forth
in § 130-C.
(6) The applicant is in compliance with and/or has the ability to comply
with all other requirements and standards set forth herein.
§ 130-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 130-5
126:757
§ 130-6. Issuance of license; fee; renewal; display; transferability.
B. In addition to the minimum standards of performance referred to in the
preceding paragraph, all applicants are subject to disqualification if
found deficient in any one of the following areas:
(1) Provided false or inaccurate information on the application form.
(2) Lacks experience and/or does not have good references from prior
customers of the applicant's towing and storage services.
(3) Fails to maintain the facilities, information, or status, to qualify as a
tow operator as set forth in § 130-4 for licensing.
(4) Provision of inadequate or insufficient service as set forth in
§ 130-7A(3).
C. The Chief of Police shall make his recommendation on the application to
the Township Clerk within 60 days of receipt by him. The Township
Clerk shall make the final decision regarding all new and/or renewal
applications for towing. If the application is disapproved, the reasons
therefor shall be set forth in writing. The Township Clerk shall notify
the applicant in writing that the application has been granted or denied.
If the application is denied, the reasons for such denial shall be set forth
in the notice, along with the applicant's right to appeal the denial to
Township Council pursuant to § 130-8.
A. A tow operator's license shall be issued by the Township Clerk to an
approved applicant upon provision of insurance certification pursuant
to § 130-9. The Township Clerk shall send a copy of the license to the
Police Department for filing and shall keep a permanent record of all
licenses issued.
B. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of the
calendar year in which issued. Applications for renewal, certifying any
changes to the original application or certifying no change, shall be
filed with the Clerk at least 30 days before expiration, on forms
provided by the Clerk. Renewal applications will be forwarded to the
Chief of Police for review and any necessary investigation in
accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in § 130-5.
Results of the Chief of Police's investigation shall be forwarded to the
Township Clerk for the Clerk's consideration when reviewing an
application. If approved, a renewal license shall be issued upon
payment of the license fee and provision of required insurance
certifications.
C. All licenses issued under this chapter, or certified copies thereof, shall
be displayed prominently on all tow vehicles and at the tow operator's
principal place of business.
D. All licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable.
§ 130-5 FLORENCE CODE § 130-7
126:758
§ 130-7. Revocation and suspension.
§ 130-8. Appeals.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Township Clerk after reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing
pursuant to § 130-8 for any of the following reasons:
(1) False or materially inaccurate information in the application, or a
change of circumstances which would have caused disapproval of
the application if existing at the time of approval.
(2) Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, any
additional regulations promulgated by the Township Council, or
any state, federal or local law relating to motor vehicle operation or
storage.
(3) Unsatisfactory service which jeopardizes public safety. By way of
example and not of limitation, more than three unexcused failures
to respond and/or valid complaints (as determined by the Chief of
Police after investigation) within a twelve-month period shall be
considered prima facia grounds for suspension and/or revocation.
(4) Response to a tow situation without being called pursuant to the
rules established by and under this chapter unless a direct call is
made to the tow operator by the vehicle owner or operator. In lieu
of revocation, the Clerk may drop the offending operator to the
bottom of the on-call list for a first offense under this provision.
B. Notice of suspension and/or revocation shall be in writing and shall
include the reasons therefor and notice of the licensee's right to appeal
to Township Council pursuant to § 130-8.
C. License fees shall in all cases be nonrefundable regardless of
revocation or suspension of the license.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Township Clerk in the denial
of an application for a license, or in revocation thereof, or in the
suspension from the Township's on-call towing list, may appeal to the
Township Council by filing with the Clerk, within 14 days after notice of
the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address, a written request for a hearing, setting forth fully the grounds
for the appeal. The Council will set a time and place for a hearing on
such appeal, and notice shall be served on or mailed to the applicant or
licensee at least five days prior to the hearing. The Council's
determination shall be made by resolution and shall become effective
immediately, unless otherwise set forth in writing in the resolution.
B. The Council may, for good cause shown and in its sole discretion, stay a
suspension or revocation by the Clerk pending the holding of a hearing
pursuant to this section.
§ 130-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 130-9
126:759
§ 130-9. Insurance requirements.
§ 130-10. On-call towing list.
A. Every licensee shall carry insurance as follows:
(1) Comprehensive automobile liability in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limits;
(2) Worker's compensation coverage as required by state law;
(3) Garage keeper's liability in an amount not less than $60,000 per
location;
(4) Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limits;
(5) Comprehensive general liability coverage in an amount not less
than $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident;
(6) Endorsements providing for collision coverage for vehicles in tow;
(7) Endorsements incorporating the indemnification provision set forth
in § 130-9B;
(8) Endorsement naming the Township as an additional insured in all
insurance policies (except workers' compensation policies) for
licensees on the Township's on-call towing list.
B. All licensees shall hold harmless and indemnify the Township, its
officers, employees and agents, from any and all liability claims, losses
or damage arising or alleged to arise from the performance of the
towing services requested of or rendered by the licensee. The Township
shall be named as an additional insured on the tow operators liability
policies as set forth in § 130-9A above.
C. All insurance policies shall be written by insurance companies
acceptable to the Township and authorized to do business in the State
of New Jersey with a best rating of not less than AAA.
D. No license shall be issued or renewed until the applicant has filed with
the Township Clerk certificates of insurance evidencing the insurance
coverage and endorsements required in § 130-9A. All certificates must
provide for 30 days' prior written notice to the Township of policy
cancellation or material change.
E. Any license issued under this chapter will be automatically revoked
upon expiration or cancellation of the required insurance, or material
change in coverage which renders that coverage not in compliance with
the requirements of § 130-9A.
A. The Chief of Police shall maintain a list of those tow operators licensed
by the Township to respond to calls from the Township Police
Department. In order to be included on the on-call towing list, an
§ 130-9 FLORENCE CODE § 130-10
126:760
§ 130-11. Disposition of towed vehicles.
applicant must meet all of the requirements of this chapter and shall
enter into an agreement with the Township for a term of one year, said
agreement to be prepared by the Township Attorney.
B. Calls to tow operators on the on-call list shall be made on a
nondiscriminatory rotating basis, pursuant to procedures established
by the Chief of Police. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Chief of Police
or his designee from calling a tow operator out of sequence or seeking
the services of a tow operator not on the on-call list if the circumstances
require specialized equipment or if the interests of public safety so
require. If the tow operator selected does not respond to the scene
within the 15 minutes after notification, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall be permitted to summon the next available tow operator.
When any unusual situation occurs which may be dangerous to the
safety of the public, such as a spill of toxic material or other dangerous
cargo, the Township Police Department may select any qualified tow
operator.
C. The fees to be charged for the towing and storage services of
automobiles shall be as set forth in § 130-11. The Township shall not be
liable for the cost of any towing and/or storage services unless those
services are performed on a municipal vehicle. This means, by way of
example and not limitation, if a tow operator is called to provide a
service and the owner is able to get his/her vehicle started and
operating in the interim, then neither the Township nor the owner shall
be responsible for the tow operator's costs. Further, the tow operator
will not lose his position on the towing list.
D. Inclusion on the on-call towing list shall be automatically revoked upon
expiration or revocation of the tow operator's license. The Township
Council may also suspend a licensed tow operator's inclusion on the oncall
towing list for such period of time as they consider appropriate for
violations of this chapter, after a hearing on such violations.
Suspensions may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in
§ 130-8.
E. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a motorist or motor vehicle owner
from summoning a tow operator of his or her own choosing, except that
any Township police officer at the scene of an incident requiring towing
services shall be responsible for making the final determination as to
when towing shall take place and which tow operator shall be called.
A. All vehicles towed at the request of the Township Police Department
must be removed to an approved storage facility unless the owner or
operator of the vehicle specifically requests that it be towed to another
destination. Any Township police officer at the scene shall be
responsible for making the final determination as to the towing
destination.
§ 130-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 130-11
126:761
§ 130-12. Additional requirements.
§ 130-13. Fee schedule. [Amended 2-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4;
12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-25]
B. Vehicles that are being towed and held by the Florence Township Police
Department shall not be released until the owner or his/her agent
provides a release form from the Police Department.
C. All vehicles towed at the request of the Township Police Department
must be stored together at the approved storage facility and not
scattered throughout the premises.
D. No tow operator shall dispose of, destroy, remove, sell or otherwise
transfer any vehicle towed at the request of the Township Police
Department without first complying with all applicable laws of the State
of New Jersey and notifying the Township Police Department of its
intention to do so in writing at least 14 days prior to effectuating same.
E. Upon request by the Township Police Department, the tow operator
shall store a motor vehicle in an inside building as defined in
§ 130-4A(4). Vehicles designated by the police as being suspected as
being used in criminal activity shall be stored in a separate space for
the exclusive use of the Police Department, and shall not be released
without the written permission of the Chief of Police, Acting Chief of
Police or his designee.
A. In addition to any requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter, all
approved towing services must provide in writing an employment
nondiscrimination statement prior to the issuance of said approval, and
must agree to comply with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning wages, hours and terms of employment.
B. Employees of an approved towing service shall in no way be deemed to
represent or be employed by this municipality, and all such towing
services shall be responsible for the conduct of their employees.
C. All towing and storage fees shall be disclosed in an appropriate notice
on the front or top page of all invoices and receipts. Additionally,
adequate public posting of such fees must be made at the storage area,
in easy view of the public.
D. Tow operators shall advise members of the public with complaints
regarding their services rendered pursuant to this chapter or their right
to file a complaint with the Township Clerk. The Township Clerk shall
evaluate all such written complaints in determining whether action is
required under § 130-7. Tow operators shall maintain a detailed list of
all complaints received for inspection by the Township which shall
include, at least, the name and address of the complaining party; the
date, time, and place of the tow; the nature of the complaint, and the
disposition of the complaint.
§ 130-11 FLORENCE CODE § 130-13
126:762
A. No person shall be liable to any tow operator who tows or stores an
automobile, including but not limited to any automobile that was
damaged in an accident or recovered after being reported stolen, for
any fees in excess of the following.
(1) All weights shall be based upon the manufacturer's stated gross
vehicle weight.
(2) Day rates shall apply between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. The night/weekend/holiday rate shall
apply from 4:30 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and for
the entire twenty-four-hour day on weekends and holidays. All rates
shall be based upon the time of the call to the tow operator.
(3) Storage fees are for each twenty-four-hour day or portion thereof. A
new day commences at 12:01 a.m.
B. Basic towing service fees are maximum rates for up to one hour of
service at the scene, and include mileage for the first five miles of tow.
Each additional mile shall be at the rate of $2 per mile or portion of a
mile.
Basic Towing Fee (includes flatbed service)
Type Day
Night/Weekend/
Holiday
Light Duty $95 $ 125
Medium Duty $125 $ 175
Heavy Duty $ 225 (min. 2 hours) $250 (min. 2 hours)
Recovery Fee
Type
Fee
(per hour)
Light Duty $70
Medium Duty $100
Heavy Duty $200
Vehicle Access Fee
$40 per hour with a minimum charge of 1/2 hour; then $10 for each 1/
4 hour (15 minutes) thereafter
Storage Fees
Type
Fee
(per day)
Inside secured $40
Outside secured $30
§ 130-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 130-13
126:763
§ 130-14. Regulations and procedures.
The Township Council shall promulgate such rules, regulations and
procedures, not inconsistent with this chapter, as may be reasonable and
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Copies thereof shall
be provided to all licensed tow operators and shall be made available to the
public, along with copies of current fee schedules, during normal business
hours. Failure to comply with applicable rules, regulations and procedures
may be cause for revocation of a tow operator's license.
§ 130-15. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police is hereby designated to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and any applicable rules and regulations.
Chapter 131
C. The tow operator shall submit annually, as part of its application or
renewal thereof, its fee schedule for the towing and storage of
automobiles, which shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Township Council Clerk.
D. If a tow operator impounds a vehicle from a public street, right-of-way
or other location at the direct request of the Florence Township Police
Department, the basic fee for towing and storage shall be as noted
above.
E. For all motor vehicles other than those set forth above, the tow operator
shall set reasonable and customary fees for the Burlington County area
for the towing and storage of such vehicles. The tow operator shall
submit annually, as part of its application or renewal thereof, its fee
schedule for the towing and storage of all motor vehicles other than
automobiles, which shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Township Clerk.
F. A current fee schedule shall be submitted for approval on an annual
basis at the time of application for license renewal.
G. When basic towing services are rendered for any automobile, there
shall be no additional charges other than those provided for in
Subsection B above, including but not limited to flatbedding, waiting
time, winching, cleanup costs and additional labor.
H. Tow vehicles transporting multiple vehicles at one time may charge the
applicable fee for each vehicle transported.
I. `Prior to hookup or flatbedding of a motor vehicle, the tow operator
shall present a copy of its fee schedule to the owner or operator of the
vehicle. The fee schedule shall also contain the name, address and
telephone number of the tow operator and a statement of the hours
when and location where the motor vehicle may be claimed.
§ 130-13 FLORENCE CODE § 130-15
131:764
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 41.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Housing — See Ch. 87.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of
permit — See Ch. 129, Art. II.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 140.
§ 131-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes natural persons, partnerships, corporations or other
business associations.
TRAILER — Any vehicle used or constructed to be used as a conveyance
upon public streets, whether self-propelled or otherwise, and so designed
as to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place, and nonself-
propelled vehicles of any kind or character constructed or intended to
be moved under fuel power.
TRAILER CAMP — Any place, the owner of which permits trailers to be
at rest for the purpose of enabling one or more persons to dwell or sleep
therein, whether any fee or other compensation is required therefor or not.
§ 131-2. Parking restrictions for trailers; penalties.
A. No person shall park or cause any trailer to be parked upon any of the
public streets, roads, parks or other publicly owned property in the
Township of Florence for the purpose of enabling any person to enter
therein or to depart therefrom or for the purpose of permitting any
person to sleep or dwell therein or for an unreasonable length of time.
Any person violating this subsection shall be liable to a fine as provided
in § 131-11 of this chapter for each offense.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any trailer in any public street, road,
highway or other thoroughfare in such manner as to cause or be likely
to cause congestion or an impediment in the normal flow of traffic on
said public street, road, highway or thoroughfare. Any person violating
this subsection shall be liable to a fine as provided in § 131-11 of this
chapter for each such offense.
C. No person shall park or cause any trailer to be parked in any trailer
camp other than one licensed under the provisions of this chapter. Any
person violating this subsection shall be liable to a fine as provided in
§ 131-11 of this chapter for each such offense. Each day that any trailer
§ 130-15 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 131-2
131:765
§ 131-3. License required for trailer camps.
No person shall operate or maintain within the Township of Florence any
trailer camp until he shall have first procured a license so to do in
conformity with this chapter. This section shall not apply to any person
parking or keeping a trailer upon his own premises, provided that he did
so prior to the taking effect of this chapter. Each day that a violation of
this section shall occur shall be deemed to be a distinct offense. Any person
violating this section shall be liable to a fine as provided in § 131-11 of this
chapter for each such offense.
§ 131-4. Trailer camp licenses.
shall remain in any unlicensed trailer camp shall be deemed to be a
distinct offense. This subsection shall not be construed to apply to any
person keeping or parking a trailer upon his own land, whether he shall
dwell in the same or not; provided, however, that such landowner used
his land for the parking or keeping of his own trailer prior to the taking
effect of this chapter.
A. Application and fees. All trailer camp licenses shall be issued only by
the order of the Mayor and Council and upon written application
therefor. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state
the name and address of the owner of the premises; the name and
address of the applicant; a description of the premises whereon or
wherein it is proposed to conduct the trailer camp; a complete and
truthful statement of the sewer, water, toilet and electrical facilities to
be provided; and a statement of the maximum number of trailers to be
accommodated in said trailer camp at any one time. Said application
shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of $40, no part of which shall
be rebated depending upon the outcome of said application. Also
accompanying said application, the applicant shall deliver the license
fee herein provided for; provided, however, that where a license shall
be applied for which, if granted, will be valid for only a portion of the
year, the applicant shall remit that portion of the license fee as shall be
determined by multiplying one-twelfth ( 1/12) of the annual fee as fixed
in this chapter by the number of months remaining in the year,
including the month in which the application is made. All licenses shall
expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year in which it is
issued. [Amended 4-16-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-16]
B. Investigations. Before any application for a trailer camp license shall be
granted, the Mayor and Council shall cause an investigation to be made
of the site sought to be used for a trailer camp and of the truth of the
matters set forth in the application. Said investigation shall also include
an inquiry as to whether the operation or maintenance of said trailer
camp would be prejudicial to the health of the residents of the Township
of Florence.
§ 131-2 FLORENCE CODE § 131-4
131:766
§ 131-5. Arrangement of camps.
Every trailer camp shall be laid out, maintained and arranged to provide
unoccupied space of not less than 10 feet in length and 10 feet in width for
each trailer, not including the area which the trailer shall occupy. All trailers
shall be arranged in rows facing on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of
not less than 10 feet in width, leaving and providing unobstructed access to
the public street, road or highway.
§ 131-6. Dogs running at large prohibited.
No dogs shall be permitted to run at large at any trailer camp at any time.
§ 131-7. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Mayor and Council may, from time to time, by resolution, make, alter
and revise reasonable rules and regulations for the governing of trailer
camps and for the violation of which the licensee may suffer a suspension
or revocation of his trailer camp license.
§ 131-8. Removal of wheels prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels of any trailer for
the purpose of having said trailer remain in a trailer camp without wheels
indefinitely. No trailer shall be permanently affixed to the ground.
§ 131-9. Design standards.
C. Revocation of license. Every such license shall be revocable upon notice
to the licensee and after written charges have been preferred and a
hearing held for any untruthful statement contained in said application
or for any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
Township of Florence or for any violation of any law of the State of New
Jersey or of the United States of America. Any such license may also be
revoked for failure of the licensee to keep the trailer camp from
becoming a public nuisance.
A. Toilets and sanitary facilities. Every licensee shall provide a separate
toilet or washroom for men and another for women. Each shall be
plainly marked and designated for the sex for whose use it is intended.
There shall be provided at least one toilet for men and one toilet for
women for each 15 trailers to be accommodated at any one time at said
trailer camp. All toilets, bathrooms, showers and other facilities
provided for the common use of trailer occupants shall be kept and
maintained in a sanitary condition and a good state of repair.
B. Drainage. So much of any land as shall be used for the purposes of a
trailer camp shall be kept well drained and graded so as to prevent
unnecessary accumulation of storm- or casual water.
§ 131-4 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 131-9
131:767
§ 131-10. Revocation of license for breach of health regulations.
All licenses issued by the authority of this chapter shall be revocable by
the Mayor and Council for any breach by the licensee of any ordinance or
regulation of the Board of Health of the Township of Florence.
§ 131-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-22]
Any person who shall make any unlawful statement in any application for a
license under this chapter or who shall permit upon his premises more than
the maximum number of trailers for which his trailer camp shall be licensed
shall be liable to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days or to a period of community service not to exceed 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 131-12. License fee.
The annual license fee shall be that sum which is equivalent to the sum of
$100 multiplied by the maximum number of trailers to be kept upon said
premises at any one time, as stated in the application. Said annual license
fee shall be divided into 12 equal parts and paid monthly, each monthly
installment to be paid on the first of each month. Each trailer camp shall be
limited to 15 trailers. No license shall be issued to any trailer camp which
shall have more than 15 trailers.
§ 131-13. License to be displayed on premises.
Licenses granted by the Mayor and Council by virtue of this chapter shall
be evidenced by certificates on forms prescribed by the Mayor and Council.
Each licensee shall keep and prominently display his license on his premises
while the same shall be in force.
C. Water supply. Each licensee shall make available to the occupants of
trailers parked within his trailer camp an adequate supply of pure water
for drinking and domestic purposes, which water shall be obtained
solely from faucets conveniently located in and about said camp.
D. Garbage disposal. Every licensee shall provide a sufficient number of
adequate receptacles wherein the occupants of the trailers located in
said trailer camp may deposit any kind of waste. He shall keep his
premises and grounds in a clean and sanitary condition, free at all times
from waste materials.
E. Lighting. Every trailer camp licensed under this chapter shall be
reasonably lighted in the nighttime, and all washrooms and toilet rooms
shall be kept lighted during the hours of darkness.
§ 131-9 FLORENCE CODE § 131-14
131:768
§ 131-14. Official inspections.
Every application made for a license by virtue of this chapter shall, by
implication, contain as one of its statements a consent that any official of
the Township of Florence may, at any time, enter upon the trailer camp for
the purpose of making an official inspection.
§ 131-15. Assignment of license.
All licenses granted by the Mayor and Council of the Township of Florence
may be assigned by the holder thereof, provided that said assignment has
been approved by the Mayor and Council, and provided further that all
provisions of this chapter have been fully complied with.
Chapter 132
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 29.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 56.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Posters on trees — See Ch. 95.
Trees in parks — See Ch. 110.
§ 132-1. Street trees.
No species other than those recommended by the Shade Tree Commission
may be planted between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues
or ways within the township, which species are hereinafter referred to
as "street trees," without approval of the Florence Township Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 132-2. Planting, pruning and removal by township.
Florence Township shall have the exclusive right to plant, prune, maintain
and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, land, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure
A. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the Tree Master
Plan.
B. The distance of street trees from the curb and sidewalks will be in
accordance with the Tree Master Plan.
C. The distance of street trees from street corners and fireplugs will be in
accordance with the Tree Master Plan.
D. The distance of street trees from utilities will be in accordance with the
Tree Master Plan.
§ 131-14 TREES § 132-2
132:769
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds. The Shade Tree Commission may remove or order to be
removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which,
by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
waterlines or other public improvements or is affected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting
of street trees by any property owners, provided that the selection and
location of said trees is in accordance with § 132-1.
§ 132-3. Topping restricted.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or township
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
"Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree
as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires
or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may
be exempted from this provision at the discretion of the Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 132-4. Trees overhanging rights-of way.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
Florence Township shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of twelve (12) feet
above the roadway and eight (8) feet above the walkway. Said owners shall
remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. Florence Township
shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it
interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight
or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.
§ 132-5. Removal of dead or diseased trees by township; costs.
Florence Township shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead
or diseased trees on private property within Florence Township when such
trees constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease
which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within Florence
Township. The Shade Tree Commission will notify, in writing, the owners
of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense
within sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice. In the event of
failure of owners to comply with such provisions, Florence Township shall
have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on
the owner's property tax notice.
§ 132-2 FLORENCE CODE § 132-6
132:770
§ 132-6. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
§ 132-7. Interference with township employees unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Shade Tree Commission or any of its agents or agents or employees of the
township while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching,
pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on
private grounds as authorized within this chapter.
§ 132-8. Review of Shade Tree Commission's decisions.
The Township Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Shade Tree Commission. Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the Shade Tree Commission to the Township Council,
which may hear the matter and make a final decision.
§ 132-9. Approval required for certain acts. [Added 9-7-1988 by
Ord. No. 1988-16]
No live trees exceeding six (6) inches in circumference measured twelve
(12) inches from the ground and situate and lying within fifteen (15) feet
from the curbline of any public street shall be cut down, removed, trimmed
or topped without first having obtained the approval of such action from the
Shade Tree Commission or its designated representative.
§ 132-10. Permits required for cutting, trimming or topping of
certain trees. [Added 9-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-16]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove, cut, trim
or top any tree located within the curbline of any street or any park tree or
any other tree on public property or any tree within fifteen (15) feet from
the curbline of any public street without first having obtained a permit to do
so from the Shade Tree Commission or its designee.
§ 132-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall be liable to a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days
or a period of community service not to exceed ninety (90) days, or any
combination thereof, for each offense.
§ 132-6 TREES § 132-11
132:771
Chapter 133
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 95.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Towing and storage of motor vehicles — See
Ch. 130.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 134.
§ 133-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-04]
The following terms, phrases and words used in and for the purpose of this
chapter shall be deemed to have the following meanings:
ABANDON — Includes any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, truck,
truck trailer, boat, boat and trailer, or other vehicle which:
BOAT — Any watercraft which if operated on any river, creek, stream, lake
or other waterway would be required to be registered under the laws of the
United States or the laws of the State of New Jersey.
IMPOUND, IMPOUNDMENT or PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT — The
sequestration of the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile at a
place of storage.
JUNK AUTOMOBILES or JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODIES — Any automobile
which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle or which is wholly unfit,
without rebuilding or reconditioning, for use in highway transportation
or which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle or otherwise
abandoned.
Is parked without current year's registration or identification markers
as required by law and/or remains so for a period of 48 hours; for any
boat and trailer combination, both the boat and the trailer must have
valid current year's registration;
A.
Has been continuously and without interruption parked in any public
street or on any public land for a period of 15 days;
B.
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the driver
or person owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move the
same to a place where it shall not obstruct traffic;
C.
Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to remain
inoperative for a period of seven days (said period of time may be
extended for good cause, by the Police Department);
D.
E. Is found without one or more tires; or
Does not display a current motor vehicle inspection sticker of the state
in which it is registered.
F.
§ 132-11 FLORENCE CODE § 133-1
133:772
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck
tractor or other vehicle and shall have the meaning as described to the
foregoing words as contained and defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation being the owner
or having any legal right in or to the motor vehicle as herein defined.
PLACE OF STORAGE — A junkyard or other approved storage area, but
any such junkyard or other storage area is subject to any and all provisions
contained in this chapter and any and all other ordinances of the Township
of Florence.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of
Florence.
§ 133-2. Restrictions.
§ 133-3. Impounding vehicles.
Whenever any officer of the Township of Florence Police Department finds
any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body, trailer, boat
or boat and trailer combination which has been abandoned, kept or stored
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, such member of the Florence
Township Police Department shall remove, secure the removal of and/or
impound said vehicle or direct the removal of said junk automobile or junk
automobile body, trailer, boat or boat and trailer combination in accordance
with the procedures hereinafter set forth:
A. Abandonment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon
or suffer to permit the abandonment of any motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body, trailer, boat or boat and trailer
combination out of doors upon any public or private lands in the
Township of Florence, upon any public street or between the right-ofway
side lines of any public right-of-way therein.
B. Storage prohibited. No person shall place, keep or store any junk
automobiles or junk automobile bodies, trailer, boat or boat and trailer
combination, as heretofore defined in this chapter, on any public or
private property within the Township of Florence.
C. Presumption. If any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile
body, trailer, boat or boat and trailer combination shall be abandoned
on private lands for 30 days or more, it shall be presumed that the
owner or tenant in possession of said land has abandoned it there or
permitted or suffered it to be abandoned there.
D. Exclusion. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the
placing, keeping or storage of any motor vehicle, junk automobile or
junk automobile body, trailer, boat or boat and trailer combination in an
enclosed garage, barn or other building or as permitted by Chapter 91,
Land Development.
§ 133-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 133-3
133:773
§ 133-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Public property. Whenever any abandoned motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body, trailer, boat or boat and trailer
combination is found on any public street, highway or public property,
an emergency condition is herewith declared to exist, and any officer of
the Florence Township Police Department is hereby authorized to
immediately remove, secure the removal of and/or impound the motor
vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body, trailer, boat or boat
and trailer combination in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1 et seq.
B. Private lands.
(1) Whenever any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile
body is found on private land in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or if probable cause exists that a violation of this chapter
exists, then any officer of the Florence Township Police Department
shall cause the owner of the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body, trailer, boat or boat and trailer, if he can be found,
or the owner or tenant of the private lands upon which the violation
is occurring to be given 10 days' written notice that said violation
exists; said notice shall be given in writing by personal service or
by registered mail, sent to the last known address of the owner of
the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body, trailer,
boat or boat and trailer and/or the owner or tenant of the property.
(2) In the event that, at the expiration of 10 days, the violation of the
provisions of this chapter still exist, the owner or tenant of the
private land on which the violation is occurring shall be subject to a
penalty as provided herein.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition
to such other penalties as may be prescribed, pay all costs of removal,
impoundment and sale not paid for out of the proceeds of the sale, and
in the event that the violator is a property owner as specified in
§ 133-2C above, said costs and such other penalties as may be levied in
accordance with this chapter shall become a lien upon his property in
accordance with law and be collected in the manner ascribed and
established for the collection of liens.
B. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or by community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof,
at the direction of the Municipal Judge, and each day that a violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. A continuation of a violation or a noncompliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance, and the Mayor and Council
§ 133-3 FLORENCE CODE § 133-4
133:774
Chapter 134
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right-of-way of fire vehicles — See Ch. 15.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
vehicles — See Ch. 36.
Parking at boat ramp — See Ch. 53.
Off-street parking requirements — See Ch.
91.
Litter from vehicles — See Ch. 95.
Noise — See Ch. 102.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 110.
Peddling from vehicles — See Ch. 114.
Closing of streets to traffic — See Ch. 124.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 126.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 131.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 133.
shall have the right to apply to the courts of this state for injunctive
relief or other relief in addition to the penalties provided for herein.
§ 133-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 133-4
133:775

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 134-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 134-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-1
133:777

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 134-2. Effect of other provisions.
The provisions of this Article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other Nev Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 134-3. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-4. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II of
any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Section
II attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-5. Stopping or standing prohibited during specified times.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle for the times specified in Schedule
III of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said
Schedule III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-6. Limited time parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule IV of any
day upon any of the streets or parts of the streets described in Schedule IV
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-7. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle parallel to the edge of the roadway or curb
upon any of the streets or parts of the streets described in Schedule V, and
at such places the street shall be marked for angle parking and all vehicles
shall be parked at a thirty-degree angle to the curb and and within the lines
indicated by the marks or signs on the roadway on the streets or parts or
streets listed in Schedule V attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-8. Parking on public property.
No person shall park or operate a vehicle on public property in violation of
the regulations listed in Schedule VI attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 134-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-8.1
133:779
§ 134-8.1. Permit parking program. [Added 9-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-27]
A. Permit parking required. In accordance with the provisions of this
section, no person shall park any vehicle upon the following described
streets or parts thereof, unless the vehicle shall bear a valid permit:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Alden Avenue North and south 7:30 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
Sundays only
Starts 91.3 feet
from the
intersection of
Roland Avenue
and Alden
Avenue and
extends 80 feet
along both sides
of Alden Avenue
B. Public notice required. The Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signs
to be posted on the portion of Alden Avenue that prohibits non-permit
parking during the hours set forth in Subsection A above.
C. Application for permit; fee.
(1) Application for parking permits under this article shall be made in
writing to the Chief of Police, or his designee, upon such forms as
may be provided.
(2) An applicant for a parking permit under this article shall show to
the Chief of Police, or his designee, satisfactory evidence that they
fulfill all the conditions required for the issuance of such permit.
Whenever such conditions no longer exist, any person holding such
permit shall surrender same to the Chief of Police, or his designee.
(3) There shall be no fee to obtain a parking permit.
D. Location of parking permit. The parking permit shall be a sticker decal
that is placed just above the inspection sticker of the vehicle located on
the lower left portion of the windshield.
E. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this section by parking a
vehicle on the portion of Alden Avenue designated as "permit
parking only" without a valid permit shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense and $200 for each
subsequent offense, plus any court fees assessed by the Municipal
Court Judge.
(2) Any misuse of permits will result in the immediate revocation of the
permit plus fines.
§ 134-8.1 FLORENCE CODE § 134-8.1
133:780
ARTICLE III
Operation of Vehicles
§ 134-9. Truck length and height restrictions. [Amended 9-17-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-24]
Trucks over certain specified dimensions are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII, except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such streets. Said Schedule VII is attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-10. Truck routes.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as routes for trucks over four tons. All trucks having a registered
gross weight in excess of four tons shall be excluded from all streets except
from those streets which form a part of the system of truck routes.
§ 134-11. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IX attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 134-12. Through streets.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets as described
in Schedule X attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right
side of each street intersecting the through street except where yield signs
are provided for the designation.
§ 134-13. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule XI
attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 134-14. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule XII
attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as yield
intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 134-15. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 134-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-16
133:781
§ 134-16. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 134-17. Bus stops. [Amended 10-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-20;
11-1-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-27; 4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-7]
The locations described in Schedule XV attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops. Bus stop shelters shall
be located at the bus stops described in Schedule XXIII. Parking shall be
prohibited in all designated bus stop areas.
§ 134-18. Left turns prohibited.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XVI attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-19. U-turns prohibited.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XVII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-20. Turning prohibited.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XVIII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-21. Speed limits.
The speed limits for all directions of traffic at the locations described in
Schedule XIX attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
established at the rates of speed indicated.
§ 134-22. Lane use.
The lane locations described in Schedule XX attached to and made a part of
this chapter are designated as lane use reservations and traffic shall move
only as indicated.
§ 134-23. Passing prohibited.
No person shall pass another vehicle at any of the locations described in
Schedule XXI attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 134-16 FLORENCE CODE § 134-23
133:782
ARTICLE IV
Emergency Parking Regulations
§ 134-24. Conduct when emergency is declared.
§ 134-25. Snow emergency regulations.
Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
streets or highway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicles shall be parked
on the streets listed in Schedule XXII.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency by the Chief of Police/Director of
Public Safety or Chief Law Enforcement Officer, as applicable, or, in his
absence, the ranking police officer, there shall be no parking upon the
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety or
Chief Law Enforcement Officer, as applicable, or in his absence the
ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free
flow of traffic. [Amended 2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03]
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 134-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-25
133:783

ARTICLE IVA
Permit Parking
[Added 2-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-1; amended 5-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-04]
§ 134-25.1. Florence Housing Authority Maplewood Homes resident
parking permit.
§ 134-25.2. (Reserved)117
A. Parking on the east side of Zinc Street and the southerly terminus of
Zinc Street shall be limited to the automobiles owned, operated or in
the possession of a resident owner or tenant of any property abutting
the easterly side of Zinc Street or the southerly terminus of Zinc Street,
which vehicle shall display a current Florence Housing Authority
Maplewood Homes resident parking permit. The Florence Housing
Authority is authorized to issue one resident parking permit to each
such owner or tenant.
B. Vehicles parking on the east side of Zinc Street or the southerly
terminus of Zinc Street and not displaying a valid Florence Housing
Authority Maplewood Homes resident parking permit shall be in
violation of this article and shall be subject to the fines imposed by this
chapter.
C. Nothing contained in § 134-24.1 shall be deemed to permit parking on
Zinc Street where such parking is otherwise prohibited or restricted.
117. Editor's Note: Former § 134-25.2, Permit parking restricted to residents on portion of 2nd
Avenue, was repealed 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-24.
§ 134-25.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-25.2
133:785

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 134-26. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the New Jersey Statutes,
every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term of not exceeding 15 days, or both.118
§ 134-27. Invalidity of provisions.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 134-28. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Florence are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall
not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior
to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 134-29. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Traffic Ordinance."
§ 134-30. Severability.
In the event that any section of this chapter is declared invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not offset the remaining
section, which shall be deemed severable therefrom.
§ 134-31. Revocation of previous regulations.
All ordinances previously adopted in regards to vehicles and traffic
regulations are hereby revoked.
§ 134-32. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon the final passage and publication
according to law.
118. Editor's Note: Original § 134-26B, which provided for additional penalty provisions and
immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-22.
§ 134-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-32
133:787

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 134-33. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-3, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Barbee Court [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Both Around the island where parking
shall only be in designated parking
spaces
Barbee Court [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Oddnumbered
Entire length
Bennett Street Both From Maple Avenue to southern
terminus
Bennett Street West From Hornberger Avenue to Maple
Avenue
Broad Street East From a point 25 feet south of the
south curbline of 4th Street to a
point 50 feet south thereof
Cedar Lane Extension Both From Old York Road to Burlington-
Columbus Road
Cedar Street East From 5th Street to 6th Street
Cedar Street West From 3rd Street to 5th Street
Challander Way
[Added 4-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08]
Evennumbered
Entire length
Chestnut Street East From Front Street to 9th Street
Church Street East From Front Street to 5th Street
Cumberland Street West From U.S. Route No. 130 to the
northerly point of the termination
point of the Cumberland Farms
Complex
D’Annunzio Lane
[Added 4-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08]
Both Entire length
Delaware Avenue [Repealed 2-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
Delaware Avenue [Repealed 2-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
Delaware Avenue East From Hornberger Avenue to a point
50 feet north thereof
Delaware Avenue East From Hornberger Avenue to a point
50 feet south thereof
§ 134-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-33
133:789
Name of Street Side Location
Delaware Avenue West From Olive Street to Burcliff Avenue
East 4th Street
[Added 11-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-27;
4-3-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-7]
South From a point 147 feet east of the
intersection of Broad Street and
extending 18 feet east thereof
Emerick Avenue
[Added 9-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-15]
North From Parish Lane to Station Road
Emerick Avenue
[Added 9-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-15]
North From Station Road to Bennett Street
Eyre Street East From Front Street to 5th Street
Fifth Street East From Hamilton Avenue to Norman
Avenue
Firehouse Lane
[Added 9-19-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-11]
Both Entire length from Cedar Lane to
the New Jersey Turnpike Authority
right-of-way
Foundry Street West From Front Street to Bodine Street
Front Street North From Oak Street to Cedar Street
Front Street South From Iron Street to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Front Street South From Pine Street to Cedar Street
Front Street South From Walnut Street to a point 100
feet west thereof
Front Street South From Walnut Street to a point 50
feet east thereof
Front Street [Added
7-17-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-27]
East From the east curbline of the drive
into the Broad Street Park along the
north curbline of Front Street to a
point 146 feet east thereof
Grove Street [Added
7-17-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-27]
South From the east curbline of Kinsman
Road to a point 300 feet east thereof
Hamilton Avenue North From 5th Street to 7th Street
Hornberger Avenue East From U.S. Route No. 130 to 2nd
Avenue
Hornberger Avenue North From 2nd Avenue to 6th Avenue
Hornberger Avenue North From the middle of the alley
between 6th Avenue and 7th Avenue
to Delaware Avenue
§ 134-33 FLORENCE CODE § 134-33
133:790
Name of Street Side Location
Hornberger Avenue South From 6th Avenue to Parish Lane
Hornberger Avenue South From Alden Avenue to 4th Avenue
Hornberger Avenue South From Bennett Street to Delaware
Avenue
Hornberger Avenue
[Amended 9-15-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-15]
South From Parish Lane to a point 300 feet
west thereof
Hornberger Avenue South From Station Road to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Hornberger Avenue South From Station Road to a point 50 feet
east thereof
Hornberger Avenue West From U.S. Route No. 130 to Norman
Avenue
Iron Street [Added
2-7-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-04]
East From West Front Street to West
Third Street
James Street West From Alden Avenue to Norman
Avenue
Lee Lane [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Evennumbered
Entire length
Library Street Both From 2nd Street to 3rd Street
Lubrano Lane [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Along the
island side
Around the island
Lubrano Lane [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Oddnumbered
Entire length
Marcella L. Duffy Way
[Added 12-18-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-23]
Both From Summer Street to Spring
Street
Maple Avenue South From Delaware Avenue to Station
Road
Ninth Avenue [Added
6-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-18]
Cul-de-sac On the east side of Ninth Avenue
from a point measured 325 feet
north of the northern curbline of
Main Street for the radius of the culde-
sac ending at a point on the west
side of Ninth Avenue as measured
290 feet north of the northern
curbline of Main Street
Norman Avenue North From Roland Street to 5th Street
§ 134-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-33
133:791
Name of Street Side Location
Norman Avenue South From 200 feet west of James Street
to 5th Street
Norman Avenue South From Hornberger Avenue to Roland
Street
Oak Street Both From 5th Street to Olive Street
Old York Road [Added
12-18-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-39]
Both From the center line of Cedar Lane
Extension to a point 200 feet east
thereof and a point 410 feet west
thereof
Olive Street Both From Cedar Lane to Delaware
Avenue
Parish Lane Both From Hornberger Avenue to
Emerick Avenue
Parkside Avenue Both From Wallace Avenue to U.S. Route
No. 130
Peace Street [Added
12-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-27]
North From a point measured 135 feet
north of the easternmost
intersection of Amboy Avenue and
an unnamed alley located between
Block 141.03, Lots 40 and 41, then
northerly a distance of 250 feet
Pigott Drive [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
North From Seaman Drive (West) to
Seaman Drive (East)
Pine Street East From 3rd Street to Wilbur Henry
Drive
Pine Street West From Wilbur Henry Drive to Shaffer
Drive
Potts Mill Road West From U.S. Route No. 130 to Lucas
Street
Railroad Avenue Both From Cedar Lane to Delaware
Avenue
Railroad Avenue
[Added 12-4-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-35]
Both From Delaware Avenue to Cedar
Lane
Richardson Street Both From Front Street to 6th Street
Ridgway Drive [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Evennumbered
Entire length
River Bank Drive
[Amended 9-4-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-24]
East From Hornberger Avenue to a point
300 feet north thereof
§ 134-33 FLORENCE CODE § 134-33
133:792
Name of Street Side Location
Riverside Avenue North From 2nd Avenue to 8th Avenue
Riverside Avenue
[Added 9-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-19;
amended 12-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-27]
South From a point measured 95 feet west
of the southwest corner of Third
Avenue and Riverside Avenue to a
point 35 feet west thereof
Riverview Avenue
[Added 2-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-6]
Both From the intersection with William
Avenue in a northwesterly direction
until Riverview Avenue ends
Riverview Avenue North From Winter Street to Summer
Street
Seaman Drive [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
All From West Fifth Street to Pigott
Drive
Seaman Drive [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
East From Pigott Drive to Szypulski Lane
Seaman Drive [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
East From Pigott Drive to West Sixth
Street
Seaman Drive [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
East From Szypulski Lane to Tetkoski
Court
Seaman Drive [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
West From Pigott Drive to Szypulski Lane
Seaman Drive [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
West From Szypulski Lane to Tetkoski
Court
Second Avenue East From Main Street to a point 50 feet
south thereof
Second Avenue
[Added 7-14-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-13;
repealed 6-13-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-16]
Seventh Street West From Hamilton Avenue to U.S. Route
No. 130
Spring Street East From Front Street to 6th Street
Spruce Street East From Front Street to 9th Street
Station Road Both From Delaware Avenue to
Hornberger Avenue
§ 134-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-33
133:793
Name of Street Side Location
Station Road Both From Delaware Avenue to U.S.
Route No. 130
Summer Street
[Added 12-16-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-22]
East From Sixth Street to a point 1070
feet south thereof
Summer Street West From Riverview Avenue to 5th
Street
Summer Street
[Added 12-16-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-22]
West From a point 830 feet south of Sixth
Street southerly to the end of
Summer Street
Summer Street
Roundabout [Added
12-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-22]
Both Entire curvature shall be no parking
Szypulski Lane
[Added 6-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-17]
North From Seaman Drive (West) to
Seaman Drive (East)
Tenth Avenue [Added
6-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-18]
Entire culde-
sac
From a point measured 210 feet
north of the northern curbline of
Main Street for the entire radius of
the cul-de-sac on Tenth Avenue
Tenth Avenue [Added
10-5-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-13]
West From Hornberger Avenue to a point
235 feet north thereof
Tetkoski Court [Added
6-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-17]
East From Seaman Drive to beginning of
cul-de-sac radius
Third Street Both From Library Street to Foundry
Street
Third Street South From Eyre Street to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Third Street South From Foundry Street to Union
Street
Third Street South From Library Street to a point 59
feet east thereof
Tilton Lane [Added
2-7-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-04]
Both From Hamilton Avenue to the
northeasternmost end of the
roadway where it intersects the
railroad right-of-way
Trainor Circle [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Evennumbered
Entire length
§ 134-33 FLORENCE CODE § 134-33
133:794
Name of Street Side Location
Union Street East From Front Street to 3rd Street
Walnut Court [Added
2-1-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-3]
North From Walnut Street to a point 385
feet west thereof
Walnut Court [Added
2-1-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-3]
South From the southeast corner of Block
155.50 Lot 8.04 to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Walnut Court [Added
2-1-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-3]
South From Walnut Street to a point 50
feet west thereof
Wallace Street South From a point 200 feet east of Tilton
Lane to a point 250 feet east thereof
Walnut Court [Added
6-4-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-08]
South From Walnut Street to the southeast
corner of Block 155.50, Lot 8.04
Walnut Street East From Front Street to 5th Street
Walnut Street West From 5th Street to Walnut Court
West Eighth Street
[Added 6-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-17]
Both From Summer Street to Pigott Drive
Winter Street
[Amended 8-3-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-08]
East From Front Street to 6th Street
Yockus Lane [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-08]
Evennumbered
Entire Length
Yurcisin Street South From Bennett Street to Delaware
Avenue
§ 134-34. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-4, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
§ 134-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-34
133:795
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Alden Avenue
[Added 2-5-1992
by Ord. No.
1992-01]
South 7:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./ Sundays
From a point 92
feet east of the
intersection of the
east curbline of
Roland Street
continuing to a
point 55 feet east
thereof
Amboy Avenue
[Added 9-1-2004
by Ord. No.
2004-12]
Northwest 7:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Mondays and
Thursdays
Beginning along the
curbline of Block
140.01, Lot 42.02,
and extending 26
feet northeasterly
to Lot 42.01 and
extending an
additional 25 feet
along Amboy
Avenue
Amboy Avenue
[Added 9-1-2004
by Ord. No.
2004-12]
Southeast 7:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Mondays and
Thursdays
Beginning at the
southwest curbline
in front of Block
141.03, Lot 40, and
running
northeasterly a
distance of 50 feet
East Front Street
[Added
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-16]
North 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./School days
Between Cedar
Street and Pine
Street
East Front Street
[Added
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-16]
South 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./School days
Between Pine
Street and Spruce
Street
Emerick Avenue [Added 10-20-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-32; repealed
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
Second Street [Repealed 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
Winter Street East 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Front Street
to Riverview
Avenue
§ 134-34 FLORENCE CODE § 134-35
133:796
§ 134-35. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-5, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle during specified times upon any of the following described streets
or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Cedar Lane Both Anytime From U.S. Route No. 130
to Wilbur Henry Drive
Cedar Lane [Added
6-4-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-07]
East Anytime From the southerly
curbline of northbound U.S.
130 to Burlington-Bustleton
Road
Cedar Lane [Added
6-4-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-07]
West Anytime From the southerly
curbline of northbound U.S.
130 to the northerly
curbline of Tall Timber
Lane and from a point 280
feet south to Burlington-
Bustleton Road
Delaware Avenue
[Added 2-3-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-2]
East Anytime From the southerly
curbline of Hornberger
Avenue to a point 110 feet
south
Delaware Avenue
[Added 2-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-01]
North Anytime From the westerly curbline
of southbound U.S. 130 to a
point 670 feet north of the
northerly curbline of the
westerly approach of
Station Road
Delaware Avenue
[Added 2-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-01]
South Anytime From the westerly curbline
of southbound U.S. 130 to a
point 80 feet north of the
northerly curbline of
Railroad Avenue
Delaware Avenue
[Added 2-3-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-2]
West Anytime From the northerly
curbline of Olive Street to a
point 524 feet north
Delaware Avenue
[Added 2-3-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-2]
West Anytime From the southerly
curbline of Olive Street to a
point 300 feet south
Front Street East Anytime From Bodine Street to
Union Street
Front Street East Anytime From Burlington Township
line to Richardson Street
§ 134-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-35
133:797
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Front Street West Anytime From Burlington Township
line to Boulevard Street
§ 134-36. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-6, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Broad Street
[Added
9-16-1992 by
Ord. No.
1992-30]
East 30 min.; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./All
From alley between
Front Street and
East 2nd Street to a
point 50 feet south
thereof
Broad Street
[Added
4-15-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-9;
amended
2-5-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-2]
West 30 min.; 6:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m./All,
from March. 15 to
October 15,
inclusive
From a point 63 feet
south of Front Street
to a point 20 feet
south thereof
Broad Street West 30 min.; 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
From West 4th
Street to a point 95
feet south thereof
Cedar Street
[Added
6-6-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-08]
West 15 min.; 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00 p.m./School
days
From Front Street to
East Third Street
East Fourth
Street [Added
4-21-1999 by
Ord. No.
1999-7]
North 30 min.; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./All
Along the northerly
curbline at a point
56 feet east of Broad
Street and extending
thence 22 feet
eastwardly
Fourth Avenue
[Added
4-2-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-7]
West 1 hr.; 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Tuesday
through Saturday
From the alley
between Main Street
and Riverside
Avenue to a point 46
feet south thereof
§ 134-35 FLORENCE CODE § 134-36
133:798
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Front Street
[Amended
10-20-1993 by
Ord. No.
1993-30]
South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./All
From a point 110
feet east of Winter
Street to a point 85
feet east thereof
Hornberger
Avenue [Added
9-2-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-30]
South 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From 5th Avenue to
6th Avenue
Hornberger
Avenue [Added
9-2-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-30]
South 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From 4th Avenue to
the alley between
4th Avenue and 5th
Avenue
Hornberger
Avenue [Added
9-2-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-30]
South 30 min.; 6:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m./All
From 5th Avenue to
the alley between
5th Avenue and 4th
Avenue
Hornberger
Avenue
South 2 hrs
Hornberger Avenue [Repealed 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-30]
Main Street North 30 min.; 6:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m./All
From 4th Avenue to
a point 214 feet west
thereof
Main Street North 30 min.; 6:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m./All
From the alley
between 5th Avenue
and 6th Avenue to a
point 75 feet east
thereof and along
the curbline of the
circle to a point 48
feet northeast
thereof
Main Street
[Added
7-2-1997 by
Ord. No.
1997-23]
South 30 min.; 8:30 a.m.
to 5:30 p.m./All
From 4th Avenue to
the alley between
3rd Avenue and 4th
Avenue
§ 134-36 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-36
133:799
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Main Street South 30 min.; 6:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m./All
From the alley
between 4th Avenue
and 5th Avenue to a
point 76 feet west
thereof and then
along the curbline of
the circle to a point
64 feet southwest
thereof
Main Street
[Amended
7-2-1997 by
Ord. No.
1997-23]
South 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From the alley
between 4th Avenue
and 5th Avenue to
4th Avenue
Pine Street
[Added
10-2-1996 by
Ord. No.
1996-18;
amended
11-3-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-15;
6-6-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-08]
East 15 min.; 7:00 a.m.
to 3:00 p.m./School
days
From Front Street
extending 567 feet
in a southerly
direction along the
easterly side of Pine
Street, except for a
one-hundred-twentytwo-
foot loading
zone as set forth in
§ 134-45, Schedule
XIII: Loading Zones
West Fourth
Street
South 30 min.; 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
From Broad Street
to a point 100 feet
west thereof
West Second
Street
North 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From Foundry Street
to a point 46 feet
east thereof
§ 134-37. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-7, angle parking shall be
provided upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Broad Street East 30 From 3rd Street to 4th Street
Front Street South 30 From Broad Street to Spring
Street
§ 134-36 FLORENCE CODE § 134-37
133:800
Name of
Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Front Street South 30 From Summer Street to Winter
Street
§ 134-38. Schedule VI: Public Parking.
A. Municipal parking lots.119 [Amended 3-4-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-6;
6-7-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10; 4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-7;
5-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
(1) The municipal parking lots now or hereafter acquired or
established by the Township of Florence shall be under the
supervision of the Chief of Police.
(a) No person shall abandon a motor vehicle in any municipal
parking lot. Unless separate limited-time parking restrictions
are listed for a specific municipal parking lot, any vehicle
parked and not moved within 24 hours shall be considered
abandoned. The vehicle shall be towed at the owner’s expense,
unless the driver/owner has first acquired the permission of
the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking officer, to
leave the vehicle there for a longer period of time. The time
shall be set by the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
officer.
(b) Only legally registered passenger automobiles, motorcycles
and commercial motor vehicles with a gross vehicle registered
weight (GVRW) of four tons or less may park on any municipal
parking lot within the Township of Florence. Exception:
Nonpassenger vehicles used in conjunction with a thenoccurring
service function or delivery are exempt from this
section while actually being used for the service function or
delivery.
(c) No trailers of any type, trailer devices, campers, motorized or
vehicle-drawn recreation vehicles with or without sleeping
quarters, vehicles in tow, boat or boat trailers, vehicles that
cannot move under their own power and which can be
operated legally on the highways of the State of New Jersey, or
non-passenger-type vehicles, may be parked on any municipal
parking lot except where the lot is specifically designated to
serve that purpose.
(2) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Lot 20.01,
Block 156.02, and located on the westerly side of Broad Street,
119. Editor's Note: The application for permit form and maps of the parking lots, which
documents were originally attached to Ord. No. 1991-09 appearing in this chapter, are on
file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 134-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-38
133:801
between Wilbur Henry Drive and Ninth Street, is hereby
designated Parking Lot No. 1.
(a) All spaces located along the southerly parking lot shall be
reserved for police vehicles and vehicles owned by members of
the police force. No person shall park a motor vehicle in those
spaces who has not acquired permission of the Chief of Police
or, in his absence, the ranking officer.
(b) All spaces located in the front and rear parking lots shall be
reserved for officers and employees of the Township of
Florence and persons engaged in activities at the Municipal
Building. No person shall park a motor vehicle in those spaces
that is not an employee of the Township of Florence or engaged
in activities at the Municipal Building or surrounding
municipal facilities.
(c) No person other than an officer or employee of the Township of
Florence shall park a motor vehicle in Parking Lot No. 1 for
more than 12 consecutive hours or overnight without first
acquiring the permission of the Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the ranking officer.
(3) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Block 141.02,
Lots 1 and 2, and located on the southerly side of Amboy Avenue
between Hornberger Avenue and Pond Street, is hereby designated
Parking Lot No. 2.
(a) No person shall abandon a motor vehicle, as provided in
Chapter 133, or leave a disabled motor vehicle in Parking Lot
No. 2. The vehicle shall be towed at the owner’s expense,
unless the driver/owner has first acquired the permission of
the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking officer, to
leave the vehicle there for a longer period of time. The time
shall be set by the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
officer.
(4) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Lots 2.02 and
2.01, Block 122, and located on the southerly side of Hornberger
Avenue between Sixth Avenue and Seventh Avenue and along Sixth
Avenue for a distance of 285 feet south from the intersection of
Hornberger Avenue, is hereby designated Parking Lot No. 3.
(a) No person shall abandon a motor vehicle, as provided in
Chapter 133, or leave a disabled motor vehicle in Parking Lot
No. 3. The vehicle shall be towed at the owner’s expense,
unless the driver/owner has first acquired the permission of
the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking officer, to
leave the vehicle there for a longer period of time. The time
shall be set by the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
officer.
§ 134-38 FLORENCE CODE § 134-38
133:802
(b) Parking in the horseshoe drive in the northerly section of
Parking Lot No. 3 shall be limited to a maximum of 30
consecutive minutes.
(5) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Block 140.03,
Lot 9, and located between Railroad Avenue and the Conrail rightof-
way, bounded on the west by Hornberger Avenue and extending
200 feet easterly thereof, is hereby designated as Parking Lot No.
4.
(a) No person shall abandon a motor vehicle, as provided in
Chapter 133, or leave a disabled motor vehicle in Parking Lot
No. 4. The vehicle shall be towed at the owner’s expense,
unless the driver/owner has first acquired the permission of
the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking officer, to
leave the vehicle there for a longer period of time. The time
shall be set by the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
officer.
(6) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or part of Lot 4 and Lot
2.02 of Block 122, located on the southerly side of South Street
between Fourth Avenue and Sixth Avenue and along the West side
of Sixth Avenue, from a point 285 feet South of Hornberger Avenue
southerly to the end at the intersection of South Street, is hereby
designated as Parking Lot No. 5.
(a) No person shall abandon a motor vehicle, as provided in
Chapter 133, or leave a disabled motor vehicle in Parking Lot
No. 5. The vehicle shall be towed at the owner’s expense,
unless the driver/owner has first acquired the permission of
the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking officer, to
leave the vehicle there for a longer period of time. The time
shall be set by the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
officer.
(b) No person shall park any recreational vehicle, boat or trailer in
Parking Lot No. 5 immediately adjacent to improved roadways.
The parking of these devices shall only be permitted on that
portion of Block 122, Lot 4, which has been specifically set
aside for that purpose and improved with a stone surface
material. This area shall be known as "Recreational Vehicle
Lot." Only vehicles of this nature that are registered to a
resident of the Township of Florence and which have been
registered with, and issued a permit by, the Township of
Florence shall be permitted to park in the area set aside for
this purpose. All registrations and permits shall be subject to
the provisions of Article XIII et seq of this Code. [Amended
8-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-08]
§ 134-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-38
133:803
(7) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Block 156.02
Lots 20.01, 19, and 14 and Block 155.29 Lot 54.04 located on
Summer Street is hereby designated as Parking Lot No. 6.
(8) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Block 155.49
Lot 54.01, located on the westerly side of Broad Street between
Ninth Street and Broad Street, is hereby designated as Parking Lot
No. 7.
B. Spaces reserved for handicapped persons. [Amended 6-18-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-19; 3-4-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-5; 5-6-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-11; 3-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Any person desiring to have a personalized handicapped parking
space established along the curb in front of his or her residence in
the Township of Florence shall make application for a personalized
handicapped parking space on the Township of Florence
Application for Handicapped Parking Place form. The application
shall be submitted to the Township Clerk, who shall then refer the
application to the Chief of Police for approval or denial.
(2) Any person making application for a personalized handicapped
parking space in front of their residence must meet the following
criteria:
(a) No application shall be considered where the applicant does
not have a wheelchair symbol license plate or windshield
placard issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission
and which is properly displayed in the vehicle for which the
parking space is being requested.
(b) If the Chief of Police determines that there is a need for the
personalized handicapped parking space and that the space
can be provided without negative impact on traffic flow or
reasonable parking for other properties in the neighborhood,
the Chief of Police shall report to the Township Clerk that the
personalized handicapped parking space is approved.
(c) If the Chief of Police determines that the approval of the
personalized handicapped parking space will have a negative
impact on traffic flow or the reasonable parking for other
properties in the neighborhood, the Chief of Police may deny
the application and shall report to the Township Clerk that the
application for the personalized handicapped parking space is
denied.
(d) Any applicant who disagrees with the decision of the Chief of
Police may, within 10 calendar days from the denial of the
application by the Chief of Police, appeal that decision to the
Township Administrator. The Township Administrator shall
review the application and the decision of the Chief of Police
§ 134-38 FLORENCE CODE § 134-38
133:804
and shall, in his sole discretion, sustain, modify or reverse the
decision of the Chief of Police.
(3) Any personalized handicapped parking space that has been
approved shall be valid for two years. After two years the person
may apply for a renewal of the personalized handicapped parking
space in the same manner as the original application. The failure to
apply for the renewal shall terminate the personalized handicapped
parking space approval.
(4) No other person shall park a vehicle in the personalized
handicapped parking space for which the permit has been granted
other than the person(s) to whom the permit has been issued
during the term of the permit.
(5) The applicant for any personalized handicapped parking space that
has been approved shall be responsible for reimbursing the
Township for all costs related to the installation of necessary
signage for the parking space.
C. General restrictions.
(1) No person shall park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot so as
to occupy more than one designated parking space.
(2) No person shall park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot
except in the designated parking space.
D. The Chief of Police shall see that appropriate signs are posted or
painted so as to afford notice of the provisions of this section.
E. Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection B of this section
regarding handicapped parking, whether the violation occurs on
private or public property, shall be fined $250 for the first offense and,
for subsequent offenses, a fine not less than $250 nor more than $1,000
and be subject to 90 days' community service on such areas and in such
form as the court deems appropriate, or any combination thereof. Any
person violating any other provision of this section shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $50. [Amended 3-4-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-5]
F. Specific restrictions for Parking Lot No. 2 and Parking Lot No. 4.
(1) Parking Lot No. 2 and Parking Lot No. 4 are hereby designated as
decal-parking areas.
(2) Restrictions on the use of decal-parking areas.
(a) Parking on said lands and premises hereinbefore designated
shall be permitted by permit only, which shall be evidenced by
a decal issued to the owner of the motor vehicle.
§ 134-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-38
133:805
(b) Such parking area shall be marked by signs and/or markings
indicating that parking will be by permit only and that vehicles
must bear the required decal.
(c) No vehicle shall be parked in any such parking area unless it
displays, in the lower left rear corner of its rear window, a valid
decal issued by the Township of Florence as herein provided.
(d) No vehicle shall be parked except within a single designated
parking space as shall be indicated within said parking area.
(e) All vehicles shall be parked in such area with the front of the
vehicle facing into the front of the parking space.
(f) No vehicle shall be parked within the entrance or exit to any
such parking area or within any of the aisles thereof.
(3) Exceptions.
(a) Only a vehicle which has displayed thereon a handicap placard
or handicap symbol license plate may park in those special
parking places established for use by handicapped persons.
(b) The six regular parking places and the handicapped parking
space along the Railroad Avenue side of Parking Lot No. 4
extending from Hornberger Avenue eastward towards the
parking lot entrance; and the 11 parking spaces along the
right-of-way of the New Jersey Transit Railroad tracks, starting
with the space closest to Hornberger Avenue and continuing in
the direction toward the Railroad Avenue Playground; and the
five spaces in Lot. No. 2 that face Hornberger Avenue will be
exempted from the decal requirement from 8:00 a.m. until 2:00
a.m. the following day. These spaces may be utilized by visitors
and/or business patrons. [Amended 6-3-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-15; 5-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-11]
(4) Issuance of decals.
(a) Decals shall be issued by the Township Clerk during regular
business hours at the Municipal Complex.
(b) Decals shall be issued upon display of a current and valid New
Jersey motor vehicle registration certificate showing the name
and address of the applicant as a resident of the Township of
Florence residing in the area bounded by Amboy Avenue,
Railroad Avenue, Peace Street and the east side of Hornberger
Avenue and also the area bounded by the west side of
Hornberger Avenue, Alden Avenue, Norman Avenue and
Roland Avenue. The vehicle for which the decal application is
being made must bear a current valid inspection certificate.
[Amended 6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-15]
§ 134-38 FLORENCE CODE § 134-38
133:806
(c) Any such decal shall be issued only to the owner of the motor
vehicle and shall not be transferable. However, a decal may be
transferred during the period of its validity to a new vehicle or
motor vehicle purchased by the applicant upon the sale or
transfer of the original vehicle. In such case of a sale or
transfer, the owner shall remove the decal and supply evidence
thereof to the Township Clerk to obtain a new decal for
transfer to a different vehicle.
(d) Decals shall be issued only for passenger vehicles, standard
size pickup trucks and vans otherwise meeting the
requirements of this chapter.
(e) There shall be no fee attached for the acquisition of the
parking decal.
(f) Said decals shall have written thereon "Township of Florence
Municipal Parking Permit," together with the number of the
decal and the motor vehicle registration number.
(g) The Township Clerk shall make and keep a record of all decals
issued, including therein the number of the decal, the date of
issuance, the name of the person to whom issued with his
address, the motor vehicle registration number and the make,
model and color of the motor vehicle for which issued.
(5) Presumption of receipt of permission. Any person parking a motor
vehicle with such decal affixed thereto shall be presumed to have
properly applied for and received permission to park said motor
vehicle in any parking area in the designated area of the Township
of Florence.
(6) Disabled vehicles. No person shall park or place any disabled
vehicle or permit any such disabled vehicle to remain in any such
parking area without the express permission of the Chief of Police
or his designee.
(7) Violations and penalties.
(a) Any person parking a vehicle in any manner other than is
required by this Article, even though the vehicle bears a valid
decal, shall be subject to a fine of $10, and each day that such
violation occurs shall be a separate and distinct violation.
Payment of said fine may be made to the Municipal Court
Administrator of the Township of Florence upon a plea of guilty.
[Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
(b) In case of a violation of any other provision of this Article, the
person so parking and the owner shall be liable to a fine of $25,
and each day the violation continues shall be a separate and
distinct violation. Payment of said fine may be made to the
Municipal Court Administrator of the Township of Florence
§ 134-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-38
133:807
§ 134-39. Schedule VII: Truck Length and Height Restrictions;
Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded. [Amended 8-4-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-17; 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-26; 9-17-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-24]
§ 134-40. Schedule VIII: Route for Trucks Over Four Tons.
Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-1]
upon a plea of guilty. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
(c) Any vehicle parked in any such parking area in violation of this
Article, except a vehicle bearing a valid decal and parked as
now herein required, may be removed from the parking area
on order of any police officer, and the owner thereof shall pay
the reasonable costs of such removal and of storage which may
result from such removal before being allowed to regain
possession of the vehicle, and such costs of removal and
storage shall be in addition to any penalty or fine hereinbefore
provided.
(8) Exemptions. This Article shall not apply to any municipal vehicles
registered to the Township of Florence or to any vehicles engaged
in police work.
A. Length and height restrictions. No vehicle which is over 25 feet in
length or is over 10 feet in height shall park on any public street in the
Township of Florence except while actually engaged in making a
delivery or providing services to a residence or business located on that
street.
B. Trucks over four tons excluded. [Added 3-7-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-01]
Name of Street Location
Burlington-Bustleton Road (CR
661) [Added 5-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-07]
Burlington Township line to Old
York Road (CR 660)
Cedar Lane (CR 659) Hunt Circus Drive to Burlington-
Bustleton Road (CR 661)
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 134-10, the following streets or
parts of streets are hereby designated as routes for trucks over four
tons.
B. All trucks having a registered gross weight in excess of four tons shall
be excluded from all other streets, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
§ 134-38 FLORENCE CODE § 134-40
133:808
§ 134-41. Schedule IX: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Alden Avenue West From Hornberger Avenue to James
Street
Amboy Avenue East From Hornberger Avenue to Peace
Street
Eighth Avenue North From Hornberger Avenue to
Riverside Avenue
Fifth Avenue South From Hornberger Avenue to South
Street
Fourth Avenue North From South Street to Riverside
Avenue
Fourth Street North From Woodlawn Avenue to Bodine
Street
James Street South From Alden Avenue to Norman
Avenue
Marcella L.
Duffy Way
[Added
12-18-2013 by
Ord. No.
2013-23]
East From Summer Street to Spring
Street
Peace Street North From Amboy Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Pond Street North From Amboy Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Railroad Avenue West From Peace Street to Hornberger
Avenue
Name of Street Location
Railroad Avenue Between Delaware Avenue and
Cedar Lane
§ 134-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-41
133:809
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Riverbank Drive
[Added
12-15-1993 by
Ord. No.
1993-39]
Counter-on the
oval upon entering
from the stub
portion from
Hornberger
Avenue the oval to
Hornberger
Avenue
The oval portion of Riverbank Drive,
excluding the stub portion that
connects Hornberger Avenue
Riverside Avenue East From Eighth Avenue to Seventh
Avenue
Riverview
Avenue
East From Winter Street to Summer
Street
Second Avenue North From Hornberger Avenue to
Riverside Avenue
Second Street East From Union Street to Boulevard
Street
Seventh Avenue South From Riverside Avenue to
Hornberger Avenue
Sixth Avenue North From South Street to Riverside
Avenue
Summer Street South From Riverview Avenue to Front
Street
Third Avenue South From Riverside Avenue to
Hornberger Avenue
Third Street West From Boulevard Street to Woodlawn
Avenue
Winter Street North From Front Street to Riverview
Avenue
§ 134-42. Schedule X: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-12, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations:
Name of Street Limits
Boulevard Street From Front Street to Fifth Street
Broad Street From Front Street to Ninth Street
Fifth Street [Added 11-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-30]
Entire length
§ 134-41 FLORENCE CODE § 134-42
133:810
Name of Street Limits
Fifth Street/Bodine Street/ Union
Street
From Broad Street to Front Street
Fifth Street/Grove Street From Broad Street to Delaware
Avenue
Firehouse Lane [Added 2-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-02]
Entire length, from its beginning at
Cedar Lane to its terminus at the
right-of-way of the New Jersey
Turnpike
Hamilton Avenue [Added
11-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-30]
Between Fifth Street and Delaware
Avenue (CR #656)
Hamilton Avenue/Fifth Street/Norman Avenue [Repealed 11-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-30]
Hornberger Avenue From Delaware Avenue to U.S.
Route No. 130
Main Street From Second Avenue to its westerly
terminus
Ninth Street From Broad Street to Cedar Lane
Norman Avenue [Added 11-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-30]
Between Fifth Street and
Hornberger Avenue
Olive Street From Cedar Lane to Delaware
Avenue
Station Road From Hornberger Avenue to
Delaware Avenue thence from
Delaware Avenue to U.S. Route No.
130
Wilbur Henry Drive From Broad Street to Pine Street
§ 134-43. Schedule XI: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Baird Drive Spruce Street and Baird Drive
Barbee Court [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Barbee Court and Trainor Circle
Bennett Street [Added 2-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-6]
Maple Avenue and Bennett Street
Burcliff Street Third Street and Burcliff Street
Carty Drive Potts Mill Road and Carty Drive
Challander Lane [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Challander Lane and Lubrano Lane
§ 134-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-43
133:811
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Challander Lane [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Challander Lane and Yockus Lane
Chanti Drive [Added 1-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-27; repealed
4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-7]
Maple Avenue and Chanti Lane
Church Street Fourth Street and Church Street
Church Street Second Street and Church Street
Church Street Third Street and Church Street
D'Annunzio Lane [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Old York Road and D'Annunzio Lane
D'Annunzio Lane [Added
4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Ridgway Drive and D'Annunzio Lane
Eighth Street Chestnut Street and Eighth Street
Eighth Street Walnut Street and Eighth Street
Emerick Avenue Parish Lane and Emerick Avenue
Eyre Street Second Street and Eyre Street
Eyre Street Third Street and Eyre Street
Fifth Avenue [Added 10-4-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-26]
South Street and Fifth Avenue
Fifth Street Richardson Street and Fifth Street
Foundry Street Third Street and Foundry Street
Fourth Street Fourth Street and Chestnut Street
Fourth Street Fourth Street and Eyre Street
Fourth Street Fourth Street and Pine Street
Fourth Street Fourth Street and Spruce Street
Fourth Street Fourth Street and Walnut Street
Hamilton Street Third Street and Hamilton Street
Highview Avenue Parish Lane and Highview Avenue
Iron Street Second Street and Iron Street
Iron Street Third Street and Iron Street
Kings Court Coachmans Drive and Kings Court
Knights Court Coachmans Drive and Knights Court
Lee Lane [Added 4-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08]
Lee Lane and Challander Lane
Lee Lane [Added 4-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08]
Lee Lane and Trainor Circle
Lubrano Lane [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Lubrano Lane and Barbee Court
§ 134-43 FLORENCE CODE § 134-43
133:812
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Lubrano Lane [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Lubrano Lane and Old York Road
Lucas Court Potts Mill Road and Lucas Court
Main Street Second Avenue and Main Street
Maple Avenue Parish Lane and Maple Avenue
Marcella L. Duffy Way [Added
12-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-23]
Spring Street
McCay Drive Third Street and McCay Drive
Park Street Richardson Street and Park Street
Pine Street Pine Street and Shaver Drive
Pond Street [Added 5-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-10]
Railroad Avenue
Progress Street Third Street and Progress Street
Quinton Street Third Street and Quinton Street
Richardson Street Fourth Street and Richardson Street
Richardson Street Third Street and Richardson Street
Ridgway Drive [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Ridgway Drive and Lubrano Lane
Ridgway Drive [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Ridgway Drive and Barbee Court
Ridgway Drive [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Ridgway Drive and Trainor Circle
Ridgway Drive [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Ridgway Drive and Yockus Lane
(nearest Old York Road)
Riverbank Drive 300 feet north of
Hornberger Avenue
Riverbank Drive and Riverbank
Drive
Roland Street Alden Avenue and Roland Street
School Lane [Added 11-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-27; amended
4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-7]
Parish Lane and School Lane
Second Street Second Street and Chestnut Street
Second Street Second Street and Foundry Street
Second Street Second Street and Spruce Street
Second Street Second Street and Walnut Street
Shaver Drive Spruce Street and Shaver Drive
Sixth Street Sixth Street and Chestnut Street
Sixth Street Sixth Street and Pine Street
Sixth Street Sixth Street and Spruce Street
§ 134-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-43
133:813
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Sixth Street Sixth Street and Walnut Street
Sixth Street [Added 8-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-08]
Winter Street
Spring Street Fourth Street and Spring Street
Spring Street Second Street and Spring Street
Spring Street Sixth Street and Spring Street
Spring Street Third Street and Spring Street
Sullivan Court [Added 11-1-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-27; repealed
4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-7]
Maple Avenue and Sullivan Court
Summer Street Fourth Street and Summer Street
Summer Street Second Street and Summer Street
Summer Street Sixth Street and Summer Street
Summer Street Third Street and Summer Street
Tall Timber Lane (southbound)
[Added 8-3-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-08]
Tall Timber Lane (westbound)
Third Street Third Street and Cedar Street
Third Street Third Street and Chestnut Street
Third Street Third Street and Oak Street
Third Street Third Street and Pine Street
Third Street Third Street and Spruce Street
Third Street Third Street and Walnut Street
Third Street Third Street and Woodlawn Avenue
Trainor Circle [Added 4-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-08]
Trainor Circle and Challander Lane
Union Street [Added 10-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-20]
Bodine Street
Wallace Avenue [Added 2-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-6]
Fifth Street
Wallace Avenue [Added 2-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-6]
Sixth Street
Wallace Avenue [Added 2-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-6]
Seventh Street
Walnut Court [Added 2-1-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-3]
Walnut Court at Walnut Street
Wilbur Henry Drive Pine Street and Wilbur Henry Drive
Winter Street Fourth Street and Winter Street
§ 134-43 FLORENCE CODE § 134-43
133:814
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Winter Street Second Street and Winter Street
Winter Street Third Street and Winter Street
Yockus Lane [Added 4-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08]
Yockus Lane and Old York Road
Yockus Lane [Added 4-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08]
Yockus Lane and Ridgway Drive
(furthest from Old York Road)
Yurcisin Street [Added 10-3-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-27]
Bennett Street
§ 134-44. Schedule XII: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
Intersection Yield Sign on
Railroad Avenue and Railroad
Avenue
For eastbound traffic only
§ 134-45. Schedule XIII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-15, the following locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Parish Lane [Added 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-15; repealed
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
Pine Street [Added
8-17-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-16; amended
10-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-18; 11-3-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-15]
East 7:00 a.m. to
3:30
p.m./School
days
Beginning at a point
339 feet from the
intersection of East
Front Street and
extending thence in a
southerly direction to
a point 122 feet
south thereof
Second Avenue [Added
7-14-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-13]
East Curb-to-curb width of
the entrance under
the arch of the
former Roebling
Main Gate entrance
§ 134-46. Schedule XIV: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-16, the following locations are
hereby designated as taxi stands:
§ 134-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-46
133:815
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 134-47. Schedule XV: Bus Stops. [Amended 6-3-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-14; 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-17, the following locations are
hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Delaware Avenue North Grove Street (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Grove Street
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Delaware Avenue South Grove Street (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Grove Street
and extending 120 feet westerly
therefrom
Delaware Avenue South Pelle Court (far side), beginning at the
easterly curbline of Pelle Court and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
Front Street North Bodine Street (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Bodine Street
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Front Street North Boulevard Street (near side), beginning
at the easterly prolongated curbline of
Boulevard Street and extending 120 feet
easterly therefrom
Front Street North Broad Street (far side), beginning at the
westerly curbline of Broad Street and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom
Front Street North Cedar Street (near side), beginning at
the easterly prolongated curbline of
Cedar Street and extending 105 feet
easterly
Front Street North Chestnut Street (near side), beginning
at the easterly prolongated curbline of
Chestnut Street and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
Front Street North Church Street (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Church Street
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 134-46 FLORENCE CODE § 134-47
133:816
Name of Street Side Location
Front Street North Foundry Street (near side), beginning
25 feet east of the easterly prolongated
curbline of Foundry Street and
extending 120 feet easterly therefrom
Front Street North Iron Street (far side), beginning at the
westerly prolongated curbline of Iron
Street and extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street North Pine Street (near side), beginning at the
easterly prolongated curbline of Pine
Street and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Front Street North Spruce Street (far side), beginning at
the westerly prolongated curbline of
Spruce Street and extending 120 feet
westerly therefrom
Front Street North Summer Street (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Summer Street
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Front Street North Walnut Street (near side), Beginning at
the easterly prolongated curbline of
Walnut Street and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
Front Street [Repealed 9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-14]
Front Street North Woodlawn Avenue (midblock), beginning
770 feet west of the westerly
prolongated curbline of Woodlawn and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
Front Street South Boulevard Street (near side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Boulevard
Street and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street South Broad Street (far side), beginning at the
westerly curbline of Broad Street and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
Front Street South Cedar Street (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Cedar Street
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street South Church Street (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Church Street
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 134-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-47
133:817
Name of Street Side Location
Front Street South Iron Street (near side), beginning at the
westerly curbline of Iron Street and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
Front Street South Richardson Street (near side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Richardson
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street South Spring Street (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Spring Street
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street South Spruce Street (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Spruce Street
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street South Walnut Street (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Walnut Street
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street [Repealed 9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-14]
Front Street South Woodlawn Avenue (midblock), beginning
770 feet west of Woodlawn and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue North 3rd Avenue (near side), beginning at the
easterly curbline of 3rd Avenue and
extending 120 feet easterly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue North 5th Avenue (near side), beginning at the
easterly curbline of 5th Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue North 10th Avenue (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of 10th Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue North Amboy Avenue (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Amboy Avenue
and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
Hornberger Avenue North Kinsman Road (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Kinsman Road
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue North Parish Lane (far side), beginning at the
westerly prolongated curbline of Parish
Lane and extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 134-47 FLORENCE CODE § 134-47
133:818
Name of Street Side Location
Hornberger Avenue South 3rd Avenue (near side), beginning at the
westerly prolongated curbline of 3rd
Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Hornberger Avenue South 5th Avenue (near side), beginning at the
westerly curbline of 5th Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue South 10th Avenue (far side), beginning at the
easterly prolongated curbline of 10th
Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
Hornberger Avenue South Kinsman Road (near side), beginning at
the westerly prolongated curbline of
Kinsman Road and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue South Norman Avenue (near side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of Norman
Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Hornberger Avenue
[Added 9-19-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-23]
South Beginning 80 feet east from the eastern
curbline of Norman Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
Hornberger Avenue South Parish Lane (midblock), between Parish
Lane and Station Road, beginning 200
feet west of Parish Lane and extending
135 feet westerly therefrom
§ 134-48. Schedule XVI: Left Turns Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-18, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following intersections:
Name of Street Location
Delaware Avenue [Added
2-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-2]
At the driveway located on Block
147.02, Lot 5
Hornberger Avenue At Hornberger Avenue eastbound at the
entrance to the parking area between
8th Avenue and 10th Avenue, 264 feet
east of the intersection of 10th Avenue
§ 134-49. Schedule XVII: U-Turns Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-19, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
§ 134-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-49
133:819
Name of Street Location
Broad Street At 9th Street
Broad Street From southwest on Broad Street to northeast
into angle parking slots between 3rd Street and
4th Street
Broad Street At Wilbur Henry Drive
Front Street From northwest on Front Street to south into
angle parking slots between Broad Street and
Spring Street
Front Street From northwest on Front Street to south into
angle parking slots between Summer Street and
Winter Street
§ 134-50. Schedule XVIII: Turning Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-20, no person shall make a turn
at any of the following locations:
(Reserved)
§ 134-51. Schedule XIX: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-21, no person shall operate a
motor vehicle in the following locations in excess of the speed listed below:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Cedar Lane Extension 35 From Old York Road to
Burlington-Columbus Road
Potts Mill Road [Added
4-1-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-08
40 From U.S. Route No. 130 to
Old York Road
Railroad Avenue [Added
4-1-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-08; amended
10-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-26]
35 From Delaware Avenue to
Cedar Lane
Riverbank Avenue [Added
12-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-39]
15 Entire length
Station Road [Added
8-17-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-16]
30 From Delaware Avenue to
Route 130
§ 134-49 FLORENCE CODE § 134-52
133:820
§ 134-52. Schedule XX: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-22, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection
(Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
(Reserved)
§ 134-53. Schedule XXI: Passing Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 134-23, no person shall pass another
vehicle at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Hornberger Avenue Delaware Avenue to U.S. Route No. 130
Ninth Street [Added
10-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-18]
Broad Street to Cedar Lane
Olive Street Cedar Lane to Delaware Avenue
Railroad Avenue [Added
2-3-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-2]
From the tip of the concrete island at the
approach to Cedar Lane (County Road
659) to Delaware Avenue (County Road
656), a distance of 3,180 feet
§ 134-54. Schedule XXII: Snow Parking Regulations.
When snow has fallen and accumulation is such that it covers the street or
highway and an emergency shall exist, no vehicles shall be parked on the
following streets or highways and portions thereof:
§ 134-55. Schedule XXIII: Bus Stop Shelters. [Added 10-5-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-20]
Bus stop shelters shall be located at the following bus stop locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Front Street
(westbound)
North Broad Street (far side) beginning at
the westerly curbline of Broad Street
and extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
Front Street
(westbound)
North Woodlawn Avenue (midblock)
beginning 770 feet west of the
westerly prolonged curbline of
Woodlawn and extending 135 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 134-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-55
133:821
Name of Street Side Location
Hornberger Avenue
(eastbound)
South 3rd Avenue (near side) beginning at
the westerly prolonged curbline of 3rd
Avenue and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
Front Street
(eastbound)
South Woodlawn Avenue
(midblock)beginning 770 feet west of
Woodlawn and extending 135 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 134-55 FLORENCE CODE § 134-55
133:822
ARTICLE VIA
Handicapped Parking
[Added 4-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-10]
§ 134-55.1. Handicapped parking on street.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Street Number of
Spaces
Location
Amboy Avenue 2 From a point 150 feet from the
northerly curbline of Pond Street to a
point 22 feet northerly therefrom
From a point 277 feet from the
southerly curbline of Peace Street to a
point 22 feet southerly therefrom
Broad Street
[Amended
2-5-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-4]
2 From a point 36 feet from the southerly
curbline of West Second Street to a point
22 feet southerly therefrom (space #1),
and at that ending point 22 feet
southerly therefrom (space #2)
From a point 19 feet from the northerly
curbline of West Fourth Street to a point
22 feet northerly therefrom
Church Street
[Added
10-3-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-13]
2 On the west side, from a point 41 feet
from the southerly curbline of West
Front Street to a point 22 feet southerly
therefrom (space No. 1), and at that
ending point 22 feet southerly therefrom
(space No. 2)
East Front
Street
1 From a point 187 feet from the easterly
curbline of Chestnut Street to a point 22
feet therefrom
East Second
Street
1 From a point 36 feet from the westerly
curbline of Chestnut Street to a point 22
feet westerly therefrom
East Third
Street [Added
2-6-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-6]
1 From a point 53 feet from the easterly
curbline of Broad Street to a point 22
feet therefrom
§ 134-55.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-55.1
133:823
Street Number of
Spaces
Location
Eighth Avenue 2 From a point 199 feet from the westerly
curbline of Hornberger Avenue to a point
22 feet westerly therefrom
From a point 100 feet from the easterly
curbline of Main Street to a point 22 feet
easterly therefrom
Fourth Avenue 2 From a point 21 feet from the westerly
curbline of Hornberger Avenue to a point
22 feet westerly therefrom
From a point 130 feet from the
westerly curbline of Hornberger Avenue
to a point 22 feet westerly therefrom
Railroad Avenue 1 From a point 329 feet from the southerly
curbline of Peace Street to a point 22
feet southerly therefrom
Third Avenue 2 From a point 47 feet from the easterly
curbline of Main Street to a point 22 feet
easterly therefrom
From a point 94 feet from the easterly
curbline of Main Street to a point 22 feet
easterly therefrom
From a point 271 feet from the
easterly curbline of Hornberger Avenue
to a point 22 feet therefrom
Walnut Street 2 From a point 26 feet from the southerly
curbline of East Front Street to a point
22 feet therefrom
From a point 48 feet from the southerly
curbline of East Front Street to a point
22 feet therefrom
West Fourth
Street
3 From a point 137 feet from the easterly
curbline of Richardson Street to a point
22 feet easterly therefrom
From a point 30 feet from the easterly
curbline of Winter Street to a point 22
feet easterly therefrom
From a point 104 feet from the easterly
curbline of Church Street to a point 22
feet easterly therefrom
§ 134-55.1 FLORENCE CODE § 134-55.2
133:824
§ 134-55.2. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and
Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4.197, the following offstreet
municipal parking yards and Board of Education property are
designated as Handicapped Parking Areas. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Clerk's office and NJDOT
Clerk's office and NJDOT
Clerk's office and NJDOT
Amboy Avenue Lot 1 As per sketch on file in Clerk's office
and NJDOT
Municipal Building 2 As per sketch on file in
Municipal Park Clerk's office and NJDOT
Parking Lot Clerk's office and NJDOT
Parking Lot Clerk's office and NJDOT
Parking Lot Clerk's office and NJDOT
Railroad Avenue 1 As per sketch on file in
Roebling Library 1 As per sketch on file in
Tenth Avenue 2 As per sketch on file in
Volunteers Park 2 As per sketch on file in
Water Works 3 As per sketch on file in
Wilkie Park 1 As per sketch on file in
§ 134-55.3. Handicapped parking on private property open to public
and to which public is invited (retail business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
§ 134-55.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-55.3
133:825
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Wawa (Broad Street) 1 As per sketch on file in Township
Clerk's office
Wawa (Rt. 130 and
Cedar Lane)
3 As per sketch on file in Township
Clerk's office
Burger King (Hunt
Circus Drive)
4 As per sketch on file in Township
Clerk's office
§ 134-55.4. Handicapped parking on all other private property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Sterling House 2 As per sketch on file in
Clerk's office and NJDOT
§ 134-55.5. Signs, pavement markings, installation and
maintenance.
The owners of the premises referred to in §§ 134-55.3 and 134-55.4 shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking space
reserved for use by handicapped persons, which signing and markings shall
be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The
cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement markings
shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The owner shall,
subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs and
pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to Florence
Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
§ 134-55.3 FLORENCE CODE § 134-55.5
133:826
ARTICLE VII
Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Operations
[Added 5-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-10]
§ 134-56. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
§ 134-57. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or, in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Florence
Township Police Department in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting
to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction of work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Township Police Department is in violation of this section.
§ 134-58. Hazardous conditions.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Township Police
Department with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be
called in case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance
site prior to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact
cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond
to the call from the Township Police Department to correct a hazardous
condition, the Township may respond to correct such hazardous conditions.
The reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Township shall be
charged to the person, contractor or utility responsible for such conditions.
A. The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above and
below ground, which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing
the normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the work force performing these operations.
B. The Township of Florence, in the County of Burlington, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, hereafter known as MUTCD, except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work is in
violation of this section.
§ 134-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-59
133:827
§ 134-59. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Township Police Department. If it
is determined by the officer in charge that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m
§ 134-60. Road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Township Police Department.
§ 134-61. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Township Police Department that same is
necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 134-62. Stop work.
The Township Police Department shall have the authority to stop work,
including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within
the street right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this section.
§ 134-63. Site preparation.
It is to be expressly understood that no material, vehicles or equipment are
to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction signs,
lights, devices, and pavement markings are installed.
§ 134-64. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the
County jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 134-59 FLORENCE CODE § 134-64
133:828
ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Parks and Municipal Parking Lots
[Added 7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-23]
§ 134-65. H. Kenneth Wilkie Memorial Rivers Edge Park.
The following regulations shall be enforceable at the H. Kenneth Wilkie
Memorial Rivers Edge Park:
§ 134-66. Volunteer Park.
The following regulations shall be enforceable at the Volunteer Park:
A. General parking:
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
Entrance/exit drives Both All Entire length
B. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan120 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Speed limits:
(1) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
Entrance/exit drives (mph) Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
A. General parking:
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
120. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-66
133:829
§ 134-67. Tenth Avenue Municipal Parking Lot.
The following regulations shall be enforceable at the Tenth Avenue
Municipal Parking Lot:
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
B. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan121 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc. must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan.122
D. Speed limits:
(1) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
A. General Parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
121. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
122. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-66 FLORENCE CODE § 134-67
133:830
(3) No person shall park a vehicle except for drop off purposes
between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., school days, at the locations
listed on the site plan.123
B. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan124 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours. No person shall stop or stand a
vehicle on the entire Tenth Avenue Lot between dusk and dawn.
D. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan.125
E. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Tenth Avenue and Road A Road A
F. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the following direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road B North Entire length
G. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
Road B 15 Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
123. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
124. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
125. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-67
133:831
§ 134-68. Railroad Avenue Parking Lot.
The following regulations shall be enforceable at the Railroad Avenue
Parking Lot:
H. Lane reservations. The lane locations described are designated as lane
use reservations and traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
Road A and Tenth Avenue Right lane of Road A westbound
reserved for right turn only
Road A and Tenth Avenue Left lane of Road A westbound
reserved for left turn only
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
B. Permit parking (no decal required) during certain hours.
Lot Hours Location
Lot A 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
As indicated on site plans126
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan127 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
D. Permit parking. The entire parking lot shall be designated as permit
parking, except for the handicapped parking space.
E. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Railroad Avenue and Road A Road A
F. Speed Limits.
126. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
127. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-67 FLORENCE CODE § 134-68
133:832
§ 134-69. Amboy Avenue Municipal Parking Lot.
The following regulations shall be enforceable at the Amboy Avenue
Municipal Parking Lot:
(1) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
A. General Parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
B. Permit parking: The entire lot shall be designated as permit parking,
except for the handicapped parking space.
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan128 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
D. Head-on parking only. The entire lot shall be designated as head-on
parking only.
E. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Pond Street and Road A Road A
F. Speed limits.
128. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-68 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-69
133:833
§ 134-70. Roebling Library Parking Lot.
The following regulations shall be enforceable at the Roebling Library
Parking Lot:
(1) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
Road B Both All Entire length
Road C Both All Entire length
Library Drive North All Entire length
(3) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Location
Library Drive South 30 min.
Sunday to
Saturday
Entire Length
B. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan129 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be
129. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-69 FLORENCE CODE § 134-70
133:834
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan.130
D. Through streets and stop intersections.
(1) Through streets. The following streets are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side
of each street intersecting the through street, except where yield
signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Road A Entire length
(2) Stop intersections The following described intersections are hereby
designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Hornberger Avenue and
Library Drive
Library Drive
Hornberger and Road A Road A
Sixth Avenue and Road A Road A
Sixth Avenue and Road C Road C
E. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Library Drive South (counterclockwise)
Entire length
F. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 15 Entire length
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
130. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-70 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-71
133:835
§ 134-71. Florence Township Municipal Complex.
The following regulations shall be enforceable at the Florence Township
Municipal Complex:
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire Length
B. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan131 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc. must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan.132
D. Through streets and stop intersections.
(1) Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Road A Entire length
(2) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Road B and Road C Road B
Road A and Broad Street Road A
Road C and Broad Street Road C
E. Speed limits.
131. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
132. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Municipal Complex.
§ 134-71 FLORENCE CODE § 134-71
133:836
§ 134-72. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 134-73. Traffic signs.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 134-74. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of $75.
§ 134-75. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1992-34 is repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
of the Township of Florence heretofore adopted which are inconsistent with
the terms and provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 15 Entire length
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
§ 134-71 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-75
133:837

ARTICLE IX
The Sterling House
[Added 4-21-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-8]
§ 134-76. General parking.
§ 134-77. Through streets and stop intersections.
§ 134-78. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of the streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Roads A, B Both All Entire length
Road B Both All Entire length
Road C South All Entire length
Sterling Circle Both All Entire length
C. Handicap parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Sterling Circle Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop sign(s) on
Road A and Road B Road B
Broad Street and Road A Road A
Road C and Lot B Road C
§ 134-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-78
133:839
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Sterling Circle West (counter-clockwise) Entire length
Road C West Entire length
§ 134-79. Speed Limits.
§ 134-80. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or presenting in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 134-81. Loading zone(s).
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for loading and unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Times Sides Location
Road C All North Entire length
§ 134-82. No-passing zone(s).
The following described roadways shall be designated as no-passing zones.
Name of Street Limits
Road A Entire length
Road B Entire length
§ 134-83. Signs.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to current Manual on Uniform
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 miles per hour.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
All roads 15 Entire Length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 134-78 FLORENCE CODE § 134-83
133:840
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.133
§ 134-84. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $75 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or both.
133. Editor's Note: See Art. VII. Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Operations.
§ 134-83 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-84
133:841

ARTICLE X
Hill Creek Farm
[Added 3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-5]
§ 134-85. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Brookside Drive and Old York Road Brookside Drive
Brookside Drive and Beatty Court Beatty Court
§ 134-86. Speed limits.
§ 134-87. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or presenting, in any way, a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 134-88. Signs.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 134-89. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $75 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Brookside Drive 25 Entire length
Beatty Court 15 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 134-85 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-89
133:843

ARTICLE XI
Golden Gate Estates
[Added 3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
§ 134-90. Through streets and stop intersection.
§ 134-91. Speed limits.
§ 134-92. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or presenting, in any way, a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 134-93. Signs.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Maple Avenue Entire length, between the municipal
jurisdiction intersects
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Sullivan Court and Chanti Lane Chanti Lane
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Chanti Lane 15 Entire length
Maple Avenue 25 Entire length
Sullivan Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 134-90 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-93
133:845
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 134-94. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $75 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 134-93 FLORENCE CODE § 134-94
133:846
ARTICLE XII
Burger King Restaurant
[Added 5-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-12]
§ 134-95. General parking.
§ 134-96. Through streets; stop intersections.
§ 134-97. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below as shown on the exhibits attached hereto and
made a part hereof.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles except
service drive
Both All Entire length
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide, as shown on the
attached exhibits and the filed site plan and signed with the R7-8 and
R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Road A Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Hunt Circus Drive and Cedar
Lane
Hunt Circus Drive
Hunt Circus Drive and Road A Hunt Circus Drive
Hunt Circus Drive and Road A Road A
Service drive and Aisle A Service drive
Aisles B and C and D Aisles C and D
§ 134-95 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-97
133:847
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road A North Between Aisles C and A
Service drive North Between Aisles C and A
Aisle A West Between Road A and Aisle B
§ 134-98. Speed limits.
§ 134-99. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway, or presenting, in any way, a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 134-100. Loading zone(s).
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials:
Name of Street Time Side Location
Road A All hours West As indicated on
site plan
Aisle A All hours North As indicated on
site plan
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Hunt Circus Drive 25 Entire length
B. For both directions and the one-way northbound direction of travel:
Name of Roadway
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
All aisles 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 134-97 FLORENCE CODE § 134-101
133:848
§ 134-101. Lane use reservations.
The land locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Hunt Circus Drive and Road A Eastbound left lane of Hunt Circus Drive
reserved for left turns only
Eastbound right lane of Hunt Circus
Drive reserved for through traffic only
§ 134-102. No-passing zones.
The following described streets or parts of streets shall be designated as
no-passing zones.
Name of Street Limits
Hunt Circus Drive Entire length
§ 134-103. Signs.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 134-104. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $75 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 134-101 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-104
133:849

ARTICLE XIII
Recreational Vehicle Parking Lot
[Added 8-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-08134]
§ 134-105. South Street Recreational Vehicle Lot.
Parking in that portion of Block 122, Lot 4, which has been specifically set
aside for the purpose of parking recreational vehicles and boats, shall be
limited to a recreational vehicle or boat owned by a resident of the Township
of Florence. Parking of recreational vehicles and boats shall be limited by
requiring an annual Township registration of the recreational vehicle or
boat as established in § 134-106 of this Code, and the parking shall be
further restricted as established in § 134-107 of this Code.
§ 134-106. Registration required.
A. Before parking on that portion of Block 122, Lot 4, which has been
specifically set aside for the purpose of parking recreational vehicles
and boats, the owner shall first register with the Township of Florence
and obtain a permit to park the recreational vehicle or boat on the lot.
Registration shall be on such forms as prepared by the Township Clerk.
Any recreational vehicle or boat not registered with the Township of
Florence to utilize the parking lot shall be in violation of this article and
shall be subject to the fines and penalties imposed by this chapter.
B. No one shall be permitted to use the municipal parking lot on South
Street without obtaining a permit from Florence Township. Applicants
for a permit must provide proof of a current valid registration for the
boat and trailer or other recreational vehicle or recreational trailer. A
permit will only be issued to residents of Florence Township. There is
an annual fee of $75 for the yearly permit or renewal permit. The
permit shall be valid for one year only and must be renewed each year.
Permits shall be valid from April 1 to March 31 of each year, with the
first permit after the effective date of this article being required by
December 1, 2011. Such first permit shall be valid until March 31,
2013. Failure to obtain a permit and visibly display said permit on the
boat, recreational vehicle, recreational trailer or camper will result in
the item being towed from the lot at the owner's expense. The item will
only be returned to its rightful owner upon payment of all impoundment
fees and towing related costs and upon issuance of a permit if the
owner intends to return to the South Street lot.
C. Operable condition required.
(1) All boats, trailers, campers and other authorized equipment
requiring a permit must always be in an operable condition when
parked in the Recreational Vehicle Lot. Further, prior to the
134. Editor's Note: The sections in this article were originally adopted as §§ 134-26.1 through
134-26.6 but were renumbered §§ 134-105 through 134-110 to better suit the
organizational structure of this chapter.
§ 134-105 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-106
133:851
§ 134-107. Maintenance and inspection required; additional use
restrictions. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
Recreation vehicles, boats, and trailers are forbidden from becoming a
public nuisance and/or from creating or violating any of the following
conditions:
issuance of a permit for the first time only, the item shall be
inspected by a designated representative of Florence Township to
ensure that it is in operable condition. No inspection is required
for renewal permits. However, for renewal permits, the owner must
substantiate to the Township that the equipment is actively being
used during the year prior to renewal. Proof of use may include,
but is not limited to:
(a) Issuance of a boat launch permit or proof of receipt for a boat
launch permit for boats.
(b) Receipts documenting the use of a boat on any waterway to
indicate that the boat has been used in the last year.
(c) Proof of use of a recreational vehicle such as receipts of
lodging at a campground or some other location where the
vehicle has been used in the last year.
(2) The intent of this provision is to ensure that equipment parked in
the lot is physically used during the year and that the lot is not used
to store unwanted, abandoned, inoperable, or unused boats,
recreational vehicles, campers, etc.
A. Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to remain
inoperative for a period of seven days. (Said period of time may be
extended for good cause by the Police Department.)
B. Is found without one or more tires.
C. Is parked without the current year’s registration or identification
markers as required by law and/or remains so for a period of 48 hours;
for any boat and trailer combination, both the boat and the trailer must
have a valid current year’s registration.
D. Is damaged and allowed to remain damaged so as to constitute a public
nuisance by harboring wildlife, insect infestations, or can contain water
and will promote mold growth or stagnation.
E. Repair: There shall be no repairing of boats, recreational campers,
trailers, or other equipment.
F. Alcoholic beverages: No alcoholic beverages can be stored in any
equipment parked in the South Street lot.
G. Vehicles: No vehicles or trucks of any type shall be parked in the lot.
§ 134-106 FLORENCE CODE § 134-107
133:852
§ 134-108. Mandatory removal of all equipment for yearly lot
maintenance.
§ 134-109. Liability.
All persons using the Recreational Vehicle Lot shall do so at their own risk.
The Township assumes no responsibility for theft, loss or damage to any
boats or any equipment located in the lot.
§ 134-110. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-07]
Any person who violates any one or more provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Unless specifically provided for
elsewhere in this chapter, a repeat offense of one or more provisions of this
chapter shall disqualify the owner from using the South Street Recreational
Parking Lot. Also, in the case of a continuing violation, such penalties may
H. Occupancy: No person shall inhabit, sleep in, and/or occupy any
recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer while parked in the lot. Inhabiting,
sleeping in or occupying any recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer will
cause immediate termination of a parking privilege, thus requiring the
immediate removal of the recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer.
I. Use of generators and pumps: No power generator(s) or pumps shall be
used at the recreational vehicle lot at any time.
J. Termination of parking privilege: Unless otherwise provided for
specifically herein, if a piece of equipment is removed from the lot more
than once for any reason stated herein or if a property owner is cited
more than once for violations related to the use of the South Street
Recreational Parking Lot, then he/she will permanently lose the
privilege of using this lot for parking.
A. From August 1 to August 15 of each year, or as otherwise posted and
noticed to the annual registrants permitted to use the lot, the owners of
items parked in the South Street Recreational Parking Lot shall be
removed from the lot so that the Public Works Department can properly
clean and maintain the South Street lot. Equipment owners can find an
alternative for their equipment or may use the designated area behind
the library on Hornberger Avenue during this time period only. Owners
can also relocate the equipment to their own property so long as the
equipment is parked in a location permitted under the Municipal Code.
No equipment can be parked on any public street if it conflicts with any
other provisions of the Township Code or other applicable state
statutes.
B. All equipment that is not removed from the South Street lot during this
time parked will be towed, and all costs shall be borne by the owner.
Notice of this permit condition shall be stated on the application for
each initial and renewal permit.
§ 134-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-110
133:853
be assessed for each day that the violation or violations continue unabated,
until such time as a violation or violations are corrected. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 134-110 FLORENCE CODE § 134-110
133:854
Chapter 140
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 2.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 79.
Housing — See Ch. 87.
Land development — See Ch. 91.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 116.
Stormwater quality protection — See Ch. 123.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 126.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 131.
§ 134-110 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 134-110
133:855

Part 1
Water Emergencies
ARTICLE I
Use of Water During Emergencies
§ 140-1. Determination of water shortage; public advertisement;
violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-32]
The Mayor shall determine that a water shortage, constituting an
emergency, exists, and notice of such determination shall be duly advertised
in a manner and form to constitute legal notice to the residents of the
Township. Such advertisement shall constitute a directive to the public to
conserve the use of municipal water. Public advertisement may be waived if
the emergency situation warrants the same. Under general police powers,
the Police Chief shall have the authority to investigate any reputed
unnecessary use of such water, and should he determine such use to be
unnecessary, the offender shall be summoned before the Municipal Judge
and be given a hearing thereupon on charges preferred by the Police Chief.
Should such offender be adjudged guilty, he shall be subject to fine not
exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or
to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
§ 140-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-1
133:857

Part 2
[AmenIdneddus3t-r1i9al- 1W9a8s6teB Ry eOgrudl.a Ntioo n1s986-2]
ARTICLE II
Control and Discharge of Industrial Wastes
§ 140-2. Purpose.
§ 140-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. This Part 2 sets forth uniform requirements for industrial contributors
into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the Township
and enables the Township to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403).
B. The objectives of this Part 2 are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wash waters and
sludges from the system.
(4) Provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
C. This Part 2 provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of the costs resulting from
the program established herein.
D. This Part 2 shall apply to the Township of Florence and to persons
outside the Township who are, by contract or agreement with the
Township, users of the Township POTW. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the Superintendent of the Township POTW shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this Part 2.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this Part 2, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 140-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-3
133:859
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director of the Department's Division of
Water Resources or his/her authorized representatives.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure five days at 20º C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — See "National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards" or "Pretreatment Standard."
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy or his/her authorized
representatives.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria and such additional pollutants
as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the
Township's NJPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such
pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required
by the NJPDES permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample consisting of several effluent
portions collected during a specific time period and combined to make
a representative sample.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the approval authority defined
hereinabove; or the Superintendent if the Township has an approved
pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
COOLING WATER — Any water used for the purpose of carrying away
excess heat and which may contain biocides used to control biological
growth.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of New Jersey.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above, if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
(3)
§ 140-3 FLORENCE CODE § 140-3
133:860
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — The liquid waste or liquid-borne waste
resulting from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling
of food and/or consisting of human excrement and similar wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, dispensing, handling, storage and/or sale of food.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a
compatible pollutant, as defined in this section.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW, including
holding tank waste discharged into the system.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INTERFERENCE —
Inhibiting or disrupting a domestic treatment works system or its
treatment process or operation so as to contribute to or cause a
violation of any condition of a state or federal permit under which
the domestic treatment works operate.
(1)
Discharging industrial process wastewater which, in combination
with existing domestic flows are of such volume and/or strength as
to exceed the domestic treatment process design capacity.
(2)
Preventing the use or disposal of sludge produced by the domestic
treatment works in accordance with Section 405 of the Federal
Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the New
Jersey Guidelines for the Utilization and Disposal of Municipal
and Industrial Sludges and Septage; or any regulations or criteria
or guidelines developed pursuant to the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. § 3251 et seq.),
the Federal Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.) and the Federal
Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.).
(3)
Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(h), pollutants in the effluent from an
industrial user shall not be considered to cause "interference"
where the industrial user is in compliance with specific prohibitions
or standards developed by federal, state or local governments.
(4)
§ 140-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-3
133:861
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific
category of industrial users.
NEW JERSEY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NJPDES) — The New Jersey system for the issuing, modifying.
suspending, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and
enforcing of discharge permits pursuant to the state act. The term also
includes discharge permits (NPDES) issued pursuant to Section 402 of
the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.).
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a Section
307(c) (33 U.S.C. § 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will
be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated
within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard
is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a "new source"
means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
date of promulgation of the standard.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group or society, including the State of New Jersey and
agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivisions created by
or pursuant to state law, and federal agencies, departments or
instrumentalities thereof.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. Solutions with a pH greater
than seven are said to be basic; solutions with a pH less than seven are
said to be acidic; pH equal to seven is considered neutral.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive substance, thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal or agricultural waste or other residue discharged
into the waters of the state.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The application of physical,
chemical and biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in
or alter the nature of the polluting properties of an industrial process
wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the treatment
works.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal or state rules
and regulations implementing Section 307 of the Clean Water Act of
1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) or N.J.S.A. 58:11-49, as well as any
nonconflicting state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards
or regulations, the more stringent thereof shall be applied.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292). which is
§ 140-3 FLORENCE CODE § 140-3
133:862
owned in this instance by the Township. For the purposes of this Part
2, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to
the POTW from persons outside the Township who are, by contract or
agreement with the Township, users of the Township's POTW.
REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator of Region II of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency or his/her authorized
representative.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user who discharges into the
Township treatment works industrial process wastewater which either:
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE ACT — The New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1 et seq.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or immediately following
any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer
Department of Florence Township or his/her duly appointed deputy,
agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total nonfilterable residue, as defined in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Florence or the Township Council of
Florence or the Florence Township Water and Sewer Department.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Those pollutants or combinations of pollutants,
including disease-causing agents, which, after discharge into the
(1) Exceeds 25,000 gallons per day;
Exceeds the mass equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of the
domestic waste of the Township treatment works based on its
design values as filed with the Department for any one of the
following parameters: BOD, COD or suspended solids;
(2)
(3) Exceeds 5% of the average daily flow of the treatment works; or
Contributes 5% or more of the daily mass loading of any of the
pollutants listed in § 140-8 which are entering the treatment works.
BOD, COD and suspended solids are defined in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
Where the design values for BOD, COD or suspended solids have
not been filed with the Department, the treatment works may use
the influent BOD, COD or suspended solids for the purpose of these
calculations.
(4)
§ 140-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-3
133:863
environment in sufficient quantities and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly or
indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis of
information available to the Commissioner, cause death, disease,
behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological
malfunctions, including malfunctions in reproduction, or physical
deformation in such organisms of their offspring.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any device or system, whether public or
private, used in the storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of
municipal or industrial waste of a liquid nature, including intercepting
sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, cooling towers and
ponds, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply, such
as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; any other works,
including sites for the treatment process or for ultimate disposal of
residues resulting from such treatment. Additionally, "treatment works"
means any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing,
storing, treating, separating or disposing of pollutants, including
stormwater runoff, or industrial waste in combined or separate
stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
TREATMENT WORKS PLANT — That portion of the treatment works
designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited
or prohibited by the effluent standard in effect and/or water whose
discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water quality
standards or interference with their designated uses.
USER — Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge
of industrial process wastewater into the treatment works.
USER CLASSIFICATION — A classification of users based on the 1972
(or subsequent) Edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
Manual prepared by the Federal Office of Management and Budget.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is discharged into or permitted to enter the Township treatment works.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT — As set forth in § 140-18 of
this Part 2.
B. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation; the Federal Guidelines for State and Local Pretreatment
Programs, EPA-43 0/9-76-017a, Volume 1, 1977, or the latest revision
§ 140-3 FLORENCE CODE § 140-3
133:864
§ 140-4. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
l — Liter.
mg — Milligrams.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
N.J.A.C. — New Jersey Administrative Code.
NJPDES — New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System.
N.J.S.A - New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
SIC — Standard industrial classification.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
USC — United States Code.
§ 140-5. General discharge prohibitions.
thereof; the Clean Water Act; N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.; or N.J.S.A.
58-11-49 et seq., 1972.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutants or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions
apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to
the national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
state or local pretreatment standard or requirements. A user may not
contribute the following substances to any POTW:
(1) Oil and grease.
(a) Oil and grease from industrial facilities in concentrations or
amounts violating pretreatment standards; this includes
petroleum-based hydrocarbons as determined by silica gel
absorption.
(b) Wastewater from industrial facilities containing flotable fats,
wax, grease or oil.
§ 140-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-5
133:865
(c) Total fats, wax, grease or oil concentration of more than 100
mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
thirty-two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(32º and 150º F.) [zero degrees and sixty-five degrees Celsius
(0º and 65º C.)] at the point of discharge into the treatment
works.
(2) Explosive and/or flammable mixtures. Liquids, solids or gases
which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be
sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to
cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
treatment works or to the operation of the works. At no time shall
two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point
of discharge into the treatment works, be more than 5% nor any
single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter. Such materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
(3) Noxious materials. Pollutants which, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, are malodorous, are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or health or are present in sufficient
concentrations to prevent entry into the treatment works for its
maintenance and repair.
(4) Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been ground
or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in
the treatment works, with no particle greater than one-half ( 1/2)
inch in any dimension; the discharge of any improperly shredded
garbage by a user, as defined herein, is prohibited.
(5) Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes of any type in any
concentration.
(6) Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous wastes which will or may
cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere with
the proper operation of the treatment works. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, grease, improperly shredded
garbage, animal tissues, diseased human organs or tissue fluids,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble
dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil and
similar substances.
(7) Excessive discharge. Any substance which will cause the POTW to
violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the
§ 140-5 FLORENCE CODE § 140-5
133:866
receiving water quality standards. Any pollutants, including oxygen
demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know
will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load
have a flow rate or contain a concentration or qualities of pollutants
that exceed, for any time period longer than 15 minutes, more than
five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities
or flow during normal operation. Any wastewater which causes a
hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
(8) Toxic pollutants. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic
effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the
limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
(9) Stormwater. Discharge of stormwater, including surface and
ground water from sump pumps and cellar drains, into the
treatment works from any source.
(10) Discolored materials. Wastes with color not removable by the
treatment works, and all wastes containing more than 100 APUH
color units.
(11) Substances interfering with sludge management. Any substance
which may cause the POTW's sludge to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process
where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In
no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act;
any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or the New Jersey
Guidelines for the Utilization and Disposal of Municipal and
Industrial Sludges and Septage.
(12) Corrosive wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the treatment works. All wastes discharged to the
treatment works must have a pH value in the range of five point
zero (5.0) to nine point zero (9.0) standard units. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, acids, alkalies, sulfides,
concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds and substances
which will react with water to form acidic or alkaline products.
(13) Heat. Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment works, resulting in interference or causing damage, but
in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature exceeds 65º
§ 140-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-5
133:867
§ 140-6. Stricter federal standards to apply; notification of users.
Upon the effective date of the federal categorical pretreatment standard for
a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent
than limitations imposed under this Part 2 for sources in that subcategory,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Part 2. The
Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 140-7. Modification of standards.
Where the Township's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the
Township may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific
limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall
mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature
of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or
harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system as measured
according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of the General
Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution (40
CFR 403) promulgated pursuant to the Act. The Township may modify
pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the
requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval
from the approval authority is obtained.
§ 140-8. Specific discharge limitations; surcharge.
C. (150º F.) at the treatment works and 40º C. (104º F.) at the
treatment works plant, unless the Department, upon request of the
POTW, approves alternate temperature limits.
B. When the Superintendent determines that a user(s) is contributing to
the POTW any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as
to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the Superintendent shall
advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW,
develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the interference
with the POTW and advise the Business Administrator of the user's
violation.
A. No waste shall be permitted to be discharged into the Township's
sewage system which contains physical, chemical and biological
characteristics in concentrations in excess of those in domestic sewage.
These specific limitations include, but are not limited to, the following;
Substance Concentration
Total suspended solids 300 mg/l
Biochemical oxygen demand (5 days, 20º
C.)
250 mg/l
Total organic carbon 250 mg/l
§ 140-5 FLORENCE CODE § 140-8
133:868
Chemical oxygen demand 600 mg/l
Total nitrogen, as N 40 mg/l
Total phosphorus, as P 50 mg/l
Oil and grease 100 mg/l
pH 5.5 - 9.0 SU
Temperature (not to exceed) 65º C.
Arsenic 0.05 mg/l
Cadmium 0.01 mg/l
Copper 1.0 mg/l
Cyanide 0.2 mg/l
Lead 0.05 mg/l
Mercury 0.002 mg/l
Silver 0.05 mg/l
Total chromium 1.0
Surfactants 0.5 mg/l
Total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons 10.0 mg/l
B. In the event that any user exceeds the discharge limitations set forth
above, a surcharge shall be imposed until such time as the excessive
discharge is corrected. Any excessive discharge shall be treated as a
violation of the wastewater contribution permit and shall be subject to
the conditions set forth in §§ 140-24 through 140-27.
C. In no instance shall concentrations in excess of 1,200 mg/l for COD, 600
mg/l for BOD and TSS, 80 mg/l for total nitrogen and 150 mg/l for oil
and grease be permitted.
D. Surcharge.
(1) The surcharge shall be calculated as 115% of the applicable volume
charge for each 100 mg/l or portion thereof by which the total
waste discharge is in excess of 250 mg/l for BOD or 300 mg/l for
TSS. A surcharge of 104% of the applicable volume charge shall be
calculated for each 10 mg/l or portion thereof by which the waste
discharge exceeds 40 mg/l for total nitrogen or 100 mg/l for oil and
grease. The surcharge shall be applied independently for each of
the above-listed parameters and in addition to the applicable
volumetric charge.
(2) The surcharge factor shall be calculated as follows:
Surcharge
=
(1.15) exp (BOD5 - 250)/100
+
(1.15) exp (SS - 300)/100
§ 140-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-8
133:869
§ 140-9. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this Part 2.
§ 140-10. Right of revision.
The Township reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the treatment works if deemed
necessary to comply with objectives presented in § 140-2 of this Part 2.
§ 140-11. Dilution of waste not substitute for treatment.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
federal categorical pretreatment standards or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the Township or state.
§ 140-12. Accidental discharges.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by Part 2 of this chapter. Facilities
to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided
and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans
showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall
be submitted to the Superintendent for review and shall be approved by
him/her prior to construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete
such a plan by May 1, 1986. No user who commences contribution to the
POTW after the effective date of Part 2 of this chapter shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures
have been approved by the Superintendent. Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from
the responsibility of modifying his/her facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this Part 2.
§ 140-13. Telephone notice.
In the case of an accidental discharge or, if for any reason a user does not
comply or will be unable to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this
Part 2, the user responsible for such discharge shall immediately telephone
and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location
+
(1.04) exp (total nitrogen - 40)/10
+
(1.04) exp (oil and grease - 100)/10
(3) For typical domestic sewage, the surcharge shall be equal to zero.
§ 140-8 FLORENCE CODE § 140-13
133:870
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume. Furthermore,
such user shall take immediate action to prevent interference with the
treatment process and/or damage to the treatment works.
§ 140-14. Written report.
Within five days following an accidental or noncomplying discharge, the
user shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing
the date, time and cause of the discharge, the quantity and characteristics
of the discharge and corrective action taken at the time of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish
kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed by this Part 2 or other applicable law.
§ 140-15. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
§ 140-16. Fees.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Township's wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the Township's Schedule of Charges
and Fees.135
B. Charges and fees. The Township may adopt charges and fees which may
include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Township's pretreatment program.
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(4) Fees for permit applications.
(5) Fees for filing appeals.
(6) Fees for consistent removal of pollutants otherwise subject to
federal pretreatment standards.
135. Editor's Note: The schedule is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 140-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-16
133:871
§ 140-17. Permit required for discharge.
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a Township permit to any natural
outlet within the Township or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Township and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the
Township in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 140-18. Wastewater contribution permits.
(7) Other fees as the Township may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
C. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by Part 2 of this chapter
and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Township.
A. General permits. All significant users proposing to connect to or to
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit
before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing
significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain
a wastewater contribution permit within 60 days after the effective date
of this Part 2.
B. Permit application.
(1) Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the Township, an application in the form
prescribed by the Township, and accompanied by a fee of $500 plus
a fee in the amount of $200 for each year of the permit. Existing
users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 30
days after the effective date of Part 2 of this chapter, and proposed
new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or
contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user
shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
(a) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(b) The SIC number according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in § 140-5 of Part 2 of this chapter
as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended.
(d) Time and duration of contribution.
(e) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
§ 140-16 FLORENCE CODE § 140-18
133:872
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(h) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal
pretreatment standards and a statement regarding whether or
not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.
(i) Each application shall contain a certification by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey that the
information required by Subsection B(1)(c) through B(1)(h)
above is accurate and correct.
(j) If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule.
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in Subsection B(10)(a) shall
exceed nine months.
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Superintendent, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user
to return the construction to the schedule established. In
no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
§ 140-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-18
133:873
(k) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(l) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(m) Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(n) Any other information as may be deemed by the Township to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(2) The Township will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Township may issue a wastewater
contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
C. Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater
contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a user subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by
§ 140-17, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national
categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an
existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the
Superintendent, within 180 days after the promulgation of an
applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard, the information
required by Subsection B(1)(h) and B(1)(j).
D. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of Part 2 of this chapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Township. Permits
may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
§ 140-18 FLORENCE CODE § 140-18
133:874
§ 140-19. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports. (See § 140-19.)
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the Township and affording
Township access thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification of the Township or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per § 140-14.
(11) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to ensure
compliance with Part 2 of this chapter.
E. Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply
for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the Township during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements as identified in §§ 140-5 through
140-15 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to
the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
F. Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
Township. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the
terms and conditions of the existing permit.
A. Compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by
pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and
§ 140-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-19
133:875
maximum daily flow for those process units in the user facility which
are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user
into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
B. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the Superintendent during the months of June and December,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by
the Superintendent, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a
record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period,
exceeded the average daily flow reported in § 140-18B(1)(e). At the
discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc.,
the Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted.
(2) The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which
are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
Subsection B(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by treatment standards in the effluent of the user. These
reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass, where requested by the Superintendent, of
pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be
prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR 136, and amendments thereto or with any
other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the Administrator. (Comment: Where 40 CFR 136, does not include
a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the EPA publication entitled "Sampling and
Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for
Priority Pollutants," April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with
§ 140-19 FLORENCE CODE § 140-19
133:876
§ 140-20. Monitoring facilities.
§ 140-21. Inspection and sampling.
§ 140-22. Pretreatment facilities; records to be made available.
any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
Administrator.)
A. The Township shall require to be provided and operated at the user's
own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. All monitoring facilities shall be subject to review and
approval by the Superintendent. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user's premises at a location approved by
the Superintendent. The facility shall not be constructed in a street or
sidewalk or shall be located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in the facility to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and sampling and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
C. The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the Township's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 60
days following written notification by the Township.
A. The Township shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this Part 2 is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Township or its
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
or in the performance of any of their duties.
B. The EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into his premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with his security guards so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, personnel from the Township, approval authority
and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
A. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this Part 2 and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as
specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities
§ 140-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-22
133:877
§ 140-23. Confidential information.
§ 140-24. Suspension of permit; severance of sewer connection.
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Township
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Township for review and shall
be acceptable to the Township before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to produce an effluent acceptable to the Township under the provisions
of this Part 2. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities
or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the
Township prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
B. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon
request.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this Part 2, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NJPDES) permit and/or the pretreatment programs: provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the
state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the Township as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
Township until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
A. The Township may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the Township, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the Township
to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
§ 140-22 FLORENCE CODE § 140-24
133:878
§ 140-25. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this Part 2, or applicable
state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in
accordance with the procedures of §§ 140-24 through 140-27:
§ 140-26. Show cause hearing.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Township shall take
such steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW
system or endangerment to any individuals. The Township shall
reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the
Township within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
D. Violation of conditions of the permit.
A. The Township may order any user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the
Township Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
of a hearing to be held by the Township Council regarding the violation,
the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement
action and directing the user to show cause before the Township
Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 days before the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
B. The Township Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or
employee of the Water and Sewer Department to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Township Council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
§ 140-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-26
133:879
§ 140-27. Legal action.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
Township's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of Part 2
of this chapter or federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order
of the Township, the Solicitor may commence an action for appropriate legal
and/or equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 140-28. Violations and penalties.136
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Township Council
or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of Part
2 of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days or serve a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof, for
each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties
provided herein, the Township may recover reasonable attorney's,
engineering or any other professional fees, court costs, court reporters' fees
and expenses of litigation arising out of violation of Part 2 of this chapter by
appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated Part 2 of
this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Township Council for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to Part 2 of this chapter, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
D. After the Township Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following
a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 140-26 FLORENCE CODE § 140-29
133:880
§ 140-29. Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 2 or wastewater
contribution permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Part 2
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both.
§ 140-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-29
133:881

Part 3
Water And Sewer Service Regulations
ARTICLE III
Rules Applicable to Both Water and Sewerage Service
§ 140-30. Definitions.
As used in this Part 3, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER or OWNER — The applicant for water and/or sewerage service
at one household or business, whether owner or tenant, and who enters into
an agreement therefor.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — The normal waterborne fluid wastes from
residences, commercial establishments, institutions and industrial
establishments, limited to the wastes from kitchens, bathrooms, water
closets, lavatories and laundries.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from commercial or industrial
processes, as distinct from domestic sewage.
MAIN — The Township-owned or -leased piping and appurtenances in or
along public highways and streets or along privately owned rights-of-way,
used for the transmission or distribution of water to or for the collection of
domestic sewage or industrial wastes from its customers.
OTHER THAN RESIDENTIAL USER — All users and connections other than
residential, including but not in limitation to business, commercial, industry,
restaurants, taverns, theaters, camps, churches, schools, hospitals, etc.
RESIDENTIAL USER —
SINGLE-FAMILY — A building on a lot, designed and occupied
exclusively as a residence for one family.
A.
TWO-FAMILY — A building on a lot, designed and occupied exclusively
as a residence for two families.
B.
THREE-FAMILY — A building on a lot, designed and occupied
exclusively as a residence for three families.
C.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building on a lot, designed and occupied
exclusively as a residence for four or more families.
D.
GARDEN, HIGH-RISE, TRAILER CAMPS, CONDOMINIUMS and
MULTIPLE-TYPE — A multiple dwelling or group of multiple dwellings
on a lot, which is held and is designed to be held in single ownership,
on which common yards and other common facilities and services may
be provided.
E.
BOARDINGHOUSE, LODGING HOUSE or NURSING HOME — A
dwelling used for the purpose of providing lodging, or both lodging and
F.
§ 140-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-30
133:883
TOWNSHIP — The Florence Township Water and Sewer Department.
§ 140-31. Application requirements.
meals, for pay or compensation of any kind, whether computed by the
day, week or month, to persons occupying such dwelling, other than
members of a family.
A. Water and sewerage service connections will be considered upon
written application signed at the Township Office by the property owner
or his properly authorized agent. Water and sewerage service will be
considered only upon receipt of an executed contract by the property
owner and tenant. Blank forms for all applications prepared for their
respective services will be furnished by the Township, and all
applications must receive the approval of the Township before
connection is made or either class of service is furnished.
B. No application for service will be accepted by the Township until the
applicant has paid or made satisfactory arrangements to pay all arrears
and charges due by the applicant at any premises now or heretofore
occupied by him.
C. The accepted application shall constitute a contract between the
Township and the applicant, obliging the applicant to pay to the
Township rates as established from time to time and to comply with its
rules and regulations.
D. Applications for service connections may be accepted subject to water
and sewer mains existing in streets or rights-of-way abutting the
premises to be served.
E. When a prospective customer has made application for a new service or
has applied for the reinstatement of an existing service, it is assumed
that the piping and fixtures on the applicant's premises are in good
condition, and the Township will not be liable in any event for any
accident, breaks or leakage arising in any way in connection with the
supply of water or failure to supply same or the freezing of water pipes
or fixtures of the customer nor for any damage to the property which
may result from the usage of water supplied to the premises.
F. A new application must be made and approved by the Township upon
any change in ownership of the property when the owner is the
customer or in any tenancy where the tenant is the customer or in the
service as described in the application, and the Township shall have the
right, upon five days' notice, to discontinue the water supply until such
new application has been made and approved. Although property may
be occupied or leased to a tenant and the tenant may have paid the
water and sewer bills, the owner of the property is responsible for
payment of any water and sewer bills not paid by the tenant.
G. Industrial and commercial establishments making application for water
and/or sanitary sewerage service, in addition to making written
§ 140-30 FLORENCE CODE § 140-31
133:884
§ 140-32. Payment of disputed bills.
The payment of any disputed bill, within the meaning of these rules, shall
be payment of the bill, with or without penalty, within 30 days following the
period for which the bill was rendered or payment within 30 days following
presentation of the bill or the payment of any contested bill, payment of
which is withheld beyond the period herein mentioned if the dispute is
terminated substantially in favor of the customer and if payment is made by
the customer within 10 days thereafter.
§ 140-33. Discontinuance of service; renewal.
application for such services, shall furnish a detailed description of the
type and size of buildings; the nature of the business to be conducted
in each structure; the number and type of fixtures to be served; and
the type, volume and chemical characteristics of the waste to be
discharged. Such applicants shall also furnish the Township four copies
of plans showing the following:
(1) The boundaries of the property.
(2) The location within the property of the structures to be served.
(3) The location and profile, with respect to finished grade, of the
services.
(4) Details of the proposed connections to the water and sewerage
systems and arrangements and details of meter installation. With
respect to admissibility of industrial wastes, see Part 2 of this
chapter.
H. Renewal of service. Water service will be renewed under proper
application when the conditions under which such service was
discontinued are corrected and upon the payment of all charges
provided in the schedule of rates or rules of the Township.
I. Signatures of owner and tenant. Where a water and/or sewer
connection has been previously installed and service is desired, a
proper application shall be signed by the owner and tenant.137
A. All agreements covering water services shall continue in force, unless
and until receipt of reasonable notice, in writing, of a desire to
terminate the contract. Water service to any premises will be
terminated upon the written order of the applicant without in any way
affecting the existing agreement for sewer service. Sewer service will
not be considered a service subject to shutoff. Requests for
discontinuance of sewer service will be permitted only in cases of
demolition, fire, flooding or by order of the Board of Health for vacation
of the building serviced for health reasons. The owner will be
137. Editor's Note: Former § 140-16, Deposits, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-17.
§ 140-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-33
133:885
responsible for the payment of sewer rental charges at the minimum
charges as established by the Township during the time the property or
structure is vacant.
B. Service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
(1) Misrepresentation in the application.
(2) Willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures or otherwise.
(3) Failure to comply with restrictions imposed under Subsection C
hereof.
(4) Use of water for any other property or purpose than that described
in the application.
(5) Molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stopcock or seals or any
other appliance.
(6) Vacancy.
(7) Neglecting to make or renew deposits or for nonpayment of any
charge accruing under the application.
(8) Refusal of reasonable access to the property for purposes of
inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meters.
(9) Making or refusing to sever any cross-connection between a pipe or
fixture carrying water furnished by the Township and a pipe or
fixture carrying water from any other source.
(10) Violation of any rules of the Township.
C. The customer shall not turn the water on or off at any corporation stop,
curb stop or meter valve, or disconnect or remove the meter or permit
its disconnection or removal without the written consent of the
Township.
D. As necessity may arise in the event of a breakdown emergency or for
any other unavoidable cause, the Township shall have the right to cut
off the water supply temporarily in order to make necessary repairs,
connections, etc., but the Township will use all reasonable and practical
measures to notify the customer of such discontinuance of service. In
such case, the Township shall not be liable for any damage or
inconvenience experienced by the customer or any claim against it at
any time for interruption in service, lessening of the supply, inadequate
pressure, poor quality of water or for any causes beyond its control.
When the supply of water is to be temporarily interrupted, notice will be
given, when practicable, to all customers affected by the temporary
interruption of service, stating the probable duration of the interruption
and also the purpose of the interruption.
§ 140-33 FLORENCE CODE § 140-33
133:886
§ 140-34. Reserve supply.
The Township shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply of water at
all times in storage to provide for fire and other emergencies or may restrict
or regulate the quantity of water used by the customer in case of scarcity or
whenever the public welfare may so require.
§ 140-35. Nonliability of Township for certain services.
It is agreed, by parties receiving public fire service, private fire service or
any service, that the Township does not assume any liability as insurer of
property or person and that the Township does not guarantee any special
service, pressure, capacity or facility, other than is permitted by the
ordinary and changing operating conditions of the Township, as the same
exists from day to day. It is agreed, by the parties receiving service, that
the Township shall be free and exempt from any and all claims for injury
to any persons or property by reasons of fire, water, failure to supply water
pressure or capacity.
§ 140-36. Bills and payments.
E. Renewal of service. Water service will be renewed, under a proper
application, when the conditions under which such service was
discontinued have been corrected and upon the payment of all proper
charges or amounts provided in the schedule of rates or rules of the
Township due from the applicant.
A. Bills are payable at any office or pay agency of the Township so
designated by the Township.
B. Regular meter readings will be made quarterly, and bills will be
rendered as soon as practicable after the reading of the respective
meters. In case of fire service, bills will be rendered on or about the first
days of January and July for service during the preceding six months. All
bills are due and payable on presentation or delivery. All customers
connected to the water system will be billed and shall pay the minimum
charge quarterly. [Amended 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-24]
C. Delinquent bills.
(1) If a bill remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after presentation, it
shall be classed as delinquent. Payments made by mail will be
credited as received on the date of mailing, as evidenced by the
United States Postal Service cancellation stamp. If a bill remains
unpaid 14 days after being classed as delinquent, service may be
discontinued at any time after having given not less than five days'
notice. If service is thus discontinued, it will not be restored until
all unpaid bills and all charges, including the turn-on charge, are
paid or satisfactory arrangements made for payment.
§ 140-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-36
133:887
§ 140-36.1. Final meter reading upon sale of property. [Added
5-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-10; 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-24]
At the time of the sale of real property which is serviced by public water and
sewer and located in the Township of Florence, it shall be the responsibility
of the buyer of the property to contact the Township of Florence at least
10 days in advance of the date of closing in order to arrange for a reading
of the property water meters within 48 hours of the closing date in order
to provide the buyer and seller with a final water and sewer bill. A perproperty
fee of $25 shall be charged for this service. In the event that the
buyer fails to make these arrangements for a final meter reading, the buyer
will be responsible for water and sewer service charges that were incurred
prior to the date the buyer purchased the premises.
§ 140-37. Main extensions.
(2) If any bill or part thereof rendered for repairs, installation, service,
meters or water and sewer usage is not paid before the 30th day
following the date the bill is rendered, such bill or part thereof shall
be considered delinquent, and the Tax Collector is hereby directed
to charge and collect interest at the prevailing rate fixed for
interest for delinquent real estate taxes from the time of such
delinquency until paid. Where any bill or part thereof has become
delinquent and remains unpaid for six months, then, upon
certification by the Tax Collector to the Superintendent concerned,
the governing body may direct said Superintendent concerned to
discontinue the service, water and/or sewer facilities, or both, to
such customer, and said service shall not be restored by the
Superintendent concerned until the Tax Collector shall certify that
he has received payment in full for the bill rendered, together with
any interest thereon and the turn-on charge. [Amended
6-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-17]
D. No abatement on meter bills will be made for leaks or for water wasted
by damaged fixtures.
A. General regulations.
(1) A bona fide customer, as referred to in succeeding subsections
hereafter, shall be a customer of permanent and established
character, exclusive of the real estate developer or builder, who
receives service at a premises improved with structures of a
permanent nature.
(2) Any facilities installed under the provisions of this section shall be
the sole property of the Township.
(3) The size, type, quality of materials and their location will be
specified by the Township, and the actual construction will be done
by the Township or by a constructing agency acceptable to it.
§ 140-36 FLORENCE CODE § 140-37
133:888
(4) Adjustment of any difference between the estimated cost and the
reasonable actual cost of any main extension made hereunder will
be made within 60 days after the actual cost of the installation has
been ascertained by the Township.
(5) Extensions for fire hydrant service, private fire-protection service
and temporary service will not be made under this rule.
B. Extension of service.
(1) Individuals. The Township may, depending upon its financial ability,
extend its mains to serve new bona fide customers, at its own
expense, other than to serve subdivisions, tracts, housing projects,
industrial developments or organized service districts, when the
required total length of the main extension from the nearest
distribution main or sanitary sewer main is not in excess of 65 feet
per service connection of each type. If the total length of the main
extension of each or either type is in excess of 65 feet per service
connection applied for, the applicant or applicants for such services
shall be required to advance to the Township, before construction
is commenced, that portion of the reasonable estimated cost of
such extension over and above the estimated reasonable cost of 65
feet of the main extension per service connection, including the
cost of service connections and meters, and the cost of increasing
the size or capacity of the Township's existing mains or any other
facilities used or necessary for supplying the proposed extension.
(2) Subdivisions, tracts, housing projects, industrial developments or
organized service districts.
(a) An applicant for a main extension to serve a new subdivision,
tract, housing project, industrial development or organized
service district shall be required to advance to the Township,
before construction is commenced, the estimated reasonable
cost of installation of the mains from the nearest existing main
at least equal in size to the main required to serve such
development, including necessary service stubs or service
pipelines, fittings, valves and housings therefor, manholes and
other appurtenances, and including public fire hydrants. If, in
the opinion of the Township, additional facilities are required
specifically to provide pressure or storage as a result of the
service requested, the cost of such facilities may be included in
the advance.
(b) The money so advanced will be subject to refund by the
Township, without interest, to the party or parties entitled
thereto to the extent that the advance exceeds the actual cost
of construction, engineering and legal contingencies.
(c) The Township may, at its option, permit the developer to
contract directly for the performance of all work by reliable
established contractors. Prior to the commencement of work,
§ 140-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-37
133:889
the names of all contractors and subcontractors to be
employed must be approved by the Township and a
performance bond posted in the full amount of the Water and
Sewer Engineer's estimate of cost. After the completion of all
work and prior to the acceptance of lines and appurtenances
by the Township, the developer will post a two-year
maintenance bond in the amount of 10% of the value of work
to be accepted. The developer shall reimburse the Township
for all legal and engineering fees charged by its consultants
in the preparation of contracts, bonds, plans, specifications,
supervision, resident inspection and all work incidental to the
construction engaged in by the developer.
(3) Design standards and future maintenance. In addition to any other
design standards regarding water main extensions, the following
shall apply: [Added 10-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-25]
(a) Waterlines whose primary function is to and will be to serve
adjacent properties shall be a minimum of eight inches in
diameter.
(b) Waterlines which serve as feeder lines to several streets shall
be a minimum of eight inches in diameter and shall be laid out
to provide loops connecting with other waterlines which
enclose an area not greater than 1/4 of a square mile.
(c) Waterlines which provide the main feed from present or future
sources of water supply or storage shall be not less than 12
inches in diameter and shall be installed in such a fashion as to
form loops connecting with other waterlines which enclose an
area not greater than one mile square.
(d) Waterlines whose only purpose is to serve as feeder lines to
abutting properties and to which there is no fire hydrant
connected and which do not serve more than four residences
shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter if specifically
approved by the Township Water and Sewer Engineer and
Water and Sewer Superintendent.
(e) Hydrant and valve locations shall be constructed in such a
fashion that not more than one hydrant is affected by shutting
off any one section of water supply. Hydrants shall be located
not more than 600 feet apart along any street line and shall be
installed in such a manner that not more than three valves are
necessary to shut off any one section of the subdivision tract.
Each hydrant shall be installed so that there is a shutoff valve
between the hydrant and the water main.
(f) No less than three valves shall be provided for each Tconnection,
one on each side of the connection. No less than
§ 140-37 FLORENCE CODE § 140-37
133:890
§ 140-38. General provisions.
four valves shall be provided for each cross-connection, one on
each side of the connection.
(g) Fire hydrants shall have the following minimum discharge
ports:
[1] One four-and-one-half-inch main steamer connection with
national standard fire threads.
[2] Two two-and-one-half-inch side connections (one on each
side of the hydrant barrel set back 90º from the main
steamer connection with both being on the same plane as
the main steamer connection) with national standard fire
threads.
[3] The hydrant main valve size shall be a minimum of 4 1/2
inches full flow.
(h) Prior to preliminary and final subdivision approval all proposed
water supply plans and hydrant locations shall be submitted to
the Board of Fire Commissioners for their review and approval.
(i) Where the water distribution supply system is installed outside
of a public right-of-way, easements or rights-of-way shall be
provided in favor of the Township for future maintenance of the
water supply distribution systems.
A. Turn-on charge. When water has been turned off from any premises
because of violation of the Township's rules or for nonpayment of a bill
or at the request of the owner, a charge of $15, payable in advance, will
be made for again turning on the water for an original connection.
[Amended 7-19-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-12]
B. Complaints. Complaints with respect to the character of the service
furnished or the reading of the meters or of the bills rendered must be
made at the Township Office, either orally or in writing, and a record of
such complaint will be kept by the Township, noting the name and
address of the complainant, the date, the nature of the complaint and
the remedy.
C. Reasonable access. The properly identified authorized agents of the
Township shall have the right of access to the premises served, at all
reasonable hours, for the purposes of reading meters, examining
fixtures and pipes, observing the manner of using water and for any
other purpose which is proper and necessary in the conduct of the
Township's business.
D. Prohibited acts. No plumber, owner, tenant or other unauthorized
person shall turn the water on or off at any corporation stop, curb stop
§ 140-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-38
133:891
or meter valve or disconnect or remove the meter without the written
consent of the Township.
E. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of Part 3 of this
chapter shall, upon notification by the Township, immediately correct
the violation and be assessed the cost of all damages to Township
property. Any person who fails to immediately correct the violation or
repeatedly violates the same provision shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or to a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof, at the
discretion of the Municipal Judge. [Amended 12-21-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-12; 12-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-32]
F. Oral agreements. No agent or employee of the Township has
authorization to bind it by any promise, agreement or representation
not provided for in these rules. The Township reserves the right to
change, take from or add to the foregoing rules and regulations.
G. Single service.
(1) Water only. In instances where owners of existing properties make
application for and are furnished only water service, all rules
pertaining to water service must be complied with, and the charge
for such service should be as described in the rate schedule.
(2) Sewer only. In instances where owners of existing properties make
application for and are furnished only sewerage service, all rules
applicable to furnishing sewerage service must be complied with,
and the charge for such service shall be as described in the rate
schedule.
H. Damage claims.
(1) In all contracts for general or special water or sewer service, it is
expressly understood and agreed that no claims will be made
against the Township for damage to life or property by reason of
the breaking of any service pipe, water fixture, meter or appliance
within the customer's premises, unless caused by the negligence of
the Township or its employees, nor for any damage due to the
failure of the water supply for any cause beyond the Township's
control, including increased pressures which are put on the mains
during the times of fires, drills by the fire company and any other
time.
(2) All consumers having boilers upon their premises depending upon
the pressure of the water in the Township's pipes to keep them
supplied are cautioned against the danger of collapse, and all such
damage must be borne exclusively by the consumer.
(3) No water will be furnished to any premises where any possibility
exists of the mingling of the water furnished by the Township with
§ 140-38 FLORENCE CODE § 140-38
133:892
§ 140-39. Special Water and Sewer Service Area. [Added 12-20-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-33]
water from any other source, nor will the Township permit its mains
or service pipes to be connected in any way to any piping, tank,
vat or other apparatus containing liquids, chemicals or any other
matter which may flow back into the Township's service pipes or
mains and consequently endanger the water supply.
I. Rules and regulations; rates. The Township reserves the right to change
or amend, from time to time, these rules and regulations and the rates
for water or sewer service.
A. Description of Special Water and Sewer Service Area. [Amended
8-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-27]
(1) Special Sewer Service Area: beginning at a point on the Burlington
Township Florence Township border at its intersection with the
southern edge of Route 130 right-of-way and continuing along said
border 1,050 feet south; continuing on a course parallel to Route
130 to the Pennsylvania Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike;
then along the northeastern edge of the turnpike right-of-way to
the Mansfield Township - Florence Township border; continuing
along the Mansfield border to Route 130; then along the western
edge of the Route 130 right-of-way to the northeastern edge of the
turnpike right-of-way; then in a westerly direction to the
intersection of Cedar Lane and Railroad Avenue; then along the
westerly right-of-way of Railroad Avenue to the northerly right-ofway
of Fifth Street (paper street); then along an imaginary line in a
westerly direction to the southwesterly right-of-way of the
intersection of East Fifth Street and Olive Street; then along the
southerly right-of-way of Olive Street to the intersection of Cedar
Lane; then crossing Cedar Lane and following the southerly edge of
the New Jersey Turnpike Authority access road to its intersection
with the northerly right-of-way of Pennsylvania Extension of the
New Jersey Turnpike; then along the northerly right-of-way of the
New Jersey Turnpike to the southeasterly intersection of Block
155.49; then along the easterly line of Block 155.49, also being the
westerly right-of-way of Broad Street to its intersection with the
center line of Ninth Street (extended); then along the center line of
Ninth Street to the intersection of Summer Street, also being the
intersection of Blocks 156.01 and 155.49; then following the block
limit of Block 156.01 in a northerly and westerly direction
(counterclockwise) to its intersection with the right-of-way of Front
Street; then south along the easterly right-of-way of Front Street to
the Florence Township - Burlington Township boundary; then
easterly along the Township boundary to the point of beginning.
Excluded from this area shall be all properties which have
previously been assessed for sewer improvements and all
Township- or publicly-owned properties.
§ 140-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-39
133:893
(2) Special Water Service Area: all lands included in the Special Sewer
Service Area and those additional lands east of the Special Sewer
Service Area to the Florence-Mansfield and Florence-Springfield
Township boundaries.
B. Reimbursement to Township of Toll Brothers' cost of installing certain
water and sewer conveyance facilities. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38b(3), the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment
of the Township of Florence shall condition any land subdivision or site
plan approvals or any property owned or obtaining water or sewer
utility approvals from the Township shall be required to connect to the
water and sewer facilities installed in the Special Water and Sewer
Service Area by Toll Brothers and ,shall be required to reimburse the
Township their pro rata share of the cost of the construction by Toll
Brothers of those water and sewer conveyance facilities. The time of
payment the total pro rata share of cost of reimbursement shall be the
date of the issuance of the first construction permit on the
development. [Amended 8-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-27]
(1) Sewer reimbursement costs. Reimbursement costs shall be defined
as those costs expended by Toll Brothers, in accordance with Toll
Brothers' Sewer Service Agreement, divided by the total sewage
flow expected to be generated from the special service area times
the new gallonage calculated to be connected. The developer shall
calculate the principal and interest associated with the sewer
facilities improvements each year, and forward to the Township for
approval. The Township's Water and Sewer Engineer shall calculate
the total sewage flow expected to be generated once each year,
based on the current zoning and revised number of units, square
footage or other applicable criteria, known to have been or
anticipated to be connected within the defined service area.
(a) Reimbursement cost = reimbursable cost (P & I)
per gallon collected total gallonage to be connected
(b) Reimbursement cost = reimbursement cost times gallons
to be connected per gallon connected
NOTES:
The reimbursement cost per gallon to be connected shall be
calculated by the Township's Water and Sewer Engineer at the
beginning of each year and shall apply for the entire calendar year.
(2) Water reimbursement costs: reimbursable costs shall be defined as
those costs expended by the developer, in accordance with the
developer's Water Service Agreement, divided by the gallonage the
improvements caused by the Township's water supply system
capacity to be increased by times the gallonage calculated to be
connected. The developer shall calculate the principal and interest
associated with the water facility improvements each year and
§ 140-39 FLORENCE CODE § 140-39
133:894
forward to the Township for approval. The total additional
gallonage generated as a result of the developer's work to existing
Well No. 2 is 288,000 gallons per day. The total additional gallonage
generated as a result of the developer drilling new Well No. 5 is
720,000 gallons per day.
Reimbursement cost = reimbursement cost times gallons to be
connected additional gallonage generated
NOTES:
The reimbursement cost per gallon to be connected shall be
calculated by the Township's Water and Sewer Engineer at the
beginning of each year and shall apply for the entire calendar year.
C. Time of reimbursement to the Township of developer's costs. The
Township shall be reimbursed the costs referred to in § 140-39B before
the recording of final subdivision plats or upon receiving final plan
approval or a building permit, whichever first occurs. [Added
8-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-24]
D. Reimbursement to Township of developer's cost of installing certain
water and sewer conveyance facilities. Pursuant N.J.S.A 40-55D-38b(3),
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of the Township of Florence shall
condition any subdivision or site plan approvals or any property
obtaining water and sewer utility approvals from the Township who are
tying into the water or sewer conveyance facilities installed by Ryland
which were the subject of water and sewer service agreements dated
February 21, 1996 and September 17, 1997, between Ryland and the
Township of Florence, shall be required to reimburse the Township the
pro rata share of the cost of construction by Ryland of those water and
sewer conveyance facilities, which amount shall be calculated by the
Florence Township Water and Sewer Engineer. The time of payment the
total pro rata share of the cost of reimbursement shall be due is the
date of the issuance of the first construction permit on the
development. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-28]
§ 140-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-39
133:895

ARTICLE IV
Rules Applicable to Water Service
§ 140-40. Service connections.
A. Service connection charges. The applicant shall pay a one-time service
charge for each service unit in keeping with the Township rate schedule
for various classes of users. Said connection charge shall be related to
the cost of primary facility such as water supply, treatment, storage,
booster stations and trunk lines. Connection charges shall be as
follows: [Amended 4-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-11; 7-19-1989 by
Ord. No. 1989-12; 2-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-03]
(1) Dwelling units, including residential one-family, two-family or
multiple-family dwelling units, garden or high-rise apartments,
condominiums, townhouses or trailers per unit: $1,550, except that
the connection fee for affordable housing units developed by
nonprofit and for-profit developers shall be entitled to a 50%
reduction in the fee pursuant to P.L. 2018, c. 74. Additionally, a
previously connected affordable unit that was demolished or
refurbished to allow for a new affordable housing unit and for
which a connection fee was previously paid may be entitled to a
credit for prior water and sewer connection fees provided that it
meets the requirements of P.L. 2018, c. 74. [Amended 12-6-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-25; 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-19;
2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01; 11-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-27; 9-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
(2) All classes of users other than residential as described above,
including but not limited to boarding homes, lodging homes and
nursing homes, hotels and motels, shall pay a connection charge
based upon their estimated daily average usage as determined by
the Township Water and Sewer Engineer. The charge per gallon per
day of usage shall be $8.39. In no case shall the connection charge
be less than the charge of $1,550 for residential units. [Amended
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12; 12-15-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-19; 2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01; 11-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-27]
(3) All classes of users outlined in § 140-40A(2) which are required to
relocate as a result of eminent domain/condemnation proceedings
shall be entitled to a credit against water service connection fees in
an amount equal to the connection fee they previously paid for the
unit that was taken from them by eminent domain/condemnation
proceedings or the amount estimated by the Water and Sewer
Engineer that the user should have paid if the actual amount paid
cannot be determined. In no event shall a user be entitled to a
refund. [Added 10-1-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-32]
B. Service lines.
§ 140-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-40
133:897
(1) Size and kind. The Township reserves the right to determine the
size and kind of service lines from the main to the curb stop or
meter pit and from the curb stop or meter pit to the property to be
served. Type K copper tubing or polyethylene (PE) pressure pipe/
tubing SDR-9 250 psi being one inch to two inches for water
services and Type K copper or C-900 polyvinylchloride (PVC)
pressure pipe and fittings, four inches and greater for water
distribution and transmission systems shall be permitted and shall
comply with AWWA C901 and/or AWWA C906. For larger services,
ductile iron pipe meeting American Water Works Association
standards for Class 200 water pipe or C-900 polyvinylchloride
(PVC) pressure pipe and fittings shall be used. The pipe from the
main to the curbline shall be installed by the owner. For a single
residential water service customer, the Township will provide the
curb stop and curb box for up to a one-inch service and make the
tap at direct cost to the owner. These costs are in no way related to
the connection charges listed in the rate schedule. The service
lateral, from the corporation valve on the water main to the house,
shall be furnished and installed by the owner or a registered
plumber and shall be laid in a straight line at right angles to the
curb and shall be at least four feet below the surface of the ground
when final grading of the property is complete. All work shall
conform to the Township's standard design details as contained
herein. The service lateral shall be inspected by the Township prior
to backfilling the trench, and any construction not approved shall
be immediately removed and reconstructed in an approved manner.
The entire service lateral from the main to the house shall be
maintained by the owner after original installation. [Amended
9-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
(2) Separate trench. No service pipe shall be laid in the same trench
with a gas pipe, drain or sewer pipe or any other facility of any
public service company, nor within three feet of any open
excavation, vault, cesspool or septic tank, nor shall the location be
in conflict with any sidewalk or driveway running at right angles to
the front of the building.
(3) Renewal. Where the renewal of the service line from the main to
the curb stop or meter pit or from the curb stop to the building is
found to be necessary, the owner, unless approved by the Township,
will renew the service in the same location as previously used.
C. Maintenance.
(1) All connections, service lines and fixtures furnished by the
customer shall be maintained by him in good order, and meters
owned by the Township and on the property of the customer shall
be protected properly and cared for by the customer. All leaks in
the service or any other pipe or fixture in or upon the premises
supplied must be repaired immediately by the owner or occupant of
the premises. The customer shall be responsible for notifying the
§ 140-40 FLORENCE CODE § 140-40
133:898
Township of the party engaged by said customer to do any
maintenance work on the customer's service line prior to work
being commenced, and said party shall not backfill any trench
until the work has been inspected and approved by the Township's
representative. Any work not acceptable shall be immediately
removed and replaced by work which is acceptable.
(2) The Township shall in no event be responsible for maintaining any
portion of the service line owned by the customer or for damage
done by water escaping therefrom or from lines or fixtures on the
customer's property, and the customer shall at all times comply
with applicable municipal regulations with respect thereto and
make changes therein required by reason of changes of grade,
relocation of mains or otherwise.
D. Property supplied by single service line.
(1) A service line from the curb stop or meter pit to a property shall not
supply more than one property, as generally described and
classified below, but any such property, upon proper application of
the owner, may be supplied by two or more meters, each of which,
for billing purposes, shall be considered as being one customer
account, and provided that the supply to each such meter has an
individual control at or near the curbline. Property supplied by a
single service line shall be as follows:
(a) A dwelling house, either detached or one side of a double
house or a house in a row of houses, provided that a garage, a
conservatory and similar structures accessory to the life of one
family shall be considered as a portion of the dwelling.
(b) An industrial or commercial or manufacturing establishment.
(c) A building separated from adjacent buildings by a party wall or
party walls and comprising apartments, or stores or offices, or
any combination thereof.
(d) A detached building comprising apartments, or stores or
offices, or any combination thereof.
(2) Where two or more customers are now supplied through a single
service line, any violation of the rules of the Township, with respect
to either or any of said customers, shall be deemed a violation as to
all, and unless said violation is corrected after reasonable notice,
the Township may take such action as can be taken for a single
customer, except that such action will not be taken until an
innocent customer, who has not violated the Township's rules, has
been given a reasonable opportunity to attach his pipe to a
separately controlled service connection.
§ 140-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-41
133:899
§ 140-41. Water use for building purposes.
A supply of water for building or other special purpose, except on a lot
or premises already supplied with a metered water connection, must be
specially applied for. All applications for water for building purposes must
be supplied through a meter at meter rates, must be signed by the owner or
his duly authorized agent and shall be interpreted to mean that the water is
to be used from a builder's hydrant and shall not be introduced into any of
the house fixtures.
§ 140-42. Water meters. [Amended 7-19-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-12;
4-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-12; 8-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-18;
5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5; 6-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15]
A. Specifications. All water meters will be according to the Township's
specifications and will become the property of and under the control of
the Township and will be accessible. Initial cost of the meter and
installation will be borne by the owner of the property.
B. Water service to be metered. Each water service from a curb stop or
meter pit to a property shall be metered. The Township reserves the
right to determine the size and location of the meter.
C. Location. After the applicant has provided a readily accessible space for
the meter, he will provide proper protection for the meter and have the
plumbing arranged to receive the meter at a convenient point approved
by the Township and so positioned as to meter and control the entire
supply. The water meter shall be located at a point nearest the
foundation of the building or where the water service enters the
building. The distance between the meter and the entry point of the
water service shall not be greater than that which is deemed
appropriate by the Township. When a separate meter is installed for a
sprinkler system, it shall be located before the main domestic meter.
The sprinkler system piping shall be a T-connection to the main water
line between where it enters the building and the main meter. This
configuration ensures that the main water meter does not also register
the water measured by the sprinkler meter. In cases where it is not
practical to place the meter within a building, the customer shall build a
brick, concrete or other approved meter box or manufactured pit inside
the property line. The pit or meter box shall be fitted with a suitable and
approved type of iron cover that will provide adequate access for
removal or installation of the water meter. The Township shall approve
the size and dimensions of the pit or box.
D. Valves. All water meters shall have a working shut-off valve on both the
inlet and outlet side of the meter. This arrangement will allow the
Township to replace or service the meter with the least amount of
disturbance to the plumbing system in the property. It is the
responsibility of the customer to keep the valves in working condition.
Before the Township operates any shut-off valves, the customer shall be
required to sign a waiver acknowledging the work to be done and the
§ 140-41 FLORENCE CODE § 140-42
133:900
risk in operating a valve that may not be properly maintained by the
customer. The customer has the right to operate their own valves if
they choose not to sign the waiver for the Township. In each case, the
valves that isolate the meter and the valve at the curb stop are the
responsibility of the customer. When a check valve is installed on the
water supply line, a safety pressure relief device must be inserted at
some convenient point in the house piping to relieve excess pressure
due to heating water.
E. Reinstallation costs. The customer shall pay a charge for the
reinstallation or changing of a meter when removed because of damage
in any way due to the negligence of the customer. The charge shall be
equivalent to the cost of a new water meter of the same size. The
customer is responsible to contract for and pay any and all costs
involved in additional plumbing work necessary to allow the Township
to properly install the new meter.
F. Payment for damages. Meters will be maintained by the Township so far
as ordinary wear and tear are concerned, but damage resulting from
freezing, hot water or external causes due to the negligence of the
customer shall be paid for by the customer.
G. Minimum charges. Each meter is installed subject to a fixed minimum
charge in accordance with the adopted rate schedule, for which certain
quantities will be furnished without additional charge. The minimum
charge shall be nonabatable for nonusers of water and noncumulative
against subsequent consumption. In the case of fractional-period bills
covering less than a quarter, minimum charges and allowances shall be
prorated.
H. Notification of defective meter. The customer shall immediately notify
the Township of injury to or a nonworking status of the meter as soon as
known by the customer.
I. Disputed accounts. In the event of a disputed account involving the
accuracy of a meter, the meter will be tested upon request of the
customer in conformity with the provisions of these rules and
regulations. If a test is performed on a disputed meter and the meter is
found to have an error in registration of 4% or more, the bills will be
increased or decreased correspondingly.
J. Testing. When a meter is removed for testing based upon the request of
the customer, the following rules shall apply:
(1) The Township shall, upon a written request of the customer and, if
he so desires, in his presence or that of the customer's authorized
representative, make a test of the accuracy of his meter. When a
customer desires, either personally or through a representative, to
witness the testing of a meter, the customer may require the meter
to be sealed in his presence before removal, which seal shall not be
broken until the test is made in his presence. If the meter so tested
shall be found to be accurate within the limits herein specified, a
§ 140-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-42
133:901
fee, as indicated in Subsection J(3) below, shall be paid to the
Township by the customer requiring the test, but if not found
accurate, then the cost thereof shall be borne by the Township.
When making the request, the customer shall agree to the basis
of payment herein specified. If the customer does not wish to be
present for the meter test, the customer must sign a waiver of the
right to observe the test.
(2) A report of the meter test shall be made available to the customer,
and the Township shall keep a complete record of the test.
(3) Fees.
(a) The amount of the fee shall be $30 for each water service
meter having an outlet not exceeding one inch.
(b) For water service meters having an outlet in excess of one inch,
the test fee shall be based upon the actual cost to the Township
of having the meter tested by an outside service, plus an
administrative fee of $50.
(c) There shall be no fee where the meter is removed for testing as
part of the Township's normal maintenance procedures.
K. Failure to provide access to water meter to Township employees: 1) In
the event that the Township is denied access to a water meter and
cannot collect register readings for a period of six months; or 2) in the
event that the Township is denied access to a water meter thereby
preventing replacement of the meter with a current model over a period
of two months from the date a first notice is sent out by the Township, a
notice shall be served upon the customer stating that the Township
shall be provided access to the meter within 10 days of the date of the
notice in order to install a new water meter of the type currently
approved by the Township. If the customer fails to provide access to the
meter with the appropriate internal plumbing necessary to complete a
Township water meter installation, then the water service may be
disconnected at the Township’s discretion for failure to provide
[Amended 4-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-8]
L. Plumbing deficiencies. Whenever the Township replaces a water meter,
the plumbing within the customer's property shall be sufficient to allow
the Township to perform the work without causing damage to the
existing plumbing. If the Township determines, in its sole discretion,
that the plumbing in the customer's property is inadequate, the
customer shall have 30 calendar days after receipt of a written notice to
have the plumbing corrected. Inadequacies can result from inoperable
or leaking valves or corroded pipes and fittings. These examples are
intended as illustrative and are not all encompassing for the purposes
of this code.
M. Whenever the Township disconnects water services, all costs of the
disconnection and reconnection shall be borne by the customer. These
§ 140-42 FLORENCE CODE § 140-42
133:902
§ 140-43. Hydrants.
§ 140-44. Automatic sprinklers and other fire service devices.
[Amended 7-19-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-12]
For automatic sprinklers or other automatic fire service devices located
inside a building or buildings, a separate service line will be required, to
be used exclusively for fire service. At the option of the customer, fire
hydrants located outside of buildings may be connected to the fire service
line. Each such separate service line shall be subject to the charges at the
rate of $2.25 per sprinkler head per year. The Township reserves the right
to refuse approval for an application for automatic fire service where, in the
judgment of the Township, such service is not practical.
§ 140-45. Swimming pools. [Amended 7-19-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-12]
Customers desiring to have their above- or below-ground swimming pools
filled with water from a hydrant in the Township's water supply system must
first apply for a permit from the Water and Sewer Department. Payment
for the volume of water necessary to fill the pool must be paid in advance
at the rate of $2.40 per 1,000 gallons. The customer may then make
arrangements with the Florence Fire District to fill his swimming pool.
costs include, but are not limited to, excavating and repairs to streets,
alleys or sidewalks.
A. Location. Extension of mains by applicants under § 140-37B(2)(a),
requiring the installation of hydrants in accordance with the Township
Water and Sewer Engineer's recommendation on spacing, shall be
borne by the applicant.
B. Maintenance. All fire hydrants will be maintained by the Township.
C. Use. Only persons authorized by the Township shall take water from
any public fire hydrant, except for purposes or for use of the Fire
Department in case of fire. No public hydrant shall be used for
sprinkling streets, flushing sewers, or gutters, or for any other than fire
purposes, except with the written approval and consent of the
Township. A permit for water usage shall be purchased in advance at
the Municipal Building at a cost of $5.75 per 1,000 gallons. The permit
will allow for a sixty-day usage period and will expire at the end of that
period. The only hydrant in Florence Township that shall be utilized for
obtaining water is located at the Florence Township Wastewater
Treatment Facility at 1500 West Front Street. The permittee shall sign
in at the Wastewater Treatment Plant for each hydrant usage. Hydrants
in other areas of Florence Township may be used only with written
consent from the Florence Township Water and Sewer Department.
[Amended 8-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-18; 9-17-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17; 5-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10; 4-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-11; 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
§ 140-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-45
133:903
Residents of Florence Township who are not customers of the Water and
Sewer Department may follow the same procedure to have their swimming
pools filled by the fire district.
§ 140-45 FLORENCE CODE § 140-45
133:904
ARTICLE V
Rules Applicable to Sewerage Service
§ 140-46. Service connections.
A. Service connection charges. The applicant shall pay a one-time service
charge for each service unit in keeping with the Township rate schedule
for various classes of users. Said charge shall be related to the cost of
primary facilities, such as sewerage treatment capacity, trunk mains
and interceptor sewers. The connection charge shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-11; 7-19-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-12; 2-6-1990 by Ord. No. 1991-03]
(1) Dwelling units, including residential one-family, two-family or
multiple-family dwelling units, garden or high-rise apartments,
condominiums, townhouses or trailers per unit: $3,105, except that
the connection fee for affordable housing units developed by
nonprofit and for-profit developers shall be entitled to a 50%
reduction in the fee pursuant to P.L. 2018, c. 74. Additionally, a
previously connected affordable unit that was demolished or
refurbished to allow for a new affordable housing unit and for
which a connection fee was previously paid may be entitled to a
credit for prior water and sewer connection fees provided that it
meets the requirements of P.L. 2018, c. 74. [Amended 12-6-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-25; 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-19;
2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01; 11-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-27; 9-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
(2) All classes of users other than residential as described above,
including but not limited to boarding homes, lodging homes and
nursing homes, hotels and motels, shall pay a connection charge
based upon their estimated daily average sewage flow as
determined by the Township Water and Sewer Engineer. The
charge per gallon per day of sewage flow shall be $16.79. In no
case shall the connection charge be less than the charge of $3,105
for residential units. [Amended 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12;
12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-19; 2-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-01; 11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-27]
(3) All classes of users outlined in § 140-46A(2) which are required to
relocate as a result of eminent domain/condemnation proceedings,
shall be entitled to a credit against sewerage service connection
fees in an amount equal to the connection fee they previously paid
for the unit that was taken from them by eminent domain/
condemnation proceedings or the amount estimated by the Water
and Sewer Engineer that the user should have paid if the actual
amount paid cannot be determined. In no event shall a user be
entitled to a refund. [Added 10-1-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-32]
B. Service laterals.
§ 140-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-46
133:905
(1) Size and kind; backflow prevention.
(a) Size and kind. The Township reserves the right to determine
the size and kind of service laterals from the main to the
curbline and from the curbline to the property to be served or
from the main in a right-of-way to the property to be served.
Laterals of all sizes shall be constructed in accordance with the
Township's specifications and standard design details. The
service lateral from the main to the building shall be furnished,
installed and maintained by the owner of the property, shall be
laid in a straight line from the point of connection at the main
to the structure and shall be at least four feet below the
surface of the ground when final grading of the property has
been completed. The service lateral installed and maintained
by the owner shall be installed by a registered plumber and
shall be inspected and approved by the Township's inspector
prior to backfilling the trench; otherwise, any construction not
approved shall be immediately removed and reconstructed in
an approved manner. The use of vents on the service lateral
which permit the entrance of surface water or stormwater is
prohibited.
(b) Backflow-prevention devices. All buildings with plumbing
facilities below the ground elevation at the sewer main will be
required to install either a vent or backflow-prevention valve in
the lateral. The vent or valve shall be so located as to prevent
entry of sewage from the main into the building and to provide
access for repairs and maintenance. The type and size of the
vent or valve shall be approved by the Township prior to
installation. The vent or valve shall be maintained in proper
working order at all times by the property owner. [Added
6-5-1985 by Ord. No. 1986-05]
(2) Separate trench. No service lateral shall be laid in the same trench
with gas pipe, water service or any other facility of any public
service company nor within three feet of any open excavation, vault
or meter pit, nor shall the location be in conflict with any sidewalk
or driveway turning at right angles to the front of the building.
(3) Renewal. Where the renewal of the service lateral from the main to
the structure is found to be necessary, the owner will renew the
service in the location as previously used unless approved by the
Township.
C. Maintenance.
(1) All connections, service laterals and fixtures furnished by the
customer shall be maintained by him in good order. All leaks in the
service lateral or any fixture for the premises served must be
repaired immediately by the owner or occupant of the premises.
The customer shall be responsible for notifying the Township of the
§ 140-46 FLORENCE CODE § 140-46
133:906
party engaged by said customer to do any maintenance work in
the customer's service lateral prior to work being commenced,
and said party shall not backfill any trench until the work has
been inspected and approved by the Township's representative.
Any work not acceptable shall be immediately removed and
replaced by work which is acceptable.
(2) In those cases where there is any suspected damage to a service
lateral in the street, specifically and limited to that area of the
lateral running from the curbline to the main underneath the street
paving, the Township will make repairs to and maintain the lateral
for all reasons other than stoppage, clogging and/or backup of
sewage caused by said stoppage or clogging, including stoppage or
clogging from root intrusion. Any work in the street area which
proves that problems with the lateral were caused by stoppage or
clogging, including stoppage or clogging from root intrusion, by
materials passing through the lateral from the owner's property
will be at the owner's expense and will be charged at cost to the
owner.
D. Property served by single service lateral.
(1) A service lateral shall not serve more than one property as
generally described and classified in § 140-42C, but any such
property, upon proper application of the owner, may be served by
two or more service laterals, each of which, for billing purposes,
shall be considered as being one customer account.
(2) Where two or more customers are now served through a single
service lateral, any violation of the rules of the Township, with
respect to either or any of said customers, shall be deemed a
violation as to all, and unless said violation is corrected after
reasonable notice, the Township may take such action as may be
taken for a single customer, except that such action will not be
taken until an innocent customer, who has not violated the
Township's rules, has been given a reasonable opportunity to
connect his pipe to a separately controlled service lateral.
E. Prohibited connections. Under no circumstances will any of the
following be connected to the sanitary sewers, either directly or
indirectly:
(1) Floor drain, area drain or yard drain.
(2) Rain conductor or downspout.
(3) Grease pit.
(4) Air-conditioning equipment.
(5) Sump pumps.
(6) Stormwater inlets or catch basins.
§ 140-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-46
133:907
§ 140-47. Industrial wastes.
Sewerage service regarding industrial wastes shall be as provided in Part 2
of this chapter.
(7) Drains from pieces of equipment or manufacturing process.
F. Special connections. Service laterals to public buildings, churches,
apartment houses, commercial establishments and industrial
establishments shall be installed to conform to detailed plans and
specifications submitted to the authority by the applicant and only after
review and approval of those plans and specifications by the Township.
G. Installation of service in wet ground. Where the trench bottom is soft
and yielding, the Township reserves the right to require that the service
be laid in a partial or total concrete encasement. Junctions of two
different types of pipe may, at the option of the Township, be required to
be encased in concrete of mix determined by the Township.
§ 140-46 FLORENCE CODE § 140-47
133:908
ARTICLE VI
Rate Schedule
§ 140-48. Fees and charges for semiannual use. [Amended 8-1-1984
by Ord. No. 1984-11; 7-19-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-12; 12-20-1989 by
Ord. No. 1989-32; 4-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-12; 9-4-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-30; 3-15-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-4; 8-20-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-25; 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-33; 5-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-12; 6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10138; 9-17-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17; 5-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10; 4-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-11; 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
A. Minimum water meter rates for every person who is a citizen and
resident of this Township of the age of 65 or more years or less than 65
years of age who is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40(6) shall be for 9,000 gallons of water or less.
Minimum water meter rates for all other residential, commercial and
industrial users shall be for 12,000 gallons of water or less.
(1) Residential customers: $52.27; provided, however, that every
person, a citizen and resident of this Township of the age of 65 or
more years or less than 65 years of age who is permanently and
totally disabled, as defined in N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40(b), shall be entitled
to a credit of $24.77 against the minimum water rate. If there is a
dispute about residency for purpose of receiving said credit. then
the property owner must produce a valid New Jersey driver's
license substantiating a Florence Township address to receive the
credit. Said credit applies to residential properties only: however, it
shall not apply to residential properties which are rental properties
and in which tenants reside.
(2) Commercial and industrial customers:
Size of Meter
(inches) Fee
3/4 to 1 1/2 $52.27
1 1/2 $53.46
2 $77.22
3 $109.56
4 $218.46
5 $328.68
6 $420.84
8 $642.91
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 9-17-2008 and that the
revised rates shall be reflected in the February 2009 billings for all classes, and the
revised quarterly sprinkler rates shall be reflected in the May 2009 billings.
§ 140-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-48
133:909
B. Water charges per 1,000 gallons shall be as follows:
(1) All flow in excess of the minimum, as defined, shall be charged at a
rate of $5.75 per 1,000 gallons. For all commercial and industrial
users who exceed 12,000,000 gallons of usage in a quarter, the full
excess rate shall be $4.51 per 1,000 gallons. For all commercial and
industrial users who exceed 28,000,000 gallons of usage in a
quarter, the full excess rate shall be $3.20 per 1,000 gallons.
[Amended 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
C. The rate, as indicated, shall be multiplied by the number of dwelling
units or business, commercial or industrial units combined.
D. For users without sewer pretreatment facilities, the sewer charges and
rates shall be 120% of the water charges, with a minimum charge of
$62.73 per quarter: provided, however, that every person a citizen and
resident of this Township of the age of 65 or more years or less than 65
years of age who is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40(b), shall be entitled to a credit of $29.73 against the
minimum sewer rate. If there is a dispute about residency, then the
property owner must produce a valid New Jersey driver's license
substantiating a Florence Township address to receive the credit. Said
credit applies to residential properties only; however, it shall not apply
to residential properties which are rental properties and in which
tenants reside. In the case of the Florence Tollgate Condominium, the
sewer charges and rates shall be based on water consumption as
evidenced by the eight-inch main water meter located at the entrance
of the complex at Ninth Street, less the water consumption for the four
heater boilers as calculated on the two water meters servicing the
boilers at the complex, as the water consumed by the heater boilers is
not discharged into the Florence Township sewage treatment system.
E. Users with sewerage pretreatment facilities which have been approved
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
shall install a sewer effluent rneter, which meter and the location of its
installation shall be approved by the Water and Sewer Engineer.
Effluent meters shall be maintained at the owner's expense and shall be
calibrated on a quarterly basis, proof of which shall be provided to the
Township Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department. Users
with NJDEP-approved sewer pretreatment facilities shall be assessed at
a rate of $4.80 per 1,000 gallons of effluent discharge into the Florence
Township sewerage treatment system. On a quarterly basis, all
commercial users with a sewer treatment unit that reduces solids being
discharged into the municipal wastewater system and which use more
than 28,000,000 gallons per quarter, the full excess rate shall be
charged at a rate of $3.84 per 1,000 gallons. [Amended 6-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-19]
F. For residential users not serviced by public water, the sewer charges
and rates shall be $90.74 per quarter; provided, however, that every
person a citizen and resident of this Township of the age of 65 or more
§ 140-48 FLORENCE CODE § 140-48
133:910
years or less than 65 years of age who is permanently and totally
disabled. as defined in N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40(h). shall be entitled to a credit
of $34.39 against their sewer rate. Said credit applies to residential
properties only; however, it shall not apply to residential properties
which are rental properties and in which tenants reside.
G. For commercial sanitary sewer users not serviced by public water, the
sewer charges and rates shall be a minimum of $62.73 per quarter.
Water usage in excess of 12,000 gallons per quarter shall be charged a
rate of $6.80 per 1.000 gallons. The commercial business must have a
water meter on its well water line, which is accessible for reading by
the Florence Township Water Department. The commercial user must
maintain the water meter in working order. If a problem with the meter
is detected, then the Water Department may require the commercial
user to test the meter and certify it for accuracy. All costs of the meter
test and any required replacements shall be the responsibility of the
commercial user. Whenever the Water Department determines that a
meter is not functioning properly, the minimum quarterly charge shall
be fixed as $150 per quarter. Failure to replace or repair any defective
meter within 30 days after notification shall result in a surcharge of
$250 per month or part thereof.
H. For sprinkler systems, property owners with sprinkler systems will be
charged and billed quarterly for water usage only, with no minimum
billing. All flow shall be charged at a rate of $5.75 per 1,000 gallons.
I. Separate industrial effluent discharges of cooling or process water
must be approved by the Township of Florence. Further, the company
must obtain a New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems
(NJPDES) permit from the State of New Jersey. All effluent discharges
of this type must be individually authorized, with applicable conditions
by the Township Council of the Township of Florence and the Water and
Sewer Director. Process or cooling water must comply with all testing
limits and parameters defined by the Township of Florence and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). If effluent
discharges do not at any time comply with said testing parameters, then
the Township of Florence has the right to immediately terminate the
connection to the public wastewater system. An increase in sludge
production attributable to said effluent is considered to be an adverse
impact on the wastewater treatment facility, and will result in
termination of the public connection and charges to the responsible
company for all additional municipal hauling and disposal costs. All
effluent discharges operating under this section shall be monitored and
billed with a sewer flow meter, and said meter type must be approved
by the Water and Sewer Director. The costs to purchase and install the
meter, along with all future maintenance, calibration, and/or
replacement of the meter shall be the responsibility of the discharge
party. Effluent in under this section or category shall be billed quarterly
at a rate of $ 10.25 per thousand gallons.
§ 140-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-48.1
133:911
§ 140-48.1. Fees and charges for private septic and grey water
haulers. [Added 4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14]
A. Licensed private septic and grey water haulers approved by the
Township of Florence are authorized to utilize the Florence Township
wastewater treatment plant to dispose of the materials they collect. The
Water and Sewer Director is authorized to promulgate rules and
procedures that must be followed in order to dispose of septic and grey
water at the wastewater treatment plant. Private haulers are permitted
to only bring residential and light commercial septic and grey water to
the facility if it is not laden with heavy grease.
B. The fee for the disposal of septic and grey water disposal at the
Florence Township treatment plant is $0.0375 per gallon.
§ 140-48.1 FLORENCE CODE § 140-48.1
133:912
ARTICLE VII
Adoption of Rules, Regulations and Technical Specifications
[Added 12-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-27]
§ 140-49. Adoption.
The Township of Florence hereby adopts "Rules, Regulations, and Technical
Specifications for Water Distribution and Sanitary Sewer Systems, October
2006."139
§ 140-50. Amendment.
The Rules and Regulations herein adopted may be amended by resolution
adopted by the Township Council.
139. Editor's Note: A complete copy of said rules and regulations are on file in the Township's
offices.
§ 140-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-50
133:913

ARTICLE VIII
Construction Verification (As-Built Drawings) for Water and Sewer
Utilities
[Added 11-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-32]
§ 140-51. Construction verification.
Whenever new water and sewer lines and facilities are installed in Florence
Township, the Township shall ensure that the systems are constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and rules and regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and the Florence
Township Water and Sewer Department. Florence Township requires
compliance as follows:
A. Upon completion of the new lines and facilities, the Florence Township
Water and Sewer Director and the Florence Township Water and Sewer
Engineer shall determine whether all work was installed per the
approved plans and that all supporting documents are in order. Both the
Water and Sewer Engineer and the Water and Sewer Director shall
confirm to the Township Administrator that the new lines and facilities
have been constructed and approved per this section.
B. The contractor shall be required to submit as-built drawings of the
water and sewer system and facilities. Such as-built drawings shall be
certified by the applicant's engineer to the Florence Township Water
and Sewer Engineer and the Florence Township Water and Sewer
Director. The as-built drawings must be submitted and approved by the
Florence Township Water and Sewer Engineer and the Florence
Township Water and Sewer Director prior to the installation of base
paving and prior to the charging of water mains. If required by the
Township, the contractor or developer shall video the sanitary sewer
mains, which video shall be supplied in a DVD format to the Florence
Township Water and Sewer Director and Florence Township Water and
Sewer Engineer for approval prior to installation of base paving.
C. All as-built drawings must accurately depict the horizontal and vertical
locations of all utilities and substantiate conformance to the approved
plans, as well as the Rules and Regulations of the Florence Township
Water and Sewer Department. All as-built drawings must be approved
by the Florence Township Water and Sewer Engineer and the Florence
Township Water and Sewer Director or the work shall be deemed to be
unacceptable and cause for requesting the cessation of building
permits until compliance is achieved by the applicant.
D. The contractor shall provide verification of all gravity sewer main
slopes prior to base paving and confirmed acceptance of said
installation by the Florence Township Water and Sewer Engineer and
the Florence Township Water and Sewer Director. Sewer lines installed
with less than the NJDEP minimum slopes or with more than the NJDEP
maximum slopes will be rejected and must be reinstalled in accordance
with the required standards prior to the base paving of the roadway. If
§ 140-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 140-51
133:915
sewer lines are installed outside of a surface to be paved, then the
contractor shall meet the same requirements for the proper
reinstallation of sewer lines prior to the release of any building permits.
E. Florence Township shall not accept any water and sewer lines or
facilities which are not located in the public right-of-way or in easement
areas approved by the Township. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to have all easements prepared and approved by the
Township. All costs of the local review and recording shall be borne by
the applicant.
F. Florence Township shall only accept dedication of new lines and
facilities once the installation has been properly approved in
accordance with this chapter of the Code of the Township of Florence
and the performance bond(s) covering said improvements have been
duly released by the Township Council. If the Florence Township Water
and Sewer Engineer and/or the Florence Township Water and Sewer
Director determine that newly installed lines warrant a documented
video inspection, and/or jetting and cleaning, then the applicant shall
be responsible for providing the inspection and cleaning in a manner
prescribed by the Township so as to confirm that the installation was
done per all requirements stated herein. The responsibility for all
construction, maintenance and operations prior to acceptance by
Florence Township shall be borne by the applicant. Once the lines and
facilities are formally accepted by Florence Township, they shall
continue to remain covered under the maintenance bonds per the
Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL) until their release by the Township
Council.140
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 140-51 FLORENCE CODE § 140-51
133:916
Appendix
Chapter A146
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A146-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A146-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R. 76.1
et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD OR BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast of Garden State, LP."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE OR OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWNSHIP OR MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Florence, County of
Burlington, State of New Jersey.
§ 140-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § A146-3
133:917
§ A146-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company, were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A146-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A146-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A146-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance for the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A146-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to provide service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
set forth in the company's application. Any extension of plant beyond the
primary service area shall be governed by the company's line extension
policy, as set forth in the company's application.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval
issued by the Board with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A146-3 FLORENCE CODE § A146-8
133:918
§ A146-8. Construction requirements.
§ A146-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:181 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the municipality Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A146-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § A146-10
133:919
§ A146-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A146-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours.
§ A146-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent, incorporated herein.
§ A146-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A146-14. Commitments by company.
A. The company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service on one (1) outlet at no cost to each qualified existing
and future school in the municipality, public and private, elementary,
intermediate and secondary, provided that the school is within 175 feet
of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any,
shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the school requesting
service.
B. The company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each qualified existing and
future police, fire, emergency management facility and public library in
the municipality, provided that the facility is located within 175 feet of
active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any,
shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the municipality.
C. The company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable modem on one non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public library at no charge provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
§ A146-10 FLORENCE CODE § A146-14
133:920
§ A146-15. Educational and governmental access.
Internet service shall be installed on a personal computer that is
accessible to library patrons and not for administrative use only.
D. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval by
the BPU, the company shall provide to the municipality a one-time
technology grant in the amount of $25,000 to meet the general
technology and/or cable related needs of the community.
E. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543 (b)],
allows the company to itemize and/or identify:
(1) The amount on the subscriber bill assessed as a franchise fee and
the identity of the governmental authority to which the fee is paid;
(2) The amount on the bill assessed to satisfy any requirements
imposed on the company by the cable franchise to support public,
educational, and/or governmental access channels or the use of
such channels; and
(3) Any grants or other fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or
charge of any kind imposed by any governmental authority on the
transaction between the operator and the subscriber. The company
reserves these external cost, pass-through rights to the extent
permitted by law.
A. The company will continue to provide the Township one channel for
educational and governmental ("EG") access on the most basic tier of
service offered by the company in accordance with the Cable Act,
Section 611, and as further set forth below. EG access video
programming shall be provided by the governing body of Florence
Township or a designated educational institution.
B. The company shall build a fiber return line to the Florence Township
Municipal Building at 711 Broad Street and maintain the cable,
modulators, and equipment necessary for Florence Township to send a
signal to the company, and to receive the return feed signal. The
company will not be responsible for the maintenance of any studio
equipment used for the access channel, including but not limited to
cameras, editing decks, monitors and character generators.
C. The company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user
— whether an educational or government user — acquires no property
or other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and
may not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no
matter how long the same channel may have been designated for such
use.
D. The company shall not exercise editorial control over any educational
or governmental use of channel capacity, except the company may
§ A146-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § A146-15
133:921
§ A146-16. Emergency uses.
§ A146-17. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single-limit amount of $1,000,000, covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A146-18. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program
or portion of an educational or governmental access program that
contains obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
E. Educational access. "Educational access" shall mean noncommercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
"home schools," community colleges, and universities.
F. Government access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the governing body of Florence Township for the purpose of
showing the public local government at work.
G. Company use of fallow time. Because blank or underutilized EG
channels are not in the public interest, in the event the municipalities or
other EG access users elect not to fully program their EG access
channel, the company may program unused time on those channels
subject to reclamation by the municipality upon no less than 60 days'
written notice.
H. Indemnification. The municipalities shall indemnify the company for
any liability, loss, or damage it may suffer due to violation of the
intellectual property rights of third parties on the EG channel and from
claims arising out of the municipalities' rules for or administration of
access.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A146-15 FLORENCE CODE § A146-18
133:922
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A146-19. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or
entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the company may substitute such language that
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
ordinance, subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A146-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A146-21. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A146-22. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Chapter A147
STREET VACATION ORDINANCES
§ A147-1. Street vacation ordinances.
The following is a tabular listing of the ordinances enacted by the Mayor
and Council of the Township of Florence providing for the vacation of
streets or portions of streets. The complete text of the ordinances is on file
in the office of the Township Clerk.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Street Vacated
1993-11 5-5-1993 Various streets
1995-15 6-21-1995 Portion of Oak Street
1997-9 3-19-1997 Airy Street
§ A146-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § A147-1
133:923
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Street Vacated
2000-18 9-20-2000 Portion of alley between Lots 17 and 18 in
Block 85
2001-17 7-11-2001 Portion of 2nd Street
2002-29 11-6-2002 Portion of 2nd Street
2004-6 5-12-2004 Alley running between Spruce Street and
Cedar Lane
2004-9 7-7-2004 Street running from East Third Street toward
East Fifth Street
2004-13 9-1-2004 Alley from Route 130 in a northerly direction
to Block 99.01, Lot 27, and which runs
between Block 99.01, Lot 31, on the western
side and Lots 32 and 33 on the eastern side;
alley from Delaware Avenue in a westerly
direction to an end point with Block 99.01,
Lot 29, and which runs between Lots 23
through 32; easement which runs in a
southerly direction from Wallace Avenue to
the second alley described herein, and which
runs between Block 99.01, Lots 23 and 24
2005-10 5-18-2005 Tilton Lane and unnamed alley from an
intersection with the easterly line of Tilton
Lane eastward to Lot 6.01 in Block 109
2009-11 6-3-2009 Certain 15-foot-wide alley running between
Fifth Street and Third Street
2009-14 8-5-2009 12-foot-wide alley which runs from Station
Road, beginning at a distance of
approximately 150 feet from its easterly
intersection point with Route 130, in an
easterly direction bounded by Block 99.01,
Lots 20, 21, 22, a portion of Lot 23 and Lot
29, with reservation of rights for Water and
Sewer Departments
2012-25 9-19-2012 20-foot-wide alley which runs from the west
side of Seaman Drive (formerly Winter
Street) west for a distance of 500 feet and
ending at Block 156.05, Lot 2
2013-19 11-6-2013 A 40-foot-wide paper street portion of Spring
Street which runs from the north side of West
Front Street (Burlington County Route 656)
north to its intersection with the Delaware
River
§ A147-1 FLORENCE CODE § A147-1
133:924
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1992-14 6-3-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1993-1 2-3-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1993-2 2-3-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1993-3 2-3-1993 Affordable housing
development fees and land
development amendment
Ch. 87, Art. IV,
and Ch. 91
1993-4 3-3-1993 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 76
1993-5 Sale of property NCM
1993-6 Index rate NCM
1993-7 4-7-1993 Newspaper vending boxes
amendment
Ch. 100
1993-8 Land lease NCM
1993-9 Participation agreement NCM
1993-10 5-5-1993 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
1993-11 Street vacation NCM
1993-12 6-2-1993 Right to farm Ch. 34, Art. I
1993-13 6-2-1993 Recommending Reeder
property for farmland
preservation program
NCM
1993-14 7-7-1993 Right to farm amendment Ch. 34, Art. I
1993-15 Bond amendment NCM
1993-16 Bond amendment NCM
1993-17 8-4-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1993-18 Bond NCM
1993-19 Bond NCM
1993-20 Bond NCM
1993-21 Bond NCM
§ A147-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:925
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1993-22 Bond NCM
1993-23 Bond NCM
1993-24 Bond NCM
1993-25 Bond NCM
1993-26 Bond NCM
1993-27 Bond NCM
1993-28 Bond Not adopted
1993-29 10-20-1993 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. I.
1993-30 10-20-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1993-31 12-15-1993 Soil, removal and deposit
amendment
Ch. 120
1993-32 12-1-1993 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1993-33 Salaries NCM
1993-34 11-3-1993 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 56
1993-35 Not adopted
1993-36 11-3-1993 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1993-37 Capital improvement NCM
1993-38 Lease agreement NCM
1993-39 12-15-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1993-40 Appropriation NCM
1993-41 12-15-1993 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. I.
1993-42 Bond amendment NCM
1994-1 Bond NCM
1994-2 Curfew Not passed
1994-3 Salaries NCM
1994-4 Salaries amendment NCM
1994-5 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Not passed
1994-6 Index rate NCM
1994-7 5-4-1994 John A. Roebling Park Ch. 110, Art. III
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:926
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1994-8 Uniform construction code
amendment
Not passed
1994-9 7-6-1994 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1994-10 Lease agreement NCM
1994-11 7-6-1994 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 36
1994-12 Bond Not passed
1994-13 Bond amendment NCM
1994-14 Bond amendment NCM
1994-15 8-17-1994 Uniform construction code
amendment
Ch. 64
1994-16 8-17-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1994-17 9-9-1994 Land development amendment Ch. 91; Ch. 87
1994-18 Salaries NCM
1994-19 Bond NCM
1994-20 10-5-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1994-21 12-7-1994 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 76
1994-22 Bond NCM
1994-23 Bond NCM
1994-24 Bond NCM
1994-25 12-21-1994 Tax abatement for commercial
or industrial structures
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2012-13
1995-1 2-15-1995 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1995-2 1995 index rate NCM
1995-3 Salaries NCM
1995-4 3-15-1995 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
1995-5 Salaries NCM
1995-6 Salaries NCM
1995-7 Salaries NCM
1995-8 5-3-1995 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 8
1995-9 Not adopted
1995-10 6-7-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:927
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1995-11 Bond NCM
1995-12 Bond NCM
1995-13 Bond NCM
1995-14 Bond NCM
1995-15 Street vacation NCM
1995-16 Sale of property NCM
1995-17 Bond amendment NCM
1995-18 Bond NCM
1995-19 Sale of property NCM
1995-20 9-6-1995 Sleeping in vehicles Ch. 112, Art. II
1995-21 9-6-1995 Curfew Ch. 66
1995-22 Repairs to sewer mains NCM
1995-23 Reconstruction of streets NCM
1995-24 10-4-1995 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1995-25 10-4-1995 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
1995-26 10-4-1995 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 76
1995-27 11-1-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1995-28 Bond NCM
1995-29 Acquisition of property NCM
1995-30 Bond NCM
1996-1 Reconstruction of streets NCM
1996-2 Reconstruction of streets NCM
1996-3 Sewer main extension NCM
1996-4 Index rate for 1996 NCM
1996-5 Sanitary sewer pump station NCM
1996-6 4-3-1996 Recycling Repealed by
Ord. No.
2010-09
1996-7 4-3-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1996-8 Salaries NCM
1996-9 Not adopted
1996-10 Bond NCM
1996-11 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:928
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1996-12 Lease NCM
1996-13 Bond NCM
1996-14 Bond NCM
1996-15 Bond NCM
1996-16 Road reconstruction program NCM
1996-17 Withdrawn
1996-18 10-2-1996 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 134
1996-19 11-13-1996 Animals Ch. 41
1996-20 Not adopted
1996-21 Not adopted
1996-22 Not adopted
1996-23 12-4-1996 Cable television franchise Superseded by
Ord. No.
1997-15
1996-24 Bond NCM
1996-25 Not adopted
1996-26 Not adopted
1997-1 2-5-1997 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1997-2 2-5-1997 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1997-3 Sunday sale of alcoholic
beverages on Superbowl
Sunday
NCM
1997-4 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 36
1997-5 2-5-1997 Curfew amendment Ch. 66
1997-6 2-19-1997 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1997-7 2-19-1997 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1997-8 Index rate NCM
1997-9 3-19-1997 Street vacation NCM
1997-10 Salaries NCM
1997-11 4-2-1997 Waterworks Men's Softball
Field amendment
Ch. 110, Art. II
1997-12 Bond NCM
1997-13 Bond NCM
1997-14 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:929
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1997-15 4-16-1997 Cable television franchise Superseded by
Ord. No.
2015-20
1997-16 4-16-1997 Trailers and trailer camps
amendment
Ch. 131
1997-17 Bond NCM
1997-18 Bond NCM
1997-19 6-18-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1997-20 6-18-1997 Bond NCM
1997-21 6-18-1997 Bond NCM
1997-22 6-18-1997 Transient merchants
amendment
Ch. 114, Art. II
1997-23 7-2-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1997-24 7-16-1997 Bond NCM
1997-25 8-20-1997 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
1997-26 9-3-1997 Salaries NCM
1997-27 9-3-1997 Salaries NCM
1997-28 9-3-1997 Bond NCM
1997-29 9-3-1997 Bond NCM
1997-30 10-1-1997 Salaries NCM
1997-31 9-3-1997 Salaries NCM
1997-32 10-1-1997 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
1997-33 12-17-1997 Agreement NCM
1997-34 12-3-1997 Bond NCM
1997-35 12-3-1997 Bond NCM
1997-36 12-3-1997 Bond NCM
1997-37 12-17-1997 Bond NCM
1998-1 2-4-1998 Easement NCM
1998-2 2-18-1998 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1998-3 2-18-1998 Land development
amendment; sidewalks,
graded areas, gutters and
curbs in connection with
residential construction
Chs. 91; 126,
Art. III
1998-4 2-4-1998 Bond amendment NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:930
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1998-5 3-4-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1998-6 3-4-1998 Bond NCM
1998-7 4-1-1998 Bond NCM
1998-8 4-1-1998 Bond NCM
1998-9 4-15-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1998-10 5-6-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1998-11 5-6-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1998-12 5-20-1998 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 8
1998-13 5-20-1998 Solid waste: truck access to
County Solid Waste Facilities
Complex amendment
Ch. 122, Art. II
1998-14 Bond NCM
1998-15 Bond NCM
1998-16 Bond NCM
1998-17 Bond NCM
1998-18 7-1-1998 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1998-19 Salaries NCM
1998-20 Bond NCM
1998-21 Bond NCM
1998-22 Salaries NCM
1998-23 7-1-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1998-24 8-19-1998 Water and sewer service
regulations amendment
Ch. 140, Part 3
1998-25 8-5-1998 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
1998-26 Salaries NCM
1998-27 8-19-1998 Water and sewer service
regulations amendment
Ch. 140, Part 3
1998-28 9-2-1998 Water and sewer service
regulations amendment
Ch. 140, Part 3
1998-29 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:931
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1998-30 9-2-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1998-31 12-2-1998 Street name change NCM
1998-32 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Awaiting DOT
approval
1998-33 12-16-1998 Water and sewer service
regulations amendment
Ch. 140,
1999-1 Index rate NCM
1999-2 Land development amendment Not adopted
1999-3 FAAD lease NCM
1999-4 Yacht club lease NCM
1999-5 5-5-1999 Affordable housing
development fees amendment;
land development amendment
Chs. 87, Art. I,
and 91
1999-6 Bond NCM
1999-7 4-21-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1999-8 4-21-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
1999-9 5-5-1999 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1999-10 6-2-1999 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
1999-11 4-21-1999 Drug-free school zones
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. I
1999-12 4-21-1999 Drug-free public areas Ch. 70, Art. II
1999-13 5-5-1999 Licensing of contractors Ch. 65
1999-14 5-5-1999 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 36
1999-15 Bond NCM
1999-16 Bond NCM
1999-17 5-5-1999 Sale or marketing of
affordable housing units
amendment
Ch. 87, Art. II
1999-18 5-19-1999 Collection of bulky items
amendment
Ch. 122, Art. III
1999-19 Bond NCM
1999-20 Bond NCM
1999-21 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:932
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1999-22 Bond NCM
1999-23 7-7-1999 Real estate sales Ch. 188
1999-24 7-7-1999 Redevelopment Agency Ch. 25
1999-25 Salaries NCM
1999-26 Bond NCM
1999-27 8-4-1999 Land development amendment Ch. 91
1999-28 Land development amendment Not adopted
1999-29 8-18-1999 Street naming NCM
1999-30 9-1-1999 Redevelopment Agency
amendment
Ch. 25
1999-31 10-6-1999 Street renaming NCM
1999-32 10-20-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2000-1 3-1-2000 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2000-2 3-1-2000 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2000-3 3-1-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2000-4 3-1-2000 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2000-5 3-1-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2000-6 3-15-2000 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2000-7 3-15-2000 Licensing of contractors
amendment
Ch. 65
2000-8 3-15-2000 Drug-Free Zones: Drunk-
Driving Free Zones
Ch. 70, Art. III
2000-9 Not approved
2000-10 4-5-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2000-11 Index rate NCM
2000-12 5-3-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2000-13 Bond NCM
2000-14 Bond NCM
2000-15 Bond amendment NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:933
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2000-16 8-2-2000 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2000-17 8-16-2000 Drug-free public areas
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II
2000-18 9-20-2000 Street vacation Ch. A147
2000-19 Bond Not adopted
2000-20 Salaries NCM
2000-21 Bond amendment NCM
2000-22 11-1-2000 Fire prevention Ch. 76
2000-23 11-1-2000 Firearms amendment Ch. 73
2000-24 11-1-2000 Street acceptance NCM
2000-25 12-6-2000 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2000-26 Not adopted
2000-27 12-20-2000 Fire insurance claims Ch. 74
2001-1 2-21-2001 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2001-2 Bond NCM
2001-3 Not adopted
2001-4 Index rate NCM
2001-5 4-4-2001 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or consumption by
underaged persons
Ch. 36
2001-6 Vacate right-of-way NCM
2001-7 4-18-2001 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2001-8 5-2-2001 Firearms amendment Ch. 73
2001-9 Not adopted
2001-10 5-2-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2001-11 5-2-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2001-12 5-16-2001 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2001-13 Bond NCM
2001-14 Bond NCM
2001-15 8-15-2001 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2001-16 Bond NCM
2001-17 7-11-2001 Street vacation Ch. A147
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:934
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2001-18 8-15-2001 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2001-19 Right-of-way obstructions Not adopted
2001-20 8-15-2001 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 63
2001-21 Co-sign for Soccer Association NCM
2001-22 9-19-2001 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2001-23 Salaries NCM
2001-24 Salaries NCM
2001-25 10-17-2001 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 116
2001-26 11-7-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2001-27 11-28-2001 Towing and storage of motor
vehicles
Ch. 130
2001-28 11-28-2001 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2002-1 1-16-2002 Annexation NCM
2002-2 Lease renewal NCM
2002-3 2-6-2002 Redevelopment Agency
amendment
Ch. 25
2002-4 Home tax abatement Tabled
2002-5 2-6-2002 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2002-6 2-6-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2002-7 Budget cap increase NCM
2002-8 Salaries NCM
2002-9 4-3-2002 General penalty amendment Superseded by
Ord. No.
2004-3
2002-10 Bond NCM
2002-11 Bond NCM
2002-12 5-1-2002 Towing and storage of motor
vehicles
Ch. 130
2002-13 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Hold pending
DOT approval
2002-14 Parking and storage of
vehicles
Void
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:935
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-15 6-5-2002 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 36
2002-16 6-5-2002 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2002-17 Bond NCM
2002-18 6-19-2002 Board of Assessors Ch. 6
2002-19 7-3-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 91
2002-20 7-3-2002 Noise: engine and
compression brakes
Ch. 102, Art. I
2002-21 8-7-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 91
2002-22 8-21-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 91
2002-23 8-21-2002 Parking; placement of
dumpsters
Ch. 108
2002-24 9-4-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2002-25 Bond NCM
2002-26 Bond NCM
2002-27 10-2-2002 Donation of property NCM
2002-28 10-16-2002 Discharge of firearms
amendment
Ch. 73
2002-29 11-6-2002 Street vacation Ch. A147
2002-30 11-6-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2002-31 Salaries NCM
2002-32 Boat ramp Not adopted
2002-33 12-4-2002 Administration of government
amendment
Ch 4
2002-34 12-4-2002 Administration of government
amendment
Ch 4
2002-35 12-4-2002 Indemnification of employees
amendment
Ch. 4
2002-36 Salaries NCM
2003-1 Salaries NCM
2003-2 2-5-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2003-3 2-5-2003 Boats and boating amendment Ch. 53
2003-4 2-5-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:936
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-5 Budget NCM
2003-6 3-19-2003 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2003-7 4-2-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2003-8 Vetoed
2003-9 5-7-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2003-10 5-7-2003 Games of chance Ch. 83
2003-11 5-21-2003 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2003-12 6-4-2003 Street naming Ch. 126, Art. IV
2003-13 Purchase of ambulance NCM
2003-14 Bond NCM
2003-15 8-6-2003 Hotel and motel occupancy tax Ch. 129, Art. IV
2003-16 9-3-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-17 Truck routes Not adopted
2003-18 9-17-2003 Auctions, markets and casual
sales amendment
Ch. 43
2003-19 Salaries NCM
2003-20 Bond amendment NCM
2003-21 10-1-2003 Bond NCM
2003-22 Bond NCM
2003-23 Truck routes Replaced by
Ord. 2004-1
2003-24 9-17-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2003-25 9-17-2003 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2003-26 10-1-2003 Bond NCM
2003-27 10-1-2003 Bond NCM
2003-28 10-1-2003 Bond NCM
2003-29 10-1-2003 Bond NCM
2003-30 12-3-2003 Housing general standards
amendment
Ch. 87, Art. I
2003-31 12-17-2003 Refunding bonds NCM
2004-1 2-4-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2004-2 4-7-2004 Index rate NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:937
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-3 4-7-2004 General penalty amendment Ch. 1
2004-4 6-2-2004 Drug-Free Zones Map
amendment
Ch. 70
2004-5 5-12-2004 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2004-6 5-12-2004 Vacate alley Ch. A147
2004-7 5-19-2004 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2004-8 7-7-2004 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2004-9 7-7-2004 Vacate alley Ch. A147
2004-10 7-21-2004 Salaries NCM
2004-11 8-4-2004 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 133
2004-12 9-1-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2004-13 9-1-2004 Alley and easement vacation Ch. A147
2004-14 Bond NCM
2004-15 11-3-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2004-16 Soil removal Tabled
2004-17 1-19-2005 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2004-18 12-15-2004 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2004-19 Held
2004-20 1-19-2005 Drug-free school zones
amendment; drug-free public
areas amendment; drunkdriving-
free school zones
amendment
Ch. 70, Arts. I,
II and III
2005-1 1-26-2005 Affordable housing
development fees amendment
Ch. 87, Art. IV
2005-2 1-26-2005 Affordable housing
development fees amendment;
growth share obligation
Ch. 87, Arts. IV
and V
2005-3 1-26-2005 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 36
2005-4 Lease agreement NCM
2005-5 Index rate/CAP NCM
2005-6 2-2-2005 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 76
2005-7 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:938
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-8 3-2-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2005-9 3-16-2005 Removal and disposal of soil
amendment
Ch. 120
2005-10 5-18-2005 Street vacation Ch. A147
2005-11 5-18-2005 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2005-12 5-4-2005 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2005-13 5-4-2005 Police Department: private
and quasi-public functions
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. I
2005-14 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-15 6-1-2005 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2005-16 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-17 Bond NCM
2005-18 Bond NCM
2005-19 Purchase of property NCM
2005-20 9-7-2005 Construction noise, yelling
and shouting
Ch. 102, Art. II
2005-21 9-7-2005 Required growth share
affordable housing obligation
Ch. 87, Art. V
2005-22 Bond NCM
2005-23 10-19-2005 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2005-24 Stormwater management Not adopted
2005-25 Salaries NCM
2005-26 12-7-2005 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2005-27 Amended Township Map NCM
2005-28 12-21-2005 Noise amendment Ch. 102, Art. II
2005-29 12-7-2005 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
2005-30 12-21-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 91
2005-31 1-18-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 116
2006-1 2-1-2006 Sex-offender-free zone Repealed by
Ord. No.
2009-12
2006-2 2-1-2006 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:939
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-3 2-1-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2006-4 2-1-2006 Towing amendment Ch. 130
2006-5 2-1-2006 Stormwater quality protection Ch. 123
2006-6 2-1-2006 Criminal history background
checks
Ch. 65A
2006-7 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Held
2006-8 4-5-2006 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2006-9 4-5-2006 Recycling amendment Repealed by
Ord. No.
2010-09
2006-10 Index rate/CAP NCM
2006-11 Salaries NCM
2006-12 5-3-2006 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 76
2006-13 5-3-2006 Fire Department amendment Ch. 15
2006-14 5-17-2006 Transient merchant licenses Ch. 114
2006-15 6-21-2006 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2006-16 6-21-2006 Portable storage units Ch. 108, Art. VI
2006-17 6-21-2006 Interlocal services agreement
for fire services
NCM
2006-18 6-21-2006 Fees for emergency medical
services
Ch. 15, Art. II
2006-19 7-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No.
2007-01
2006-20 7-5-2006 Speed limit on Cedar Lane
(under county jurisdiction)
NCM
2006-21 9-6-2006 Salaries NCM
2006-22 9-6-2006 Streets and sidewalks: casting
of snow into streets prohibited
Ch. 126, Art. V
2006-23 9-20-2006 Township Seal adopted NCM
2006-24 10-4-2006 Sale of property agreement NCM
2006-25 10-18-2006 Housing: required growth
share affordable housing
obligation amendment
Ch. 87, Art. V
2006-26 11-1-2006 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:940
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-27 12-6-2006 Water and sewer regulations Ch. 140, Art.
VII
2006-28 12-6-2006 Housing: growth share
obligation time payments
Ch. 87, Art. VI
2006-29 12-20-2006 Bond NCM
2007-01 3-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2007-02 Increase budget cap NCM
2007-03 4-4-2007 Administration of government Ch. 4
2007-04 4-4-2007 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 133
2007-05 Bond NCM
2007-06 Salaries NCM
2007-07 5-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2007-08 6-6-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2007-09 6-6-2007 Bond NCM
2007-10 9-19-2007 Affordable housing: Municipal
Housing Liaison and
Administrative Agent
Ch. 33, Art. I
2007-11 9-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2007-12 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Tabled
2007-13 10-3-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2007-14 10-3-2007 Street closings repealer;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 124
(reference
only); 134
2007-15 11-7-2007 Lease agreement NCM
2007-16 12-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2007-17 12-5-2007 Tax abatement NCM
2007-18 12-5-2007 Tax abatement NCM
2007-19 12-5-2007 Tax abatement NCM
2008-01 2-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:941
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-02 2-20-2008 Criminal history background
checks amendment
Ch. 65A
2008-03 3-5-2008 Economic Development
Committee
Ch. 5, Art. I
2008-04 Lease renewal NCM
2008-05 Increase budget cap NCM
2008-06 Bond NCM
2008-07 6-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2008-08 6-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2008-09 7-16-2008 Bond NCM
2008-10 7-16-2008 Bond NCM
2008-11 7-16-2008 Farmland preservation
referendum
NCM
2008-12 8-6-2008 Eligibility for defined
contribution retirement
program
NCM
2008-13 8-6-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-14 9-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2008-15 9-3-2008 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2008-16 9-3-2008 Parking; placement of
dumpsters; portable storage
units amendment
Ch. 108
2008-17 9-17-2008 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2008-18 10-1-2008 Parks and recreation: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 110, Art. I
2008-19 11-5-2008 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2008-20 Tax abatement NCM
2008-21 12-17-2008 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 116
2008-22 Bond NCM
2008-23 Bond NCM
2008-24 Bond NCM
2008-25 12-17-2008 Towing and storage of motor
vehicles amendment
Ch. 130
2008-26 Tax abatement NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:942
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-01 2-4-2009 Schools: residency
requirement for enrollment
Ch. 119, Art. I
2009-02 2-4-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2009-03 2-18-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2009-04 3-4-2009 Environmental Commission
amendment
Ch. 12
2009-05 3-4-2009 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2009-06 3-4-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2009-07 Bond Tabled
2009-08 Sidewalk regulations Held
2009-09 5-6-2009 Bond NCM
2009-10 5-6-2009 Animals amendment Ch. 41
2009-11 6-3-2009 Street vacation Ch. A147
2009-12 6-3-2009 Sex-offender-free zone
repealer
Ch. 70, Art. IV
(footnote only)
2009-13 8-5-2009 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2009-14 8-5-2009 Street vacation Ch. A147
2009-15 8-5-2009 Tax abatement NCM
2009-16 9-2-2009 Bond NCM
2009-17 9-2-2009 Bond NCM
2009-18 8-24-2009 Affordable housing: Fair Share
Plan
Ch. 33, Art. II
2009-19 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Held
2009-20 10-7-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2009-21 12-2-2009 Salaries NCM
2009-22 12-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2010-01 2-17-2010 Stormwater quality protection
amendment
Ch. 123
2010-02 3-17-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2010-03 4-7-2010 Bond NCM
2010-04 4-7-2010 Bond NCM
2010-05 4-7-2010 Bond NCM
2010-06 Held
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:943
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-07 4-21-2010 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2010-08 4-21-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2010-09 5-5-2010 Land development
amendment; solid waste:
recycling
Chs. 91; 122,
Art. IV
2010-10 5-19-2010 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2010-11 6-2-2010 Fees; fees amendment Chs. 2; 4; 41;
43; 91
2010-12 6-16-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-13 7-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2010-14 8-4-2010 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2010-15 9-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2010-16 9-15-2010 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 36
2010-17 10-20-2010 Animals amendment Ch. 41
2010-18 Bond NCM
2010-19 12-15-2010 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2011-01 Lease renewal NCM
2011-02 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2011-03 Bond NCM
2011-04 5-18-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2011-05 6-1-2011 Redevelopment areas
amendment
Ch. 25
2011-06 Sale of property NCM
2011-07 Salaries NCM
2011-08 8-3-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2011-09 8-3-2011 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2011-10 Purchase of water meters NCM
2011-11 9-7-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 2
2011-12 9-7-2011 Sale of property NCM
2011-13 10-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:944
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-14 11-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2011-15 Salaries NCM
2011-16 12-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 91
2011-17 12-21-2011 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2012-01 2-1-2012 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2012-02 2-1-2012 Economic Development
Committee amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
2012-03 2-1-2012 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2012-04 2-1-2012 Salaries NCM
2012-05 2-15-2012 Bond NCM
2012-06 2-15-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2012-07 3-7-2012 Economic Development
Committee amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
2012-08 3-21-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-09 3-21-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-10 4-4-2012 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
2012-11 4-4-2012 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2012-12 4-18-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
2012-13 4-18-2012 Five-year tax exemption and
abatement for commercial or
industrial structures
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2019-25
2012-14 4-18-2012 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2012-15 5-2-2012 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2012-16 6-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2012-17 6-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2012-18 6-13-2012 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
2012-19 6-20-2012 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2012-20 6-20-2012 Financial agreement NCM
2012-21 Fees amendment Held
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:945
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-22 8-1-2012 Tax abatement agreement NCM
2012-23 8-1-2012 Tax abatement agreement NCM
2012-24 9-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2012-25 9-19-2012 Alley vacation Ch. A147
2012-26 9-19-2012 Fees amendment; boats and
boating amendment
Chs. 2; 53
2012-27 10-3-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2012-28 10-3-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-29 10-3-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-30 10-3-2012 Acceptance of donated
property
NCM
2012-31 10-17-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
2012-32 11-7-2012 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2012-33 11-19-2012 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2012-34 11-19-2012 Bond NCM
2012-35 12-5-2012 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2012-36 12-19-2012 Salaries NCM
2012-37 12-19-2012 Salaries NCM
2012-38 12-19-2012 Land conveyance NCM
2012-39 12-19-2012 Financial agreement NCM
2013-01 2-20-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2013-02 2-20-2013 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2013-03 3-6-2013 Fees amendment; land
development amendment
Chs. 2; 91
2013-04 4-17-2013 Tax abatement agreement NCM
2013-05 4-17-2013 Bond NCM
2013-06 6-12-2013 Parks and recreation: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 110, Art. I
2013-07 6-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2013-08 6-12-2013 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 101
2013-09 7-17-2013 Bond NCM
2013-10 7-17-2013 Redevelopment plan NCM
2013-11 8-7-2013 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:946
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-12 8-7-2013 Bond NCM
2013-13 8-7-2013 Bond NCM
2013-14 8-7-2013 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2013-15 9-4-2013 Bond NCM
2013-16 9-4-2013 Bond NCM
2013-17 9-4-2013 Bond NCM
2013-18 9-11-2013 Tax abatement agreement NCM
2013-19 11-6-2013 Street vacation Ch. A147
2013-20 11-6-2013 Police salaries NCM
2013-21 11-6-2013 Bond NCM
2013-22 12-11-2013 Redevelopment plan NCM
2013-23 12-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2013-24 12-18-2013 Tax abatement agreement NCM
2014-01 2-19-2014 Yacht Club lease NCM
2014-02 3-5-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2014-03 4-2-2014 Bond NCM
2014-04 4-16-2014 Salaries NCM
2014-05 5-7-2014 Utility easement NCM
2014-06 6-4-2014 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
2014-07 6-4-2014 Bond NCM
2014-08 6-4-2014 Bond NCM
2014-09 6-4-2014 Bond NCM
2014-10 6-4-2014 Bond NCM
2014-11 6-4-2014 Bond NCM
2014-12 6-4-2014 Bond NCM
2014-13 6-4-2014 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2014-14 6-18-2014 Bond NCM
2014-15 9-3-2014 Bond NCM
2014-16 9-3-2014 Bond NCM
2014-17 9-3-2014 Bond NCM
2014-18 9-3-2014 Property purchase NCM
2014-19 9-17-2014 Property purchase NCM
2014-20 9-17-2014 Property sale NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:947
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-21 10-1-2014 Land development amendment Ch. 91
2014-22 10-15-2014 Bond NCM
2014-23 10-15-2014 Property purchase NCM
2014-24 12-17-2014 Redevelopment plan NCM
2015-01 2-4-2015 Bond NCM
2015-02 2-4-2015 Bond NCM
2015-03 2-4-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-04 2-4-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-05 2-18-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2015-06 3-4-2015 Bond NCM
2015-07 3-18-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-08 3-18-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-09 4-1-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-10 4-15-2015 Property maintenance by
creditors
Ch. 116, Art. II
2015-11 4-15-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-12 4-15-2015 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2015-13 6-3-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-14 8-5-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-15 8-5-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-16 8-5-2015 Financial agreement NCM
2015-17 9-2-2015 Bond NCM
2015-18 9-2-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-19 9-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2015-20 9-16-2015 Cable television franchise Ch. A146
2015-21 10-7-2015 Bond NCM
2015-22 10-7-2015 Bond NCM
2015-23 10-7-2015 Bond NCM
2015-24 10-7-2015 Bond NCM
2015-25 10-7-2015 Bond NCM
2015-26 10-7-2015 Bond NCM
2015-27 12-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:948
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-28 12-2-2015 Police Department: private
and quasi-public functions
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. I
2015-29 12-2-2015 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
2015-30 12-16-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-31 12-16-2015 Property purchase NCM
2015-32 12-16-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
2015-33 12-16-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-01 1-20-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
2016-02 1-20-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
2016-03 2-17-2016 Bond NCM
2016-04 2-17-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-05 2-17-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2016-06 4-6-2016 Criminal history background
checks amendment
Ch. 65A
2016-07 4-6-2016 Tax abatement agreement NCM
2016-08 4-6-2016 Financial agreement (First
Financial Florence I Urban
Renewal)
NCM
2016-09 4-20-2016 Police vehicle purchase NCM
2016-10 4-20-2016 Authorization of participation
in Burlington County Energy
Aggregation Program
NCM
2016-11 4-20-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-12 5-4-2016 Financial agreement
(Turnpike Crossings II Urban
Renewal)
NCM
2016-13 5-18-2016 Police Department: Police
Chaplain
Ch. 22, Art. II
2016-14 5-18-2016 Bond NCM
2016-15 5-18-2016 Bond NCM
2016-16 5-18-2016 Bond NCM
2016-17 5-18-2016 Bond NCM
2016-18 6-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2016-19 7-13-2016 Police Department: Police
Chaplain amendment
Ch. 22, Art. II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:949
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-20 7-13-2016 Off-tract improvements Ch. 106
2016-21 8-3-2016 Sewer easement NCM
2016-22 Not adopted
2016-23 8-3-2016 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
2016-24 8-3-2016 Pilot agreement amendment NCM
2016-25 8-3-2016 Pilot agreement amendment NCM
2016-26 9-7-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-27 9-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2016-28 Not adopted
2016-29 10-5-2016 Bond NCM
2016-30 10-19-2016 Bond NCM
2016-31 10-19-2016 Bond NCM
2016-32 10-19-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-33 12-7-2016 Transfer of property NCM
2016-34 12-7-2016 Bond NCM
2016-35 12-7-2016 Bond NCM
2016-36 12-7-2016 Bond NCM
2016-37 12-7-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-38 12-7-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
2016-39 12-7-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-01 2-1-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2017-02 2-15-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-03 3-1-2017 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
2017-04 4-5-2017 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 64
2017-05 4-5-2017 Fees amendment; property
maintenance: landlord
registration
Ch. 2; Ch. 116,
Art. III
2017-06 4-5-2017 Bond NCM
2017-07 4-19-2017 Bond NCM
2017-08 4-19-2017 Bond NCM
2017-09 4-19-2017 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:950
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-10 4-19-2017 Improvements to streets and
roads
NCM
2017-11 4-19-2017 Salaries NCM
2017-12 4-19-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-13 6-14-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-14 6-14-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-15 6-14-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-16 6-14-2017 Bond NCM
2017-17 6-14-2017 Bond NCM
2017-18 6-14-2017 Bond NCM
2017-19 6-14-2017 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2017-20 6-14-2017 Land conveyance NCM
2017-21 6-14-2017 Acceptance of land donation NCM
2017-22 8-2-2017 Bond NCM
2017-23 8-2-2017 Bond NCM
2017-24 8-2-2017 Authorization to purchase
property
NCM
2017-25 9-6-2017 Redevelopment plan NCM
2017-26 10-4-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 134
2017-27 11-8-2017 Water and sewers amendment Ch. 140
2017-28 12-6-2017 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 79
2017-29 12-6-2017 Bond NCM
2017-30 12-6-2017 Bond NCM
2017-31 12-6-2017 Authorization to purchase
property
NCM
2017-32 12-20-2017 Bond NCM
2017-33 12-20-2017 Bond NCM
2018-01 2-7-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2018-02 2-7-2018 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 79
2018-03 2-7-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-04 2-7-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 134
2018-05 2-7-2018 Easement NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:951
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-06 4-18-2018 Bond NCM
2018-07 4-18-2018 Bond NCM
2018-08 4-18-2018 Bond NCM
2018-09 4-18-2018 Authorization to Purchase
Property
NCM
2018-10 5-2-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-11 4-18-2018 Tax Exemption for Properties NCM
2018-12 5-2-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-13 5-2-2018 Housing: Affordable Housing
Development Fees
Amendment
Ch. 87, Art. IV
2018-14 5-2-2018 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 33
2018-15 7-11-2018 Improvements to Streets and
Roads
NCM
2018-16 7-11-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
2018-17 7-11-2018 Tax Exemption Agreement NCM
2018-18 8-1-2018 Bond NCM
2018-19 8-1-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-20 9-5-2018 Brush, Grass and Weeds
Amendment
Ch. 56
2018-21 Not Adopted
2018-22 9-5-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-23 9-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 134
2018-24 9-19-2018 Water and Sewers Amendment Ch. 140
2018-25 10-10-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-26 10-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 134
2018-27 11-7-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-28 11-7-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
Transient Merchants and
Temporary Businesses
Amendment
Ch. 114, Art. II
2018-29 12-19-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
2018-30 12-19-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:952
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-31 12-19-2018 Bond NCM
2018-32 12-19-2018 Financial Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-01 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 33
2019-02 Lease Agreement NCM 33
2019-03 Salaries NCM 33
2019-04 Short-Term Lease
Agreement
NCM 33
2019-05 Bond NCM 33
2019-06 Bond NCM 33
2019-07 Bond NCM 33
2019-08 Bond NCM 33
2019-09 Bond NCM 33
2019-10 Bond NCM 33
2019-11 5-1-2019 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 64 33
2019-12 5-15-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 2 33
2019-13 Financial Agreement NCM 33
2019-14 6-5-2019 Fees Amendment;
Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 2; Ch.
91
33
2019-15 6-25-2019 Fees Amendment;
Property
Maintenance:
Standards and
Inspections
Amendment
Ch. 2; Ch.
116, Art. I
33
2019-16 Bond NCM 33
2019-17 Bond NCM 33
2019-18 Bond NCM 33
2019-19 Bond NCM 33
2019-20 Utility Easement
Vacation
NCM 33
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
133:953
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-21 9-18-2019 Water and Sewers
Amendment
Ch. 140 33
2019-22 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 33
2019-23 Rescind
Redevelopment Plan
for Parcels in
Roebling Steel Plant
Redevelopment Area
NCM 33
2019-24 12-4-2019 Water and Sewers
Amendment
Ch. 140 33
2019-25 Taxation: Five-Year
Tax Exemption and
Abatement for
Commercial or
Industrial Structures
Ch. 129,
Art. III
33
2019-26 Bond NCM 33
2019-27 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 33
2019-28 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 33
2019-29 Financial Agreement NCM 33
§ DL-1 FLORENCE CODE § DL-1
133:954