Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Board of Health - See Ch.
253.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Borough Council
[Adopted 2-16-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the various chapters and Articles of the
General Ordinances, 1969 Code of the Borough of Florham Park, and the
other ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park of a general and
permanent nature adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Florham Park, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 252, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Borough of Florham Park," hereinafter known and referred to
as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1969 Code of the Borough
of Florham Park, and all other general and permanent ordinances enacted
prior to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are
hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Florham Park by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Florham
Park" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Florham Park, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the
Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
[Amended 5-16-2006 by Ord. No. 10-06]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Florham Park to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section
or part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
more than $2,000 or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in
the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to July 15, 1985.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-15. Definitions and word usage.
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the Borough,
the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Borough Council:
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any and all legislation regulating zoning in the Borough of Florham
Park.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. In addition, the following sections are hereby amended to delete the
specific penalty therefrom and to provide that such violations shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.2
A. Definitions. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Florham Park.
CODE — The Code of the Borough of Florham Park, New Jersey.
COUNCIL or BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the
Borough of Florham Park.
COUNTY — The County of Morris.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough.
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14B, the following sections were amended or added: §§ 8-1,
8-3, 16-2, 16-3, 25-19, 25-20, 42-7, 46-4, 94-4, 94-6, 94-8, 108-9, 122-2, 131-6, 171-12,
188-4A, 188-10A, 188-11C(1)(c) and (7)(a), 212-7D, 212-38B, 212-41, 212-42A and
212-43A. The following sections were deleted: § 14-3(b) and (d) of the 1969 Code and
Section 20-11(g) of Ord. No. 5-77. A complete description of each change is on file in the
office of the Borough Secretary.
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14C, the following penalty sections were amended: §§ 68-3A,
68-6A, 77-6, 80-11, 90-8, 131-6, 150-5, 159-5, 179-5, 188-16A, 199-37, 208-6, 229-12, and
235-4.
§ 1-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 1-15
1:6
§ 1-16. General penalty. [Amended 5-17-1988 by Ord. No. 10-88]
MONTH — A calendar month.
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership,
joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STREET — Includes a highway, road, avenue, court, public lane or
alley; and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath,
unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Borough Council.
WRITING or IN WRITING — Includes any representation of words,
letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
B. Word usage.
(1) Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or
an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding
shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is
done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on
which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted.
(2) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and
corporations as well as to males.
(3) Number, A word importing the singular number only may extend
and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one
person and thing.
(4) Shall; may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is
permissive.
(5) Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, whenever in this Code or in any other
ordinance of the Borough or in any rule, regulation or order
promulgated pursuant to such Code or other ordinance of the Borough
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense
or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or in such other Borough
ordinance, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific
penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this
Code or of any other ordinance of the Borough or of any rule, regulation
or order promulgated pursuant to such Code or other Borough
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
ordinance shall be assessed a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. [Amended 6-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 11-02; 5-16-2006 by Ord. No. 10-06]
B. Each day any violation of this Code or any other Borough ordinance or
rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise provided and as
established by the Municipal Court.
C. Any person convicted of the violation of an ordinance and who is in
default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor may, in the
discretion of the Court, be imprisoned in the Morris County Jail or its
equivalent for a term not to exceed 90 days or may be required to
perform community service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
D. Whenever any provision of the New Jersey Revised Statutes limits the
authority of the Borough to administer the violation of any particular
provision of this Code or other Borough ordinance or rule, regulation or
order promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less amount than that
provided in this section or imprisonment for a shorter term than that
provided in this section, then violation of such particular provision of
this Code or other Borough ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be
administered by the imposition of not more than the maximum fine or
imprisonment so authorized or by both such fine, imprisonment or
community service, where applicable.
E. Whenever any such fine is imposed upon any corporation, such fine and
costs and charges incident thereto may be collected in such manner as
may be provided by law.
F. The fine for parking in a handicapped zone shall be $250, as
promulgated by Chapter 161 of P.L. 2003.3 [Added 3-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 2-04]
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.
§ 1-16 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Administrator — See Ch. 4.
Tax Assessor — See Ch. 8.
Chief Financial Officer — See Ch. 11.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 16.
Public Defender — See Ch. 19.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 20.
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Board of Health — See Ch. 29.
Historic Preservation Commission — See Ch.
31.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 32.
Personnel — See Ch. 38.
Planning Board — See Ch. 42.
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
Director of Public Works — See Ch. 48.
Recreation Department — See Ch. 50.
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 63.
§ 2-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Administrative Code of the Borough of
Florham Park" and is hereby referred to as the "code."
§ 2-2. Elected officials.
A. Officials enumerated.
(1) There shall be elected by the voters of the Borough a Mayor and six
Council members. The term of office of each shall begin at 12:00
noon on January 1 next after their election.
(2) The Mayor shall hold office for four years and until his/her
successor qualifies. Council members shall hold office for three
years and until their successor qualifies, and their respective terms
shall be arranged so that the terms of two Council members expire
at the end of each year.
B. Resignation and vacancies.
(1) Mayor and Borough Council (governing body). All vacancies
occurring in the governing body shall be controlled by and filled in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:16-1 et seq., the
Municipal Vacancy Law.
(2) Other elective offices. All vacancies in other elective offices shall be
filled by nomination by the Mayor and appointment by him/her, by
and with the advice and consent of the Council expressed by the
vote of a majority of the members of the Council present at the
meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:9
§ 2-3. Appointed officers.
required for such purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereof
except in the case of a tie.
(3) Procedure for filling vacancies.
(a) All vacancies occurring in any other elective office shall be
filled by appointment until January 1 following the next annual
election and until the election and qualification of a successor.
The procedure for appointments and in case of failure to make
or confirm the same shall be as provided in § 2-3B.
(b) If a vacancy occurs at so short a period of time before the next
annual election that the office cannot be filled at the election,
the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as though it had
occurred immediately after the election, and the vacancy shall
then be filled at the next subsequent annual election for the
portion of the term, if any, as may still remain unexpired.
(c) At the next annual election of persons elected to fill the
vacancies, he/she shall be elected for the unexpired term only.
A. Term; removal; residency. There shall be appointed a Borough
Administrator, Borough Clerk, Borough Attorney, Borough Engineer,
Borough Treasurer, Chief Financial Officer and such other officers as
the Council may deem necessary. They shall perform the duties
required by law and the ordinances of the Borough. They shall all hold
office at the pleasure of the Council, unless the office holder has been
tenured, and no officer shall be removed without being afforded an
opportunity to be heard. Unless sooner removed, appointed officers
shall hold office for one year and until their successors qualify. Except
for the Borough Attorney, Auditor, Engineer, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector,
members of the Police Department, Construction Official, subcode
officials, Director of Public Works and any other appointed municipal
officer for which residency within the Borough is not required by
statute, they shall reside within the Borough.
B. Method of appointment; vacancies. Except as otherwise provided by the
laws of New Jersey, the Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and
consent of the Council, appoint all officers directed to be appointed and
fill all vacancies in appointive offices for the unexpired term only. Within
30 days after an office becomes vacant, the Mayor shall make a
nomination. If the Mayor fails to nominate within 30 days or the Council
fails to confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then after the
expiration of 30 days the Council shall appoint the officers directed to
be appointed. No appointment shall be made except by the vote of a
majority of the members of the Council present at the meeting,
provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for that
purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
§ 2-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-4
1:10
§ 2-4. Powers and duties of Mayor.
The Mayor shall have the following powers and:
§ 2-5. Borough Council.
A. The Mayor shall be the head of the municipal government and shall
have all the powers granted by the laws of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Borough, including particularly those powers
enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5.
B. The Mayor shall preside at the meetings of the Council and its
deliberations and may vote to break a tie. The Mayor shall also
participate in the determination of Borough affairs to the extent
permitted by statute.
C. The Mayor shall, on all occasions, preserve the strictest order and
decorum and shall cause the removal of all persons who interrupt the
orderly proceedings of the Council.
D. When two or more Council members shall speak at the same time, the
Mayor shall name the one entitled to the floor.
E. The Mayor shall decide all questions of order without debate, subject to
appeal to the Borough Council, and may call upon the Borough Council
for its opinion upon any question of order.
F. The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of all Borough Council
committees, boards, bodies and commissions, both standing and
special, and shall be informed in advance of all meetings of these
groups.
G. The Mayor shall serve as the liaison between the governing body and all
boards, committees, agencies or organizations. The Mayor shall also
appoint a Council member as liaison if the Mayor deems it appropriate
and necessary.
H. The Mayor shall assign each Council person a portfolio of boards,
commissions or committees for the purpose of supervision,
coordination and reporting.
A. Composition. The Mayor and Council members of the Borough shall
constitute the Council.
B. Meetings.
(1) The Council shall hold an annual meeting on January 1 of each year
for the purpose of reorganization, unless otherwise advertised.
(2) The agenda and workshop meetings shall be held at the Borough
Hall at 7:00 p.m.; regular meetings at 8:00 p.m., during the course
of the year, according to the meeting schedule approved by the
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:11
Mayor and Council at the annual meeting in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act.4
(3) The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special meetings of the
Council. In the case of the Mayor's neglect or refusal, any four
members of the Council may do so.
(4) At the annual meeting, the following order of business shall be
observed:
(a) Call to order.
(b) Pledge allegiance to the flag.
(c) Swearing-in of elected officials.
(d) Roll call.
(e) Election of Council President.
(f) Mayoral appointments with confirmation.
(g) Mayor's message.
(5) At the regular meetings, the following order of business shall be
observed:
(a) Roll call.
(b) Open Public Meetings Act announcement.
(c) Pledge allegiance to the flag.
(d) Approval of minutes.
(e) Communications.
(f) Reports.
(g) Ordinances for final reading and passage.
(h) Ordinances for first reading.
(i) Resolutions.
(j) New business.
(k) Payment of vouchers.
(l) Public hearing.
(m) Adjournment.
(6) The order of business for the annual and regular meetings may be
changed by a majority vote of the members present at the meeting
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-5
1:12
of the Borough Council. Every member who shall be present when
the question is put to vote shall vote for or against the question or
shall abstain. Such abstention shall have no effect upon the final
count and shall be treated as neither affirmative nor negative.
(7) Except as otherwise required by statute, all action of the Borough
Council shall be by a majority vote of those present, except that no
action may be taken with fewer than three affirmative votes.
(8) Upon the motion of one member of the Borough Council and
seconded by another member of the Borough Council, or upon
request of the Mayor and seconded by a member of the Borough
Council, a roll-call vote shall be taken and the yeas, nays and
abstentions entered into the minutes of the meeting.
C. Quorum. Three Council members and the Mayor or, in the absence of
the Mayor, four Council members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business; but a small number may meet and adjourn from
time to time. (See § 2-5I.)
D. President of Council. By a majority vote, the Council at its annual
meeting shall elect from its number a President who shall preside at all
its meetings when the Mayor does not preside. The President shall hold
office for one year and until the next annual meeting. He shall have the
right to debate and vote on all questions before the Council. If the
Council at its annual meeting fails to elect a President, the Mayor shall
appoint the President from the Council, and no confirmation by the
Council shall be necessary.
E. Acting Mayor. If the Mayor is absent from the Borough or for any reason
is unable to act, the President of the Council shall perform all duties of
the Mayor during such absence or inability. If the Mayor intends to be
absent from the Borough, he/she shall notify the President in writing of
the intended absence, and the President shall become Acting Mayor
from time he/she receives the notice until the Mayor's return. If the
President is temporarily unable to act, the Council member having the
longest term of service may act temporarily for the President.
F. Powers of the Council. The Council shall possess all the powers granted
by or permissible under the laws of the State of New Jersey, including
particularly those powers enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-6.
G. Rules of procedure.
(1) The Council shall provide, by resolution or ordinance, rules of
procedure noninconsistent with law or this code. Proceedings at all
meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of
Order, revised, except where the Council provides otherwise by
resolution or ordinance. The Attorney shall be ex officio
parliamentarian and shall give his opinion on questions of
procedure at the request of members of the Council.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:13
§ 2-6. Borough Clerk and Deputy Borough Clerk.
(2) The Mayor and Council shall permit public discussion or comment
on any question or issue prior to any vote being taken on that
question or issue. Said public discussion or comment shall be
permitted after completion of discussion by the Mayor and Council
and shall be reasonably limited to statements relative to the
particular question or issue on which the vote is to be taken. If, in
the opinion of the Mayor and Council, it becomes necessary to
limit, delete or terminate said public discussion or comment on a
question or issue, said limitation, deletion or termination shall be
accomplished by a majority vote of the Council members present,
on a motion to limit, delete or terminate discussion. Said motion
shall not be subject to public comment or discussion.
H. Attendance at meetings. All regular, workshop and special meetings of
the Council shall be open to the public. The Attorney, the Clerk and any
other Borough officer or employee whose presence is required by
resolution of the Council shall attend such meetings.
I. Conference meetings. The Borough Council may meet at any time in
informal conferences for preliminary consideration of any Borough
business, to prepare or plan agenda for its future meetings and meet
with any officer or employee of the Borough or any other person. Such
meetings shall be subject to the provisions of the Open Public Meetings
Act, P.L. 1975, c. 231.5 Except for meetings which are closed to the
public as authorized by the Open Public Meetings Act, all conference
meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
A. Borough Clerk.
(1) Duties. The Clerk shall be responsible to perform those duties as
are now or hereafter imposed by the state laws or by a Borough
ordinance, including those specified by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133. The
Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council. He/she shall attend all
meetings of the Council and of the Council committees when
required by the chairmembers and shall keep the minutes of the
meetings of the Council and of the committees. The minutes of each
meeting of the Council shall be signed by the Clerk. The Clerk
serves as secretary of the Borough; Secretary to the Mayor and
Council; chief administrative officer of all elections; and
administrative officer responsible for licenses and permits except
where statute or municipal ordinance has delegated that
responsibility to some other municipal officer; assessment search
officer; and information officer to the public.
(2) Appointment/term of office.
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-6
1:14
(a) Effective January 1, 2002, no person shall be appointed or
reappointed as a Municipal Clerk unless that person holds a
registered municipal clerk (RMC) certificate.
(b) The Mayor and Council shall appoint a person to a three-year
term within 90 days after the office of Municipal Clerk
becomes vacant. The term begins on the actual date of
appointment.
(3) Vacancy in the office of the Municipal Clerk/Acting Municipal
Clerk.
(a) In the case of a vacancy, an appointment is made for a new
term and not for the unexpired term.
(b) Until January 1, 2002: the Mayor and Council may appoint a
person who does not hold a registered municipal clerk
certificate to serve as municipal clerk for an initial three-year
term. After January 1, 2002: no person may be appointed or
reappointed as municipal clerk who does not hold an RMC
certificate.
(c) If an RMC has been appointed as Borough Clerk prior to
January 1, 2002, and then vacates the office, within 90 days of
the date of the vacancy, the Mayor and Council can appoint a
non-RMC as Acting Clerk for a one-year term.
[1] With written permission from the Director of the Division
of Local Government Services, the Mayor and Council may
appoint an Acting Clerk for two additional one-year terms.
Therefore, a non-RMC may be an Acting Clerk through
January 1, 2002, provided that they have not served in the
position for more than three consecutive years as of that
date:
[2] Time served as Acting Clerk may not be credit as time
served as Borough Clerk for the purposes of tenure.
[3] A Mayor and Council may not appoint someone who holds
an RMC certificate as an Acting Clerk.
(d) If the Mayor and Council fails or refuses to comply with this
section, the Director may order the Mayor and Council to
comply by a certain date which shall afford the Mayor and
Council a reasonable time within which to comply.
(4) Qualifications. The following are required for appointment as well
as for application to take the examination for certification as
registered municipal clerk (RMC):
(a) At least 21 years of age.
(b) Citizen of the United States.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6
1:15
(c) Of good moral character.
(d) In receipt of a high school diploma or an equivalent certificate
accepted by the Commissioner of Education.
(e) Completion of at least two years of education at a college of
recognized study, which can be substituted with year-for-year
full-time experience or the equivalent part-time experience in
federal, state or local government performing duties relative to
those performed by a Municipal Clerk.
(5) Reappointment. The Reappointment of an incumbent Municipal
Clerk within 60 days of the expiration of the prior term is
considered a reappointment and shall date back to the expiration
date of the initial term (for purposes of tenure).
B. Deputy Borough Clerk.
(1) Position created. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A 40A:9-135,
there is hereby created the position of Deputy Borough Clerk.
(2) Appointment. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
(3) Term of office. The term of office shall be a three-year term. The
term shall commence on the actual date of appointment. In the
event of a vacancy in the position of Deputy Borough Clerk, an
appointment shall be made for a new term and not for the
unexpired term.
(4) Duties.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Deputy Borough Clerk generally to
aid and assist the Borough Clerk in the performance of his/her
office in such manner as the Borough Clerk shall direct. During
the absence or disability of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy
Borough Clerk shall have all the powers of the Borough Clerk
and shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
(b) In addition to the duties set forth in Subsection B(4)(a), the
Deputy Borough Clerk shall also, but not in limitation thereof,
assist the Borough Clerk in the following functions and/or
duties and perform the same, notwithstanding that they may
not be functions performed by the Borough Clerk, as directed
by the Borough Clerk:
[1] Prepare all minutes required to be taken by the Borough
Clerk.
[2] Attend meetings in place of the Borough Clerk.
[3] Process raffle applications.
[4] Process license applications.
§ 2-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-6
1:16
[5] Answer phone.
[6] Process mail.
[7] General typing and assistance as directed by the Borough
Clerk.
[8] Maintenance of Borough computer systems and website.
C. Ordinances and resolutions.
(1) The Clerk shall record all ordinances in books to be provided for
that purpose. After each ordinance, he/she shall record and certify
the proof of its publication as required by law. Each ordinance so
recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who shall
attest that it was adopted on a date stated, and when so signed the
recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record of the
ordinance. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to record, sign
or certify shall not impair or affect the validity of an ordinance
which has been duly adopted.
(2) Periodically, as determined by the Council, the Clerk shall compile
at least two copies of all ordinances that have been adopted since
the previous code book revision or supplement and forward them to
a company selected by the Council to prepare a new supplement or
revision to the Borough Code Book.
(3) The Clerk shall compile annually, in the order of their adoption, all
resolutions adopted by the Council during the year and shall
preserve them.
D. Custodian of records. The Clerk shall have the custody of and safely
keep all records, books and documents of the Borough except those
committed by ordinance, to any other office, by resolution or by law. On
request and on the payment of the fees prescribed therefor, the Clerk
shall furnish a certified copy of any paper in his/her custody under the
Corporate Seal of the Borough.
E. Corporate Seal. The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the
Borough to be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by
ordinance or resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify
any document on record in his/her office, or to certify any act or paper
which form the records in his/her office shall appear to have been a
public act of the Borough or a public document.
F. Insurance; surety bonds; contracts. Subject to the supervision of the
Council, the Clerk shall:
(1) Be the depository for and the custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, except his/
her own bond which shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer,
of all insurance policies on or with respect to risks insured for the
benefit of the Borough or to protect it against any claim, demand or
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6
1:17
§ 2-7. Administrative organization.
liability; and of all formal contracts for work, labor, services,
supplies, equipment and materials to which the Borough may be a
party.
(2) Be the depository for and the custodian of all performance bonds
running to the Borough as obligee or any other form of security
given by a contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on
account of work done or to be done in or for the Borough.
(3) Have custody of all leases, titles and deeds of property owned by
the Borough.
(4) Report to the Council annually, at such times as the Council may
require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each
surety bond and contract of insurance, the nature and terms of
outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective
expiration dates.
G. Administrative rules and regulations; filing and publication. The Clerk
shall maintain a current compilation of all rules and regulations, which
shall be available for public inspection in his/her office during business
hours. No rule or general regulation made by a department, officer,
agency or authority of the Borough, unless it relates to the organization
or internal management of the municipal government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Clerk.
H. Other laws and ordinances. In addition to other functions, powers and
duties prescribed by ordinance and subject to the supervision and
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall:
(1) Perform all the functions required of municipal clerks by the
General Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any
other law or ordinance.
(2) Administer the provisions of Borough ordinances with reference to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
(3) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and
duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to
him/her by the Council.
A. Committees; officers; boards; bodies and commissions.
(1) Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:60-7b, there are hereby
established the following standing committees:
(a) (Reserved)6
6. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(a), Trustees of the Free Public Library, was
repealed 4-30-2012 by Ord. No. 12-3. See now § 2-35.
§ 2-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-7
1:18
(b) Municipal Alliance Committee. [Amended 6-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-10]
(c) Capital Improvement Committee.
(d) Community TV Committee.
(e) Airport Advisory Committee.
(f) Gazebo Committee.
(g) Construction Board of Appeals.
(h) Housing Committee.
(i) Public Information Committee.
(j) Any other committee, officer, board, body or commission
deemed necessary by the Mayor and Council.
(2) Appointment.
(a) The Mayor shall appoint the members of all committees,
boards, bodies and commissions, as well as the Council liaison
to each, at the annual meeting, with the advice and consent of
the Council, and shall see that all matters referred to these
groups are acted upon and reported promptly to the Council.
(b) In the case of death, resignation, removal from the office or
incapacity to serve of any committee Chairperson or member,
the Mayor shall name the successor Chairperson of the
Committee.
(c) The Mayor shall, at any time, change existing committee
assignments and Chairperson if the Mayor deems it to be in the
best interest of the Borough.
(d) The Chairperson of each standing committee shall be prepared
to report to the Mayor and Council at each regular meeting on
the work of his/her committee. The Chairperson shall also
prepare and submit a written annual report to the Mayor and
Council as of the last meeting of each year.
(3) Duties and powers of committees.
(a) Standing committees are appointed to expedite and facilitate
the work of the Council, but the entire Council is accountable
for any and all of its acts.
(b) The general duties, powers and functions of a standing
committee shall be to:
[1] Administer the activities and matters for which it has been
given responsibility.
§ 2-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7
1:19
§ 2-8. Borough Administrator.
(See Chapter 4.)
§ 2-9. Chief Financial Officer.
(See Chapter 11.)
[2] Perform such additional acts and duties as may be
assigned to it by the Mayor and Council.
[3] Report and make recommendations to the Council
concerning activities and matters assigned to it.
(c) No standing committee shall have the power to make promises
or commitments which directly or indirectly bind the Council
or to act in such a manner or make decisions which set
precedent or violate established Council policy.
(d) The Mayor may appoint special committees and the
Chairperson of such committees for purposes other than those
included in the duties of the standing committees with the
advice and consent of the Council. The Chairperson of such
special committee shall be prepared to report to the Mayor and
Council on the work of his committee and shall submit a
written annual report not later than the last meeting of the
year.
B. Boards and bodies. There shall be the following boards and bodies in
the Borough of Florham Park:
(1) Municipal Court (see Chapter 16).
(2) Planning Board (see Chapter 42).
(3) Zoning Board of Adjustment (see Chapter 62).
(4) Board of Health (see Chapter 29).
(5) Board of Recreation Commissioners (see Chapter 50).
(6) Sewerage Authority (see Chapter 58).7
(7) Historic Preservation Commission (see Chapter 31).
(8) Environmental Commission (see Chapter 32).
C. Expenditures. The Chairman of each committee may approve
expenditures relating to his/her department in an amount not
exceeding $500, subject to approval by Council at it next meeting.
7. Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer Utility. Former Ch. 58, Sewerage Authority,
was repealed 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-40.
§ 2-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-10
1:20
§ 2-10. Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall possess all the powers and duties established by
law. The Collector shall enter in suitable books to be kept for that purpose
the sums received by him/her each day for taxes, with the names of the
persons on whose account the same shall have been paid; shall keep a
record and account of the finances of the Borough; and shall, within 60 days
after the end of the fiscal year, or when otherwise required by the Council,
make and furnish a report thereof with a detailed and true statement of
all moneys received by him/her and disbursed therefrom and for what
purposes, from the commencement of his/her official year to the date of his/
her report, or for such period as the Council may require, a list of delinquent
taxpayers for the previous year. He/she shall file the report, with two copies
of the statement and list of delinquents, with the Clerk within the time
hereinafter specified or when otherwise required by the Council. He/she
shall, as necessary and as directed, arrange for any sales of real estate for
delinquents taxes.
§ 2-11. Tax Assessor.
(See Chapter 8.)
§ 2-12. Police Department.
(See Chapter 46.)
§ 2-13. Fire Department.
(See Chapter 25.)
§ 2-14. Department of Community Services. [Amended 6-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 16-06; 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-40]
A. Department established; Director of Community Services. There shall
be within the Borough government a Department of Community
Services, the head of which shall be the Director of Community
Services.
B. Division of the Department. Within the Department shall be the Water
Utility, the Sewer Utility, the Division of Code Administration, the Pool
Utility, and such other divisions as may be approved from time to time
by the governing body.
C. The Pool Utility shall be considered under the supervision of the
Recreation Department and its Director with regard to the coordination
of services and programs. In all other aspects and operationally, the
Pool Utility shall be under the supervision of the Department of
Community Services and its Director.
D. Division of Code Administration; functions. The function of the Division
of Code Administration shall be to coordinate activities and
enforcement of all property-related codes of the Borough, including
§ 2-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-14
1:21
§ 2-15. Borough Engineer. [Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06;
12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-40]
property maintenance, construction, and any related codes, ordinances
and regulations. The Division shall include the Construction Code
Enforcement Agency as described by state statute and ordinances of
the Borough. All code and subcode officials shall be appointed pursuant
to state statute and regulations, and their terms and duties are fixed
pursuant thereto. See Chapter 103, Construction Codes, Uniform. The
head of the Division of Code Administration shall be the Construction
Code Official, who shall report to the Director.
E. Other functions within the Department. Other functions within the
Department may be designated from time to time by action of the
governing body. These may include, but are not limited to, providing
administrative services to the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the Construction Code Appeals Board, and such other
boards or committees as the governing body may create or designate.
F. Director of Community Services; responsibilities.
(1) The Director of Community Services shall be responsible for
management of the Department, its employees, facilities and
equipment, including assigning tasks and functions within the
various divisions and to the various employees of the Department.
Notwithstanding the outlines of functions contained in this section
in assigning functions and tasks, the provision of services to the
community shall be of paramount concern, without regard to
formal or previous organizational structure.
(2) The Director shall also serve as the Assistant Administrator for the
Borough and shall report to the Borough Administrator, who may
assign tasks and responsibilities to the Director.
(3) The Director shall serve as the Purchasing Agent for the Borough
and shall be responsible for performing all of the duties and
responsibilities of that position as required by state law.
(4) The Director shall also be responsible for oversight and
management of the following contract services for the Borough:
recycling, radio repair, water chemicals, computer services,
telephone services, fire extinguishing services.
(5) The Director shall be responsible for oversight of all Borough
construction projects, in conjunction with the Borough Engineer
and the Construction Official.
A. Appointment; term. There shall be a Borough Engineer appointed by
the Council for a term of three years. The Borough Engineer shall
receive such compensation as may be agreed upon and determined by
the Council. He/She shall be a duly licensed professional engineer of
the State of New Jersey but need not be a resident of the Borough.
§ 2-14 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-15
1:22
§ 2-16. Department of Public Works.8 [Added 12-16-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-40
§ 2-17. Borough Attorney; Municipal Prosecutor.
B. Duties. The Borough Engineer shall perform the duties prescribed by
general law and ordinance and, as authorized by the Council, shall
serve as the engineering consultant for the Planning Board and the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Borough Engineer shall be the head of
the Engineering Department and shall be responsible for the duties and
operations of that Department.
C. Department of Engineering functions. The function of the Department
of Engineering shall be to provide for the design, construction and
repair of Borough infrastructure and for the provision of technical
information and services to the Borough government, including
supervision of engineers (staff or contract), technicians, and
contractors hired by the Borough, and such other duties and
responsibilities as may be assigned by the governing body.
A. Functions.
(1) The function of the Department of Public Works shall be to furnish
services within the Borough, including, but not necessarily limited
to, construction and/or maintenance of streets, drainage, storm
sewers, parks and shade trees, public buildings and grounds,
public equipment, vehicle maintenance, collection and disposal of
vegetative waste, and such other services as may be approved by
the governing body. The head of the Department of Public Works
shall be the Director of Public Works.
(2) The Department of Public Works shall be organized into three
sections which include Roads, Buildings and Grounds, and Vehicle
Maintenance, with workers assigned to each section as needed to
accomplish Department goals and objectives. The supervisors
within the sections shall be superintendents, supervisors and
foremen, who shall report to the Director.
A. Appointment. The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council for a term of one year. He/
She shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident
of the Borough. The Attorney shall receive a retainer and in addition
shall be paid reasonable fees and charges.
B. Powers and duties. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the
Attorney shall give all legal counsel and advice required by the Council
or any member thereof and shall in general serve as the legal advisor to
the Council on all matters of Borough business. He/She shall represent
8. Editor's Note: Former § 2-16, Building Department, was repealed 6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
06-16. See now § 2-14D.
§ 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17
1:23
§ 2-18. Municipal Court.
(See Chapter 16.)
§ 2-19. Planning Board.
(See Chapter 42.)
§ 2-20. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(See Chapter 62.)
§ 2-21. Board of Health.
(See Chapter 29.)
the Borough in all judicial and administrative proceedings in which
the Borough or any of its officers or agencies may be a party or have
an interest. In furtherance of his/her general powers and duties, but
without limiting them, the Attorney shall:
(1) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Borough.
(2) Prosecute and defend litigation involving the Borough and conduct
appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any interest
of the Borough.
(3) With the approval of the Borough Council, compromise or settle
litigation in which the Borough is involved.
(4) Render opinions in writing upon questions of law submitted to him/
her by the Council or any member thereof with respect to their
official powers and duties.
(5) Supervise and direct the work of additional attorney and technical
and professional assistants which the Council may authorize for
special or regular employment in or for the Borough.
C. Municipal Prosecutor. At the discretion of the governing body, a
Municipal Prosecutor may be appointed as a position separate from
that of the Borough Attorney to represent the Borough on all Municipal
Court matters or any other matters in which the Borough may need
someone to prosecute charges. The manner of appointment, term of
appointment and qualifications for the position shall be the same as for
Borough Attorney. The Prosecutor shall be paid reasonable fees and
charges.
§ 2-17 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-22
1:24
§ 2-22. Recreation Department. [Amended 12-19-2000 by Ord. No.
31-00]
(See Chapter 50.)
§ 2-23. Municipal Public Defender.
(See Chapter 19.)
§ 2-24. Historic Preservation Commission.
(See Chapter 31.)
§ 2-25. Environmental Commission.
(See Chapter 32.)
§ 2-26. (Reserved)9
§ 2-27. Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(See Chapter 250.)
A. Establishment. The office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer of Florham
Park is hereby established.
B. Appointment; term; vacancy. Appointments to the office of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council. The term of office shall be one year, but the first
term shall commence upon the effective date of this chapter and shall
expire December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, every appointment
shall be made for the calendar year. A vacancy for the office shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
C. Duties. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall:
(1) Enforce the Zoning Ordinance and Property Maintenance Code of
the Borough of Florham Park and have all the powers, functions
and duties prescribed by general law and ordinances, and as
further provided in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 250) and
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 188).
(2) Keep a record of his/her proceedings and a complaint book, all of
which shall be subject to inspection; report monthly to the Council
the number of zoning violations, summonses issued and action
taken. (See §§ 250-6 and 188-28.)
9. Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority, formerly referenced in this § 2-26, was dissolved
2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its operations and activities were transferred to the
Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer
Utility.
§ 2-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-28
1:25
§ 2-28. Emergency Management Coordinator.
Duties. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall coordinate and
manage any crisis or disaster in the Borough and act as liaison to the Morris
County Regional Emergency Deployment System (MCREDS).10 (Reference
also State of New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety, Division
of State Police, Directive 61, dated 11-19-1986, and Directive 102, dated
7-24-1987 and revisions of same.)
§ 2-29. Mayor's Advisory Council. [Added 2-17-2004 by Ord. No.
1-04]
§ 2-30. Personnel Committee. [Added 7-20-2004 by Ord. No. 10-04]
§ 2-31. Recreation Committee. [Added 5-16-2006 by Ord. No. 11-06]
A. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:60-7d, there is hereby
established a Mayor's Advisory Council.
B. Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the members of the Mayor's
Advisory Council from among the residents of the Borough and others
who may be able to offer useful advice, each for a term of one year.
C. Meetings. The Mayor shall consult with individual members and
convene meetings of all of the members of the Mayor's Advisory Council
at his discretion.
D. Matters referred to Council. The Mayor shall seek advice and counsel
from the Mayor's Advisory Council, and refer to the Mayor's Advisory
Council those matters that he or she determines to be necessary and
appropriate, at his or her sole discretion.
A. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:60-7(d), there is hereby
established a Personnel Committee.
B. Appointment. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council,
shall appoint up to five members to the Personnel Committee from
among the residents of the Borough and others who have experience in
management and/or human resources that enables them to offer useful
insight and advice, each for a term of one year. The Mayor shall serve as
an ex officio member of the Personnel Committee.
C. Matters referred to Committee. The Mayor and Council shall seek
advice and counsel from the Personnel Committee, and refer to the
Personnel Committee those matters that they determine to be
necessary and appropriate with respect to the Borough's Personnel
Manual and personnel policies.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Mutual Aid Agreements, Art. I, Regional Emergency Deployment
System.
§ 2-28 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-31
1:26
§ 2-32. Grants Committee. [Added 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-13;
amended 9-18-2007 by Ord. No. 07-22]
A. There shall be established a Recreation Committee, which shall be
responsible for recommending goals and objectives for the Borough's
recreational programs and recommending policies and procedures, and
updating the Recreation Master Plan on an annual basis. The
Committee shall advise the governing body as to the recreational needs
of the Borough and shall report as to all activities to the Mayor and
Council on at least a quarterly basis.
B. The members of the Recreation Committee shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, from among the
residents of the Borough, with the exception of the Borough’s
Recreation Director, who shall serve as a member of the Committee and
not be required to be a Borough resident. There shall be nine members
appointed to the Committee. The members of said Recreation
Committee shall hold office as follows: four members shall be appointed
for terms of two years; five members shall be appointed for terms of one
year. After the expiration of the term of the five members that were
appointed for a one-year term, each member of the Committee shall be
appointed to serve for two years from the day of appointment until his
or her successor is duly appointed and has qualified. Any vacancy
occurring during the term of any of the members shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original term. [Amended
2-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-5]
C. A Chairman of the Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council for a one-year term.
D. The members of said Recreation Committee shall receive no salary or
other compensation for their services.
E. The Recreation Committee shall meet at least once per month. Minutes
of all meetings of each Committee shall be kept. The Secretary of the
Committee shall prepare and maintain said minutes, and submit a copy
of the Mayor and Council.
A. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:60-7d, there is hereby
established a Grants Committee.
B. Membership. The Grants Committee shall be comprised of the Borough
Administrator, the Director of Community Services, the Chief of Police
or his designee, and five members to be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council.
C. Appointment. The Mayor shall nominate the members of the Grants
Committee from among the residents of the Borough and others who
may have relevant experience or education that would enable them to
offer assistance, each for a term of one year commencing on January 1
§ 2-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-32
1:27
§ 2-33. Pool Committee. [Added 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 08-33]
§ 2-34. Sewer Utility Committee. [Added 2-17-2009 by Ord. No.
09-4]
of each year, except for the initial members, who shall be appointed for
the remainder of the calendar year in which they are appointed.
D. The Grants Committee shall hold meetings as the members deem
necessary and shall undertake all efforts deemed by the membership to
be necessary and appropriate to assist the Borough in researching and
applying for grant monies and other funding for Borough projects and
activities. The Grants Committee shall make recommendations to the
governing body regarding the application for grants and, when
authorized by the governing body, shall be responsible for the
preparation of grant application forms and shall coordinate the filing of
applications for grants with appropriate Borough personnel and
officials.
E. The Grants Committee shall cooperate with and coordinate its efforts
with the Open Space Committee and the Environmental Commission in
connection with any application for a grant for the purchase of land by
the Borough.
A. There shall be established a Pool Committee, which shall be responsible
for making recommendations to the governing body as to the operation
of and strategic planning for the Municipal Pool. The Committee shall
advise the governing body as to the needs of the pool members and the
community and shall report as to its activities on at least a quarterly
basis.
B. The members of the Pool Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, from among the residents of
the Borough who are members in good standing of the Municipal Pool.
There shall be five members of the Committee, each to be appointed to
serve a one-year term.
C. A Chairman of the Pool Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor for
a one-year term.
D. The members of the Pool Committee shall hold meetings as the
members deem necessary.
A. There shall be established a Sewer Utility Committee, which shall be
responsible for making recommendations to the governing body as to
the operation of and strategic planning for the Sewer Utility. The
Committee shall report to the governing body as to its activities on at
least a quarterly basis.
B. The members of the Sewer Utility Committee shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council. There shall be five
§ 2-32 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-34
1:28
§ 2-35. Trustees of Free Public Library. [Added 4-30-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-3]
§ 2-36. Anti-nepotism policy.
The governing body of the Borough of Florham Park declares that an antinepotism
policy should be enacted.
§ 2-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPOINTED OFFICIAL — Any person, appointed by the Mayor and/or
Council of the Borough of Florham Park, to any local government agency
as that term is defined within N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.3(e), including, but not
limited to, appointees to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, Planning Board,
Library, and any board, commission, agency or other instrumentality of the
Borough of Florham Park, as well as any other independent local authority
or entity created by the Borough of Florham Park, which performs functions
other than of a purely advisory nature and/or in which members receive
compensation.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — The administrative head with designated
responsibility for the operation of a particular organizational unit, group
of organizational units or department of the government of the Borough of
Florham Park.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Any person holding the position of Mayor or Council
Member of the Borough of Florham Park.
members of the Committee, each to be appointed to serve a one-year
term.
C. A Chairman of the Sewer Utility Committee shall be appointed by the
Mayor for a one-year term.
D. The members of the Sewer Utility Committee shall hold meetings as the
members deem necessary.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq. of the statutes of the State of New
Jersey, the Board of Trustees of the Free Public Library of the Borough
of Florham Park may consist of from seven to nine members.
B. The composition of the Board shall be as follows:
(1) The Mayor of the Borough or his/her designee;
(2) The Superintendent of Florham Park schools, or his/her designee;
(3) Up to seven citizens to be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent
of the Council, who shall each be appointed for a term of five
(years).
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37
1:29
FAMILY MEMBER or RELATIVE — Spouse, child, parent, sibling,
grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sisterin-
law, stepfather, stepmother, stepsibling, half-brother, half-sister, nephew,
niece, first cousins, aunt, uncle, foster children, domestic partner or
cohabitants.
SUPERVISOR — Any employee of the Borough of Florham Park having
supervisory duties and authority over another employee or employees of the
Borough of Florham Park.
§ 2-38. Hiring and supervision of employees.
§ 2-39. Promotion of Existing Employees.
No elected official, appointed official, department head or supervisor of the
Borough of Florham Park may participate in the promotion process or any
other personnel matter, of any existing Borough employee who is a relative
or family member of such elected official, department head or supervisor.
§ 2-40. Appointments.
No relative or family member of an elected official of the Borough of
Florham Park shall be appointed to the position of any Borough professional
who receives compensation, or any Borough Board or Commission which
has more than an advisory role and/or one in which the members receive
compensation.
A. No person who is a relative or family member of any elected official,
appointed official, department head or supervisor of the Borough of
Florham Park shall be considered for employment as an employee of the
Borough. This applies to full-time, part-time and seasonal employment.
This policy does not apply to present employees and shall not restrict
nor prohibit the continued employment of individuals to a position or
positions with the Borough where a relative of a permanent employee is
elected before the date of the permanent employee's start date of
employment with the Borough.
B. No elected official can serve as Council liaison to any department that
employs any member of that elected official's family.
C. These policies are not for the purpose of depriving any citizen of an
equal chance for a government job, but solely to eliminate the potential
for preferential treatment of the family and relatives of elected officials,
appointed officials, department heads and supervisors. These policies
will not deprive any permanent employee as of the date of these policies
of any promotional right in the normal career development nor affect
the existing status of any permanent employee.
§ 2-37 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 2-40
1:30
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATOR, BOROUGH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of claims - See Ch. 12.
Personnel - See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation - See Ch. 54.
§ 4-1. Establishment; authorization.
The position of Borough Administrator is hereby created, and employment
of a qualified person for that position is hereby authorized.
§ 4-2. Appointment.
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:87-16.11
§ 4-3. Suspension; removal; reinstatement.12 [Amended 12-26-1978
by Ord. No. 29-78]
§ 4-4. Qualifications. [Amended 7-18-2006 by Ord. No. 18-06]
A. The Borough Administrator may be suspended without pay by the
Mayor and Council at any time pending a hearing. He may be removed
from office by the Mayor and Council for just cause, upon 30 days'
written notice, after adoption of a resolution setting forth the reasons
for removal. Such resolution shall be adopted by a two-thirds vote of the
Borough Council.
B. The Borough Administrator, upon receipt of a resolution of removal
properly approved. may reply within 10 days of receipt and request a
public hearing. A public hearing, if any, shall be held not earlier than 15
days nor later than 30 days after the request is received by the Borough
Council. The findings of the hearing and decision of removal shall be by
written resolution approved by a two-thirds vote of the Borough
Council.
C. If the Borough Administrator is restored to his position, he shall be
entitled to any compensation lost by reason of his suspension.
A. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of
administrative qualifications, with special regard to education and
training in governmental affairs and experience therein.
11.Editor's Note: See also N.J.S.A. 40A9-137.
12.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 2-4, Term of office, which immediately preceded this section,
was repealed 12-26-1978 by Ord. No. 29-78.
§ 2-40 ADMINISTRATOR, BOROUGH § 4-4
4:31
§ 4-5. Residency requirement.
The Borough Administrator shall be a resident of the Borough. In the event
that on the date of the initial appointment he is not a resident, he shall
become one within one year of such appointment and shall continue his
residency throughout his term of office. If circumstances so warrant, this
residency requirement may be waived by a majority vote of the Borough
Council.
§ 4-6. Temporary Borough Administrator.
During any approved absence or disability of the Borough Administrator,
an officer or employee of the Borough may be appointed by the Borough
Council to temporarily perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position.
§ 4-7. Compensation.
The compensation of the Borough Administrator shall be fixed by the
Borough Council by appropriate ordinance.
§ 4-8. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-26-1978 by Ord. No. 29-78]
The Borough Administrator shall act as the chief administrative officer
of the Borough. His duties shall include, with the advice and consent
of the Mayor and Council and under their direction, the development of
rules and regulations for administrative procedures governing purchasing
practices, operation of all departments, personnel management and general
coordination of departments, offices, boards and agencies of the Borough,
all for the purpose of increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Borough government and promoting its economic operation. The Borough
Administrator shall perform the duties hereinafter enumerated and such
other duties as may be assigned to him by the Mayor with the consent of the
Borough Council:
B. No elected member of the governing body may receive such
appointment unless he first resigns his office. If a member of the
governing body resigns his office in order to be appointed to the
position of Borough Administrator, the salary of the Borough
Administrator shall not be increased during the term of office of the
governing body member so resigning.
A. He shall act as the Administrator for the Mayor and the Council of the
Borough and, as such, will supervise all salaried personnel of the
Borough through the respective department heads unless otherwise
provided for by law or by this chapter. He shall devote his entire time
and effort to the performance of his duties and functions. He shall not
engage in any other occupation or employment while employed by the
Borough except as assigned by the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 4-8
4:32
B. He shall integrate and coordinate the functions of all departments,
boards, agencies, offices, officials and employees of the Borough and
shall maintain liaison with the Boards of Education of Florham Park and
Hanover Park Regional High School, authorities and commissions.
C. He shall supervise the purchase of all materials, equipment and
supplies authorized by the Borough Council; establish standards and
specifications to control all purchases by the Borough and recommend
to the Council such standards as to quality, size and variety of articles,
equipment and supplies used by the offices and departments of the
Borough to make possible uniform purchasing practices; advertise for
proposals for the furnishing of any and all work required to be done for
the Borough; receive bids therefor at the direction of the Borough
Council; receive all department requisitions for all materials,
equipment and supplies approved for purchase by committee
Chairmen; act as the purchasing agent in the purchase of such
materials, equipment and supplies; issue the necessary purchase order
to the lowest responsible bidder for such materials, equipment and
supplies for all departments; require that all departments, including
police and fire, secure a purchase order prior to the purchasing of all
services, supplies, materials or equipment approved in the budget;
ensure that all purchases are at a most favorable price to the Borough;
and see to it that the materials, equipment, services or supplies
delivered are correct in number or amount and comply with the
standards and specifications prescribed by the governing body as
agreed to at the time of purchase. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9, the
Administrator, as purchasing agent, is authorized to award contracts
for the purchase of goods and services in amounts up to the bid
threshold pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3, as amended from time to time.
The Administrator shall supervise the qualified purchasing agent who,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9b, is authorized to award contracts for the
purchase of goods and services in amounts up to the bid threshold
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3, as amended from time to time.
[Amended 9-19-2000 by Ord. No. 22-00; 9-20-2005 by Ord. No.
30-05]
D. He shall collect all data and prepare a proposed budget for
consideration by the Mayor and Council, annually, on or before
December 15 of each year, after obtaining requests for appropriations
from all departments of the Borough and consulting with all department
heads. The proposed budget shall be accompanied by the proper
supplemental detail in support of the proposed budget appropriation
with a comparison of prior year's expenditure and an analysis of the
proposed expenditures with recommendations regarding the feasibility
thereof. Upon adoption of the budget, current accounts of the
expenditures made shall be kept on a monthly basis based upon the
supplemental detail of the adopted budget.
E. He shall require the various departments of the Borough to furnish
annually an adequate inventory of all equipment. materials and supplies
§ 4-8 ADMINISTRATOR, BOROUGH § 4-8
4:33
§ 4-9. Limitation of power.
Nothing in this chapter shall derogate from or authorize the Borough
Administrator to exercise the powers and duties of elected officials of the
Borough and of the boards and agencies thereof established pursuant to
law.
Chapter 6
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON
in stock and recommend the sale of any surplus. obsolete equipment,
materials and supplies.
F. He shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records not required
by law to be kept by another officer of the Borough and establish and
keep up-to-date a coordinated filing system for all Borough
departments, offices, boards and agencies.
G. He shall keep the Mayor and Council currently informed on all matters
within his jurisdiction by submitting such reports as he deems advisable
or as requested by the Mayor and Council and prepare and present to
the Mayor and Council an annual report on Borough matters and make
such other reports as from time to time the Mayor and Council may
require.
H. He shall advise the Mayor and Borough Council on all matters of
administration, organization and personnel and assign office personnel
to the performance of various duties in various departments and study,
recommend, implement and enforce personnel organization and policy
of the Borough and implement vacation policy as established by the
Borough Council for all departments, except as otherwise provided by
statute for Police and Fire Departments.
I. He shall study, recommend, implement and enforce procedures and
policy of the Borough and its departments for receipt, dissemination
and collation of and responses to communications and requests for
information after consultation with department heads and receive,
distribute and follow up requests for information and complaints from
citizens and keep the Mayor and Council informed on such matters.
J. He shall prepare an agenda fur and arrange meetings and conferences
of the Mayor and Council and other agencies of the Borough, when so
requested by the Mayor and Council.
K. He shall attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council, unless excused
by that body.
§ 4-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 6-1
6:34
§ 6-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Borough’s responsibility to assist in the
provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 6-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Florham Park to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Borough.
§ 6-3. Position established; compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as the Borough’s primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents,
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough’s Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Borough as described below.
§ 6-1 MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON § 6-3
6:35
Chapter 8
ASSESSOR, TAX
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of Government — See Ch. 2.
Chief Financial Officer — See Ch. 11.
Defense and Indemnification — See Ch. 20.
Personnel — See Ch. 38.
Taxation — See Ch. 220.
§ 8-1. Establishment.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 et seq., establishing the office of Tax
Assessor in the Borough, are hereby accepted and adopted.
§ 8-2. Appointment.
The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council.
§ 8-3. Qualifications.
The Tax Assessor shall be a person qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25
et seq. and any amendments thereto.
§ 8-4. Term of office; vacancies.
The Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years from the first day
of July next following his/her appointment, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148. Vacancies due to other than expiration of the term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
§ 8-5. Tenure; removal.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.1, any Assessor who is reappointed after the
expiration of the initial four-year term has tenure during good behavior and
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the Borough. If the
Borough contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of
the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 6-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 8-5
6:36
efficiency and may only be removed for cause. Under N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.31,
any removal proceeding against an Assessor must occur before the Director
of the Division of Taxation after due notice.
§ 8-6. Compensation.
Chapter 11
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of claims — See Ch. 12.
Personnel — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 54.
§ 11-1. Statutory provisions adopted.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10 et seq., establishing the office of
Chief Financial Officer in the Borough, are hereby established and adopted.
§ 11-2. Appointment.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed, when legally qualified, by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
§ 11-3. Compensation.
The compensation for the Chief Financial Officer shall be fixed by the
Borough council by appropriate ordinace.14
Chapter 12
CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Administrator — See Ch. 4.
A. The compensation of the Assessor shall be set by the Borough Council
by appropriate ordinance.13
B. N.J.S.A. 40A:9-165 requires that the salary of the Tax Assessor may not
be decreased, nor shall the Tax Assessor be denied without good cause
any increase in salary given to all other municipal officers and
employees.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Salaries and Compensation.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 8-5 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER § 11-3
11:37
§ 12-1. Procedure.
A. The Borough Administrator, or other officer to be designated by him in
writing, shall certify all claims per N.J.S.A. 40A:5-166 prior to
presentation to the Borough Council for approval. Certification shall
include the verification that there are proper appropriations with
sufficient balances to cover the payment and that the purchase or
service was legal and duly authorized.
B. Where certification was made by his appointee, the Borough
Administrator shall initial the payment voucher in the block entitled
"Approval for Payment."
C. Prior to the approval by the Council, a duly designated Councilman
shall review and sign each voucher.
D. Except as provided in Subsection F hereafter, the Administrator shall
cause to be listed and subtotaled by departmental category all vouchers
duly approved as per Subsections A through C herein. During a
regularly scheduled business meeting, the Administrator shall present
to the Council for payment authorization the list of payment vouchers.
The Clerk shall enter into the minutes a record of the action taken and
the vote thereon.
E. The Treasurer shall draw checks for payment of all claims which have
been approved according to the foregoing procedure.
F. Ratification of payments.
(1) Subject to the following limitations, the Council may ratify
payments which have preceded the date of regular meeting.
(2) All such payments shall be aggregated separately in the listing
prescribed in Subsection D under the heading "Ratification of
Payments Made Pursuant to Borough Code § 12-1F."
(a) Certain payments for goods or services which must be made at
the time of delivery either due to emergency or because the
need therefor could not have been foreseen or because the
payee refuses to take a voucher or in order to take advantage
of a cash discount.
(b) Payments to be duly authorized, certified and signed by the
designated Councilman as set forth in Subsections A through
C, inclusive.
(c) Payments not to exceed $500.
G. The Administrator shall not list or present for payment any voucher
which the duly designated Councilman has refused to sign, except that
such refusal shall be made only upon the following grounds
§ 11-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 12-1
12:38
Chapter 16
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 38. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 54.
§ 16-1. Establishment; jurisdiction.
A Municipal Court is hereby established in and for the Borough under and
by virtue of the provisions of Title 2A, Chapter 8, of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey, with the jurisdiction as therein conferred.
§ 16-2. Name; Judge.15
The Municipal Court shall be known as the "Municipal Court of the Borough
of Florham Park," and the Judge shall be known as the "Judge of the
Municipal Court."
§ 16-3. Compensation of Judge.16
The compensation of the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be as fixed by
the Borough Council.
Chapter 19
DEFENDER, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 16.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 20.
Personnel — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 54.
§ 19-1. Purpose.
It is determined that establishing an office of the Public Defender in the
Borough of Florham Park to provide legal representation for indigents
(1) Evidence of improper authorization.
(2) Error in price, extension totals, accounting or name of payee.
(3) Evidence of illegality.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.)
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.)
§ 12-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 19-1
16:39
charged with certain crimes is in the public interest and is required by P.L.
1997, c. 256.17
§ 19-2. Appointment.
The Public Defender shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council. The Public Defender shall be an attorney
at law of this state in good standing and shall serve for a term of one year
from the date of his appointment.
§ 19-3. Compensation.
The Public Defender shall receive compensation either on an hourly, per
diem, annual or other basis, subject to the negotiation and agreement
between the Mayor and Borough Council and the selected Public
Defender.18
§ 19-4. Duties.
The Public Defender shall, except in circumstances involving a conflict
of interest or temporary unavailability, represent any defendant deemed
indigent by the Municipal Court, who is charged in the Municipal Court
with a crime as specified in N.J.S.A. 2B:12-18 or if, in the opinion of the
Municipal Court, there is a likelihood that the defendant, if convicted of the
offenses charged, will be subject to imprisonment or other consequences
of magnitude. The Municipal Public Defender shall be responsible for all
phases of the defense, including but not limited to discover, pretrial and
post-trial hearings, motions, removals to federal district court and other
collateral functions reasonably related to the defense, excluding de novo
appeals to the Superior Court.
§ 19-5. Application fee.
Any person seeking the services of a Public Defender shall tender to the
Municipal Court an application fee of $200. This application fee may be
waived by the Municipal Court, in its discretion, only in circumstances
where the applicant provides clear and convincing evidence that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden upon the person seeking
representation.
Chapter 20
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Administrator — See Ch. 4. Personnel — See Ch. 38.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 19-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 19-5
19:40
§ 20-1. Provision of indemnification and legal defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Florham Park, hereinafter
known as the "Borough," shall, upon the request of any present or former
official, employee or appointee of the Borough, provide for indemnification
and legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public
duties.
§ 20-2. Exceptions.
§ 20-3. Construal of terms.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of "official," "employee" and
"appointee" are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter, except that these terms shall not mean:
A. The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of
punitive damages, penalties, or fines but may provide for the legal
defense of such claims in accordance with the standards set forth
herein. The Borough may refuse to provide for the defense and
indemnification of any civil action referred to herein if the Borough
determines that:
(1) The act or omission did not occur within the scope of duty
authorized or imposed by law;
(2) The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough would
create a conflict of interest between the Borough and the person or
persons involved.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, the indemnification and defense provided
for in this chapter shall include exemplary or punitive damages
resulting from the employee's civil violation of state or federal law if, in
the opinion of the Borough, the acts committed upon which the
damages are based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful
misconduct or an intentional wrong.
A. Any person who is not a natural person;
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the Borough except an employment contract;
C. Any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the
Borough; and
§ 19-5 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 20-3
19:41
§ 20-4. Indemnification.
§ 20-5. Defense in best interest of Borough.
In any action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the Borough
may provide for the defense of a present or former official, employee or
appointee, if the Borough concludes that such representation is in the best
interest of the Borough and that the person to be defended acted or failed
to act in accord with the standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 20-6. Borough to control representation.
Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended, and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Borough.
§ 20-7. Means of defense.
The Borough may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its attorney to act in behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Borough under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide a defense.
D. Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
A. The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Borough who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had
an interest;
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by laws; and
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the duty and authority of the Borough to
defend and indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim
against said person.
§ 20-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 20-7
19:42
Chapter 25
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 125.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Outdoor fires — See Ch. 137.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 145, Art. I.
§ 25-1. Composition; control of Department.
§ 25-2. Board of Engineers.
The Board of Engineers shall consist of a Fire Chief, a Deputy Chief and two
Assistant Chiefs. Members of the Board of Engineers may serve not more
than five continuous years in the same office unless there are no qualified
persons to assume that position. At no time may a firefighter run for or hold
a position on the Board of Engineers or serve as Rescue Captain and/or a
line officer in the same year.
§ 25-3. Classes of membership.
The membership of the Fire Department shall be divided into six classes:
probationary firefighters, active firefighters, inactive firefighters, life
members, Junior Auxiliary and on-call firefighters.
A. The Fire Department shall consist of a Board of Engineers, a minimum
of one Captain and Lieutenant per company (line officers), a Rescue
Captain and firefighters. There are two fire companies now existing in
the Borough, and there shall be such additional companies as may be
hereafter authorized by the Borough Council.
B. The Fire Department shall be under the supervision and control of the
municipality, subject to existing state laws and subject to such rules and
regulations as may be adopted, in writing, by the Board of Fire
Engineers, which shall not be inconsistent with this chapter. The annual
election of the Board of Engineers, Rescue Captain and line officers
shall remain the prerogative of the membership of the fire companies.
However, once elected, the Board of Engineers will be sworn in by the
Mayor and Borough Council.
A. Probationary firefighters. Probationary firefighters shall be those
individuals newly appointed to the Fire Department who have not yet
completed one year of service, completed Firefighter I training or
obtained a Level 1 Incident Command certification. This probationary
period shall be for a minimum of one year and may be extended if the
probationary firefighter has not completed Firefighter I training.
§ 20-7 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 25-3
19:43
Probationary firefighters shall also be any firefighters who have not
completed all mandatory testing and training within the first quarter
of each calendar year, as prescribed by the Board of Engineers, and/or
who are not in compliance with § 25-10A of this chapter. Probationary
firefighters shall not have the right to vote or hold any office during
their probationary period. Probationary firefighters shall not be
permitted to respond to any fire calls until they have completed the
requirements of all mandatory testing and training, as prescribed by
the Board of Engineers.
B. Active firefighters. Active firefighters shall be those individuals of the
Fire Department who are no longer on probation and who are in
compliance with § 25-10A of this chapter. All active firefighters shall
have all privileges as to voting and serving as a Rescue Captain, a
company line officer or on the Board of Engineers and shall be subject
to the rules and regulations governing the fire companies and the Fire
Department. Any active firefighter who fails to comply with § 25-10A of
this chapter shall be placed on probationary status. Any firefighter who
fails to meet the annual minimum requirements of all mandatory testing
and training, as prescribed by the Board of Engineers, within the first
quarter of the calendar year, shall have his/her firefighting gear
removed, and said firefighter shall be placed on probationary status.
C. Life members.
(1) Life members are those members who have:
(a) Twenty-five years as an active firefighter;
(b) Made application to the Board of Engineers to become a life
member; and
(c) Been approved by the Mayor and Council.
(2) A firefighter who is unable to attain 25 years of service due to a
medical condition may make application to the Board of Engineers,
which, after considering the facts presented, may vote to exempt
the firefighter from the twenty-five-year requirement. If the
application is approved by a majority vote, it shall be presented to
the Mayor and Council for approval.
(3) Life members shall not be required to respond to fires or attend
drills but shall be designated as inactive.
(4) A life member shall be considered active if he/she is in compliance
with §§ 25-9 and 25-10A of this chapter. A life member may not
serve as Chief, Rescue Captain or a line officer unless that life
member is in compliance with §§ 25-3B, 25-5, 25-9 and 25-10A of
this chapter. However, at no time will said life member be
authorized to respond to any fire call until he/she has completed
the requirements of all mandatory testing and training, as
prescribed by the Board of Engineers. Any life member who is not
§ 25-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 25-3
19:44
§ 25-4. Qualifications for appointment as firefighter.
No person shall become a firefighter of the Fire Department or any company
thereof unless he/she is able to read and write the English language, is
a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, is above the age of 18,
is of good moral character, and is a resident of the Borough of Florham
Park, owns a business in the Borough of Florham Park or is employed fulltime
by a business located in the Borough of Florham Park. No person
shall become a firefighter of the Fire Department unless he/she successfully
passes a physical administered by a physician licensed by the State of
New Jersey. The Borough Police Department shall also complete a criminal
background investigation of each applicant, which shall include the taking
of fingerprints. No person shall be so appointed who has been convicted of
any crime involving moral turpitude.
in compliance with §§ 25-9 and 25-10, shall be placed on inactive
status but is not subject to removal under § 25-20A, B, C, and D.
(5) Life members may not vote on any member of the Board of
Engineers, a Rescue Captain or a company line officer unless the
life member is in compliance with §§ 25-9 and 25-10A of this
chapter or is certified to be a safety officer and/or an accountability
officer.
D. Junior Auxiliary. Junior Auxiliary members shall be at least 16 years old
and no more than 18 years old when appointed by the Borough Council
and meet the membership requirements established in the bylaws of
the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department and follow all rules and
regulations established for all Junior Auxiliary members. No Junior
Auxiliary member shall have the right to vote or hold office in the
Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department. All Junior Auxiliary members
shall complete a probationary period of at least one year. This period
may be extended if the member fails to meet the standards set forth in
the rules and regulations of the Junior Auxiliary.
E. On-call firefighters. Any full-time nonprobationary employee of the
Borough of Florham Park who has completed Firefighter I training and
has a Department of Community Affairs certification for the same and
has obtained a Level 1 Incident Command certification from the
Department of Community Affairs and is an active member in good
standing of a fire company outside of the Borough, may be an on-call
firefighter. Each on-call firefighter shall be appointed by the Borough
Council in the same manner as an active firefighter. No on-call
firefighter shall have the right to vote or hold office in the Florham Park
Volunteer Fire Department.
F. Inactive firefighters. Inactive firefighters shall be firefighters who are
subject to the provisions of §§ 25-9B and 25-10B or inactive life
members pursuant to § 25-3C(3) and (4).
§ 25-3 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 25-5
19:45
§ 25-5. Qualifications for Chiefs and line officers. [Amended
12-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-16]
No person shall become a Chief, Rescue Captain or line officer in the
Volunteer Fire Department or any company thereof until he/she has met and
complied with the following categorized qualifications. All courses shall be
taken at a certified training facility or given by certified instructors at any
other facility.
A. Lieutenant:
(1) Possess three years in the fire service: one year as an active
firefighter in the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department. (The
probationary period shall not be included.)
(2) Complete the requirements for the Firefighter I and Firefighter II
certifications.
(3) Qualify on all apparatus of the firefighter's assigned company.
(4) Obtain, by application, an Incident Management System Level 1
certificate issued by the State of New Jersey. (Note: In order to
obtain IML 1, a firefighter must obtain I-100, I-200, NIMS 700 and
any other command-level certificate as may be mandated by the
State of New Jersey.)
(5) Be interior qualified by the Florham Park Fire Department.
(6) Maintain a minimum attendance of 12 drills in the preceding 12
months and a minimum fire-call percentage of 25% in this same
period.
B. Captain:
(1) Complete five years in the fire service: one year as an active
firefighter in the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department. (The
probationary period shall not be included.)
(2) Serve as a Lieutenant or higher rank in any fire department for a
minimum of two years.
(3) Qualify for Lieutenant in the Florham Park Fire Department.
(4) Be interior qualified by the Florham Park Fire Department.
(5) Complete a fire officer course.
(6) Maintain a minimum attendance of 12 drills in the preceding 12
months and a minimum fire-call percentage of 25% in this same
period.
C. Rescue Captain:
§ 25-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 25-5
19:46
(1) Complete five years in the fire service: one year as an active
firefighter in the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department. (The
probationary period shall not be included.)
(2) Serve as a Lieutenant or higher rank in any fire department for a
minimum of two years.
(3) Qualify for Lieutenant in the Florham Park Fire Department.
(4) Be interior qualified by the Florham Park Fire Department.
(5) Complete a vehicle rescue course.
(6) Complete a fire officer course.
(7) Maintain a minimum attendance of 12 drills in the preceding 12
months and a minimum fire-call percentage of 25% in this same
period.
D. Assistant Chief:
(1) Complete seven years in the fire service: two years as an active
firefighter in the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department. (The
probationary period shall not be included.)
(2) Qualify for Captain in the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department.
(3) Qualify on all Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department apparatus.
(4) Possess a certificate for Incident Management System Level 2,
I-300 and IS-800.
(5) Be interior qualified by the Florham Park Fire Department.
(6) Maintain a minimum attendance of 12 drills in the preceding 12
months and a minimum fire-call percentage of 25% in this same
period.
(7) Complete an operational-level certified class in any special
discipline provided by the Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department, inclusive of ice rescue, vehicle extrication and
confined space, unless said discipline is discontinued by the
Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department.
E. Deputy Chief:
(1) Complete seven years as an active firefighter in the Florham Park
Volunteer Fire Department. (The probationary period shall not be
included.)
(2) Serve as Assistant Chief in the Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department for two years.
(3) Complete all qualifications for Assistant Chief, Captain and
Lieutenant.
§ 25-5 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 25-5
19:47
(4) Complete a building construction course approved by the Board of
Engineers.
(5) Possess a certificate for Incident Management Level 3 I-400.
(6) Qualify on all Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department apparatus.
(7) Be interior qualified by the Florham Park Fire Department.
(8) Maintain a minimum attendance of 12 drills in the preceding 12
months and a minimum fire-call percentage of 25% in this same
period.
(9) Complete an operational-level certified class in any special
discipline provided by the Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department, inclusive of ice rescue, vehicle extrication and
confined space, unless said discipline is discontinued by the
Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department.
F. Chief:
(1) Complete seven years as an active firefighter in the Florham Park
Volunteer Fire Department. (The probationary period shall not be
included.)
(2) Serve as Assistant Chief in the Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department for two years and Deputy Chief for two years.
(3) Complete all qualifications for Assistant Chief, Captain and
Lieutenant.
(4) Complete IS-701.
(5) Maintain residency in Florham Park.
(6) Qualify on all Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department apparatus.
(7) Be interior qualified by the Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department.
(8) Maintain a minimum attendance of 12 drills in the preceding 12
months and a minimum fire-call percentage of 25% in this same
period.
(9) Complete an operational-level certified class in any special
discipline provided by the Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department, inclusive of ice rescue, vehicle extrication and
confined space, unless said discipline is discontinued by the Fire
Department.
G. If any one person is appointed to the position out of necessity under this
section without first completing the required time-in-service
qualifications, that person shall not be prohibited from advancing in
rank in the future and shall not be required to meet the time
§ 25-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 25-5
19:48
§ 25-6. Appointment of firefighters; probationary period.
§ 25-7. (Reserved)
§ 25-8. Term of service.
The term of service of each firefighter shall begin at the date of the
confirmation of his/her appointment by the Mayor and Borough Council and
cease on the date of the approval of his/her resignation, dismissal and/or
expulsion.
§ 25-9. Residency requirements.
requirements of the lesser ranks. The member seeking to advance in
rank, however, shall be required to meet all the other requirements of
the lesser rank before advancing.
A. Any person seeking to join the Fire Department shall make application
to the Board of Engineers. The Board of Engineers, after examining the
qualifications of the applicant and verifying that he/she is in compliance
with § 25-4 of this chapter, shall recommend the applicant to the Mayor
and Borough Council for appointment. Should the Board of Engineers
decline or fail to recommend the appointment of an applicant, the
applicant shall have the right to appeal to the Mayor and Borough
Council upon five days' written notice to the Board of Engineers.
B. Upon the confirmation by the Mayor and Borough Council and the
administration of the oath, a letter signed by the Mayor and Borough
Clerk shall be issued memorializing such applicant's status as a
probationary firefighter in the Borough of Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department, and his/her name shall be entered on the register of
firefighters to be maintained by the Borough Clerk. The Mayor and
Borough Council shall issue a badge to each firefighter. His/her badge
shall be worn at all times when in dress uniform. The badge will be
surrendered to the Chief of the Department at any time upon just cause
or under charges involving moral turpitude, neglect of duty or if for any
cause he/she shall cease to be a firefighter. Failure to complete the
probationary period within a reasonable time will result in dismissal
from the Fire Department.
C. Upon confirmation and appointment of such applicant, the Board of
Engineers shall assign the newly appointed firefighter to a company for
duty.
D. Upon completion of the probationary period, as described in § 25-3A, a
probationary firefighter will become an active firefighter of the Florham
Park Volunteer Fire Department, with all rights and privileges.
A. Any firefighter that has achieved the status of active firefighter and who
no longer resides, owns a business or is employed full-time within the
Borough of Florham Park, pursuant to § 25-4 of this chapter, may
§ 25-5 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 25-9
19:49
§ 25-10. Attendance requirements.
remain on the Fire Department, provided that he/she does not join
another fire department and that he/she lives in a contiguous
municipality.
B. Upon written notice to the Board of Engineers, the requirements of
§ 25-9A shall be temporarily suspended for any firefighter who meets
the following criteria:
(1) He/she is enrolled as a student at a university, college or any
educational institution which requires him/her to temporarily
reside outside the Borough of Florham Park, provided that the
firefighter maintains a residence in the Borough of Florham Park,
or a contiguous town, during said absence and complies with
§ 25-10A while on break or recess. This exemption shall terminate
upon successful completion, graduation and/or termination from
said educational institution. However, at no time will any firefighter
under this section be authorized to respond to any fire call until he/
she has completed the requirements of all mandatory testing and
training as prescribed by the Board of Engineers.
(2) He/she is a full-time employee of a company which obligates said
firefighter to move outside the State of New Jersey for an
indeterminate period of time, so long as that firefighter maintains a
residence in the Borough of Florham Park, or a contiguous town,
during said absence and complies with § 25-10A while physically in
New Jersey. This exemption shall expire upon the firefighter's
termination or cessation of employment. However, at no time will
said firefighter be authorized to respond to any fire call until he/she
has completed the requirements of all mandatory testing and
training as prescribed by the Board of Engineers.
C. Any firefighter who has attained the status of active firefighter and who
no longer resides, owns a business or is employed full-time in the
Borough of Florham Park shall, after a hearing as prescribed by § 25-20,
be removed from the roster and dismissed from the Florham Park Fire
Department. Removal from the Fire Department is not intended or
implied to mean removal from any membership organization
established as part of the Florham Park Fire Department Association,
Inc.
A. Every active firefighter, except on-call firefighters, shall attend an
average of one drill per month and maintain a minimum quarterly firecall
percentage of 30%. Every active firefighter shall also complete all
mandatory training and testing, at the beginning of every year, as
prescribed by the Board of Engineers, within the first quarter of each
year. A record shall be kept of such attendance, and it is the duty of the
Chief of the Fire Department to report it to the Borough Council
annually.
§ 25-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 25-10
19:50
B. Upon written notice to the Board of Engineers, the requirements of
§ 25-10A shall be temporarily suspended for any firefighter who:
(1) Is enrolled as a student in a university, college or any educational
institution which requires the firefighter to temporarily reside
outside the Borough of Florham Park, provided that the firefighter
maintains a residence in the Borough of Florham Park, or a
contiguous town, during said absence. This exemption does not
apply during school breaks or recesses. This exemption shall
terminate upon successful completion, graduation and/or
termination from said educational institution. However, at no time
will any firefighter under this section be authorized to respond to
any fire call until he/she has completed the requirements of all
mandatory testing and training as prescribed by the Board of
Engineers.
(2) Is employed full-time by a company or business which obligates the
firefighter to reside outside the State of New Jersey for an
indeterminate period of time, provided that the firefighter
maintains a residence in the Borough of Florham Park, or a
contiguous town, during said absence. This exemption shall expire
upon the firefighter's cessation of employment. However, at no time
will said firefighter be authorized to respond to any fire call until
he/she has completed the requirements of all mandatory testing
and training as prescribed by the Board of Engineers.
(3) Has presented a report and/or medical note from a physician,
licensed in the State of New Jersey, stating that the firefighter is
temporarily unable to perform the duties of a firefighter. This
temporary waiver shall not exceed 90 days without another report
and/or medical note being presented. In the case of a firefighter
who is absent for six months or more and who remains unable to
perform the essential functions of his/her position with reasonable
accommodation, such firefighter shall be placed on inactive status.
At no time will said firefighter be allowed to respond to any fire call
until he/she has completed the requirements of all mandatory
testing and training as prescribed by the Board of Engineers.
C. Every on-call firefighter shall, in each and every year, attend a minimum
of four drills and respond to all general alarms during the hours which
he/she is working in the Borough. ("General alarms" are defined as calls
for working fires, presence of smoke or other hazardous materials,
confined space incidents, or entrapment of persons due to accident or
collapse.) A record of these drills and calls shall be maintained and
forwarded to the Borough Administrator, the Director of Community
Services or the Director of Public Works annually by the Fire Chief. All
on-call firefighters shall also meet the minimum requirements of all
mandatory testing and training.
D. Responses to general alarms by on-call firefighters shall be as directed
by the Fire Chief, and use of Borough vehicles in responding to calls
§ 25-10 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 25-10
19:51
§ 25-11. Exemption certificates.
Exemption certificates shall be issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55
et seq. This section shall not be construed to afford the holder of an
exemption certificate any rights, privileges or immunities not otherwise
expressly provided for under the laws of the State of New Jersey, the
Borough of Florham Park Municipal Code or the rules and regulations
prescribed by the Board of Engineers.
§ 25-12. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Engineers may adopt, in writing, such rules and regulations,
not inconsistent with this chapter, as it may see fit for the management and
control of the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 25-13. Register.
The names of all firefighters, together with the dates of their admission or
resignation, suspension, discharge, expulsion, removal from the Borough or
death, shall be entered by the Borough Clerk in a book to be called the
"Register of the Fire Department of the Borough of Florham Park." In case
any person ceases to be a firefighter, such fact, with the cause thereof, shall
be reported, through the Board of Engineers, to the Borough Council, to the
end that such fact may be entered upon such register.
§ 25-14. Management of Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department.
The Fire Chief shall have the exclusive responsibility for the direction,
management and control of the Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department.
In the Chief's absence, and where there is not a Chief Officer available,
this responsibility shall be placed with the next-highest-ranking line officer
available from each of the fire companies. The Deputy Chief and the
Assistant Chiefs shall at all times aid and assist the Fire Chief in the
discharge of his/her duties and responsibilities. Nothing in this section shall
be interpreted to mean that the Chiefs and/or line officers have any control,
power and/or authority over the Florham Park Fire Department Association,
Inc.
§ 25-15. Powers and duties of Fire Chief.
shall be in accordance with the Department of Community Services
or other Borough policies and procedures. A record of responses shall
be submitted for each calendar quarter to the Borough Administrator,
the Director of Community Services or the Director of Public Works
annually by the Fire Chief.
A. The Fire Chief shall have the exclusive responsibility, authority and
control when the Borough's fire forces have been activated. His/her
responsibility and authority shall extend to all firefighters, apparatus
and other persons involved with or assisting in the operation and
management of a fire scene. In the absence of the Fire Chief, said duties
§ 25-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 25-15
19:52
§ 25-16. Maintenance of firehouses, grounds and equipment.
Whereas all the firehouses, fire apparatus and equipment are the property
of the Borough and are entrusted to the fire companies, each company
shall take proper care of such apparatus and equipment, so long as the
same is left in the possession of the company, and shall keep the apparatus
and the building in which the same is housed and the grounds clean and
in a presentable condition at all times. The fire companies shall allow
no use of such apparatus and equipment except as provided for by the
Borough Council or the Fire Department rules and regulations and shall not
obtain any right of ownership or lien upon any building, fire apparatus or
equipment belonging to the Borough and shall deliver and return the same
to the Borough at any time upon demand of the Borough Council.
§ 25-17. Unauthorized use of equipment.
No person shall operate or ride upon any of the apparatus or interfere with
or handle the same in any manner, except by order of the Fire Chief. This
provision shall also apply to any firefighter who has been suspended, during
the period of suspension. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in § 1-16 of this
Code.
shall descend to the next-highest-ranking Chief and/or line officer
present at the scene.
B. The Fire Chief shall see that the provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations governing the Fire Department are carried out and that
all records are properly made and recorded. At least once each month,
the condition of the trucks, ladders, hoses and other fire apparatus and
equipment, and the buildings in which the same are kept, shall be
checked, and a report of the condition thereof shall be made to the
Borough Council at its regular meetings in January and July of each
year. It shall also be his/her duty, whenever any of the fire apparatus or
equipment shall be required to be replaced or repaired, to report such
fact immediately to the Fire Commissioner or the Borough Council.
C. The Chief shall report, in writing, to the Fire Commissioner or Borough
Council at each regular monthly meeting the number of alarms of fire
and all fires that may have occurred in the Borough during the
preceding month, with the causes thereof and the amount of loss by
fire, as well as can be ascertained, and the number and designations of
the buildings or other property injured or destroyed, with the names of
the owners thereof. At each regular meeting of the Borough Council,
the Chief can make a report on any matters pertaining to the Fire
Department as he/she shall deem advisable and proper or as shall be
requested by the Borough Council.
D. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to mean that the Chiefs and/
or line officers have any control, power and/or authority over the
Florham Park Fire Department Association, Inc.
§ 25-15 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 25-18
19:53
§ 25-18. Interference with personnel.
No person shall interfere with or hinder the Fire Department personnel in
the performance of their duties. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in § 1-16 of
this Code.
§ 25-19. Fires outside of Borough.
No fire apparatus shall be taken to any fire outside the Borough of Florham
Park unless authorized by statute, ordinance or mutual aide agreement or
by order of the Fire Chief, or, in his/her absence, the next-highest-ranking
officer. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 25-20. Removal, suspension and disciplinary actions against
firefighters.
A. Any firefighter not in compliance with the minimum requirements
prescribed under § 25-10A for two consecutive quarters, beginning in
January of each year, shall be notified, in writing, by certified and
regular mail, and shall be placed on probationary status. In addition,
any firefighter who does not meet the mandatory minimum training and
testing requirements prescribed within the first quarter of every
calendar year shall not be entitled to use or possess any departmentally
issued gear or equipment and shall promptly return all such items upon
request and/or have such items removed. A firefighter's gear shall be
reissued upon completion of the minimum mandatory training and
testing.
B. If, at the end of three consecutive quarters, beginning in January of
each year, a firefighter is not in compliance with § 25-10A or fails to
complete the minimum mandatory training and testing, a hearing shall
be had within 30 days. The Board of Engineers and the Captain and
Lieutenant of the company in which the firefighter is assigned shall
preside over such hearing. At the conclusion of such hearing, a written
determination shall be issued setting forth the basis of the decision
rendered and the issues of concern and notifying the firefighter that he/
she shall be classified as a probationary firefighter until such time as
he/she satisfies § 25-10 and any mandatory testing and training
requirements prescribed by the Board of Engineers. The firefighter will
not receive his/her gear until the minimum mandatory training and
testing is completed.
C. If, at the end of four consecutive quarters, beginning in January of each
year, a firefighter is not in compliance with § 25-10A and minimum
mandatory training and testing, the firefighter will be notified, in
writing, by certified and regular mail, that a hearing will be commenced
and that the firefighter may be subject to removal from the Department
or to discipline. If a majority of the Board of Engineers and the Captain
and Lieutenant of the company in which the firefighter is assigned
§ 25-18 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 25-20
19:54
decide to remove the firefighter, the firefighter shall return all
equipment and badges belonging to the Florham Park Volunteer Fire
Department and shall have his/her name removed from the roster.
If, after proper notice, the firefighter fails to attend the scheduled
meeting, the hearing will proceed in absentia.
D. If at any time herein a firefighter is not compliant with § 25-9, he/she
shall return any badges, equipment or gear issued by the Fire
Department and shall be removed from the Department, subject to the
procedure set forth in this section. In the event that an issue arises
regarding a firefighter's compliance with § 25-9, such complaint shall
be made in writing, with reasonable particularity, and shall advise the
firefighter, by regular and certified mail, of the right to a hearing to be
commenced within 30 days, at which time the firefighter shall have the
right to confront the evidence against him/her and present a defense. If
at the conclusion of the hearing the firefighter fails to establish
residency as prescribed by § 25-9, he/she shall be removed from the
Florham Park Volunteer Fire Department. If, after proper notice, the
firefighter fails to attend the scheduled hearing, the hearing will
proceed in absentia.
E. If at any time herein a complaint is made against any firefighter for
conduct unbecoming or for violation of any written rules or regulations,
such complaint shall be in writing, with reasonable particularity, and
shall be submitted to the Board of Engineers. The Board of Engineers
shall conduct an investigation. At the conclusion of its investigation, the
Board of Engineers shall determine whether to dismiss the complaint or
commence a full company hearing. No such hearing shall be
commenced unless the accused firefighter is noticed, in writing, by
regular and certified mail, of the same, and that he/she shall have the
right to call witnesses on his/her own behalf and to present a defense,
and of the evidence and witnesses against him/her. At the conclusion of
said hearing, the company, by a majority vote, shall decide whether to
suspend, remove, censure or exonerate the firefighter. If the Board of
Engineers fails to act within 30 days, the complaint shall be dismissed
with prejudice and shall not be made part of the firefighter's personnel
file. If, after proper notice, the firefighter fails to attend the scheduled
hearing, the hearing will proceed in absentia.
F. If any firefighter is removed or suspended under this § 25-20 for any
reason, he/she will have a right of appeal to the Mayor and Borough
Council within 30 days, with notice to the Board of Engineers, for a
hearing on all issues and independent de novo review and decision.
G. Any vote prescribed under Subsection C, D or E of this section
recommending the removal of any firefighter shall not be by secret
ballot.
H. Removal, under any section of this chapter, from the Florham Park
Volunteer Fire Department is not intended or implied to mean removal
§ 25-20 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 25-20
19:55
Chapter 29
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health legislation — See Part III of
this volume.
§ 29-1. Establishment.
There shall be in and for the Borough a Board of Health, to be called and
designated the "Board of Health of the Borough of Florham Park."
§ 29-2. Composition; appointment; terms. [Amended 12-22-1981 by
Ord. No. 22-81; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1]
The Board of Health shall be composed of seven members and two alternate
members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The members of the Board of Health shall hold their offices for
terms of three years.
§ 29-3. Rules and regulations; election of President and Secretary.
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government and shall elect a President and a Secretary from its own
members.
§ 29-4. Appointment of officers.
The Board of Health shall have the power to appoint a Registrar of Vital
Statistics, a Clerk and Sanitary Inspector and may also appoint such other
officers or assistants as the Board of Health may deem necessary. All
appointees of the Board of Health shall be governed by the rules of the
Board, and they may be removed for cause by the Board.
§ 29-5. Debts.
The Board of Health shall not contract any debt of any kind beyond the
amount of the appropriation made for its use by the Borough Council.
from any membership organization established as part of the Florham
Park Fire Department Association, Inc.
§ 25-20 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 29-5
19:56
Chapter 31
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 42.
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 62.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 31-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Historical Preservation Commission for the
protection, enhancement and preservation of districts, sites, buildings and
structures of historic, cultural or architectural value or interest, including
manuscripts, photos, artifacts and papers deemed to be current or of
possible future historic value within the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 31-2. Composition; terms; vacancies; compensation.
A. Composition.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of nine
members, one whom shall be a Borough council member, and at
least one member of each of the following classes: [Amended
12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 28-01; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 18-03]
(a) Class A: a person knowledgeable in building design and who
may reside outside the Borough of Florham Park; and
(b) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside the
Borough of Florham Park.
(2) The Class A and B members of the Commission must collectively
comprise at least one less than a majority of the membership of the
Commission.
(3) All other members shall be designated as Class C members, who
shall hold no other Borough office, position or employment except
for membership on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(4) No more than two members of the commission shall reside outside
the Borough of Florham Park. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
18-0319]
(5) The Mayor shall appoint all members of the commission with the
approval of the Borough council.
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(4) as Subsection A(5).
§ 29-5 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 31-2
19:57
§ 31-3. Organization.
The Historic Preservation Commission may organize as it sees fit, choosing
a Chairman from among its members and such other officers as it may
deem advisable, may adopt and publish rules and bylaws for the proper
administration of its functions; and may formulate committees for the
administration and handling of its programs. Officers shall be elected for
one-year terms at the January meeting.
§ 31-4. Meetings; quorum: minutes.
B. Initial appointments to the Commission shall be for terms of one, two or
three years, respectively. The term of each member shall expire on
December 31 of the last year of each member's term, and upon the
appointment and qualification of such member's successor. Thereafter,
all appointments shall be for a three-year term. The member of the
Borough Council shall serve for one year.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
by an individual appointed by a majority of the Commission, with the
approval of the Mayor and Council, who shall serve for the unexpired
term only.
D. Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services but shall be reimbursed for approved expenses associated with
their Commission functions.
E. The Commission shall provide for a maximum of one alternate member
to sit for a one-year term. Said appointee shall be named by the Mayor
with the Borough council's approval. Alternate members may
participate in discussions and proceedings, but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 18-03]
A. Meetings.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold regularly
scheduled public meetings at least 10 months throughout the year.
(2) All meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(3) The Commission shall keep minutes and records of all meetings
and proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions,
findings, determinations and decisions. All such material shall be
public record.
B. At all meetings, a quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of
five of the commission members. For the purpose of a quorum, the
alternate member is considered a member. [Amended 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 18-03]
§ 31-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 31-4
19:58
§ 31-5. Powers and duties.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall perform all of the functions
assigned by federal law, state law or Borough ordinances to the
Commission, and shall have the following powers, duties and authority:
C. In the absence of the Chairman and Vice Chairman, the Secretary may
chair the meeting. In the event the Secretary is also absent, the most
senior member will chair the meeting. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 18-0320]
D. The Commission shall post and distribute copies of the minutes of each
regular meeting of the commission to the Mayor and council, Borough
Clerk, Borough Administrator, Borough Treasurer and such others as
may formally request copies. The minutes shall include a record of all
decisions, appointments and expenditures by the Commission.
A. Determine the full range of historic preservation needs and desires of
the Borough.
B. Establish policies and standards therefor.
C. Promulgate, adopt, approve and publish suitable rules and regulations
and bylaws as the Commission shall deem fitting and proper to carry
out its purposes and objectives.
D. The Commission may adopt and publish rules, regulations and bylaws
for the use and purposes thereof of all historical landmarks, buildings
and sites and the conduct of all persons while using the same. Such
rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Commission shall
be reasonably related to the protection of the property. Any person who
shall violate any such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be deemed and
adjudged to be a disorderly person.
E. The Borough Administrator or his designee shall be responsible for
monitoring and supervision of all programs, activities and operations
and buildings and grounds improvements or any use of the Little Red
Schoolhouse in accordance with the written Borough policy, including
all such uses of the Little Red Schoolhouse by the following: [Added
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 09-19; amended 6-19-2014 by Ord. No.
14-9]
(1) The Historical Society of Florham Park.
(2) The Historic Preservation Commission.
(3) Any other public bodies or residents who wish to use the building.
F. Any group or body that wishes to use the Little Red Schoolhouse must
obtain a facilities use permit from the office of the Business
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection C
as Subsection D.
§ 31-4 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 31-5
19:59
§ 31-6. Designation of historic landmarks, historic landmark sites
and historic districts; notification; right to challenge; board
approvals.
Administrator at least two weeks in advance to access this facility for
any reason. All keys to the facility will be held in the office of the
Borough Administrator and will be issued upon approval of a written
request for use of the facility. [Added 6-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-9]
A. Designation.
(1) The Commission shall survey the entire Borough against criteria
for the National Register of Historic Places and, based on the
survey, in conjunction with the recommendations of concerned
citizens, the Commission shall identify historic landmarks, historic
landmark sites and historic districts within the Borough which are
worthy of preservation because of their historical, cultural, social
or architectural significance in that they possess integrity of
location, design, setting, material workmanship and:
(a) Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the history of the Borough, state or nation;
(b) Are associated with the lives of significant persons in our past;
(c) Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, represent the work of a master or
possess high artistic values; or
(d) Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
(2) The Commission may also prepare nominations for the
consideration of the State Historical Preservation Officer.
B. The Commission shall thereafter notify owners, neighbors and
occupants or tenants that their building or area has been designated a
historic landmark, advise them of the significance and consequence of
the same and advise them of their right to challenge such designation.
C. The Commission shall as soon thereafter as practicable hold a public
hearing at which all interested persons shall be entitled to present their
opinions, suggestions and objections. After full consideration of the
evidence brought forth at the hearing, the Commission shall make its
final decision and shall issue its final report to the public stating
reasons in support of its action with respect to each individual
landmark, historical landmark site and historic district designation.
Each owner shall have the opportunity to voluntarily consent to final
designation without the need for a public hearing.
§ 31-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 31-6
19:60
§ 31-7. Documentation of designated areas.
The Commission shall maintain current lists and maps of all historical
landmarks, buildings, sites and neighborhoods. Such lists shall contain a
brief description of the historical site or area and shall list the reasons for
its inclusion in the list of historical places. The Commission shall cause
drawings, photographs, descriptions and other appropriate documentation
to be made concerning all areas and buildings included in the list. All
inventory material shall be:
§ 31-8. Design review of demolition, alteration, restoration and new
construction; Historic Preservation Commission report: Planning
Board and Board of Adjustment review.
D. Such final report shall be submitted to the Borough Planning Board for
inclusion in the Master Plan and to the Borough Council for inclusion in
the Land Use Ordinance, informing both boards of any objections.
E. Following approval by the Planning Board and Borough Council,
certificates of designation shall be served upon the owner of the site so
designated, and a true copy thereof shall be filed with the Tax Collector
and Tax Assessor who shall maintain a record of all historic
designations in the tax rolls. Notice of the designation shall be made to
the office of the Construction Official and Building Inspector.
A. Compatible with New Jersey Historic Sites Inventory;
B. Accessible to the public, except that access to archaeological site
locations shall be restricted; and
C. Updated periodically.
A. Prior to the approval of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment of
any application for a permit to perform any demolition, alteration,
restoration or new construction upon any property located within a
historic district or designated a historic landmark or historic landmark
site, the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment shall submit to the
Historic Preservation Commission a copy of every application
submitted to either board for development in historic zoning districts or
historic sites designated on the zoning or official map, or in any
component element of the Master Plan. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall make and transmit within 30 days after referral, a
report to the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment, including
recommendations concerning the proposed application, and whether it
should be approved or denied. The commission shall designate one of
its members to testify at the hearing on the application and to explain
the written report.
B. The report should take into consideration the following factors in
regard to an application to demolish, alter or perform new construction
upon a historic landmark or within a historic district:
§ 31-6 DEFENDER, PUBLIC § 31-8
19:61
§ 31-9. Annual update and budget.
§ 31-10. Emergency review.
(1) Its historical, architectural and aesthetic significance.
(2) Its use.
(3) Its importance to the Borough and the extent to which its historical
or architectural value is such that its removal or alteration would
be detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention as is would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values,
generating business, creating new jobs, attracting tourists,
students, writers, historians, artists and artisans, attracting new
residents, encouraging study of architecture and design, educating
citizens in American culture and heritage or making the Borough a
more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(6) If it is within a historic district, the probable impact of its alteration
or removal upon the ambiance of the historic district.
C. The Planning Board/Board of Adjustment shall review the report of the
Commission and may disapprove or change any recommendation only
by a vote of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall
record in its minutes the reasons for not following such
recommendations. Failure of the Commission to transmit its report
within the thirty-day period provided herein shall relieve the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment from the requirements of this section.
A. The Historic Commission must report at least annually to the Planning
Board and the Borough Council on the state of historic preservation in
the Borough and recommend measures to improve the same.
B. Each year, the Commission shall develop a budget for the ensuing
calendar year and present the same to the Mayor and Borough Council
on or before October 15. This budget shall give the details of the money
considered necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
A. In addition to conducting reviews at its regularly scheduled meetings,
the Commission will conduct emergency review meetings when
necessary. These emergency meetings shall be held when any action
jeopardizes the safety of designated or potential historic districts,
landmarks or landmark sites.
§ 31-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 31-10
19:62
§ 31-11. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 32
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 32-1. Creation; purpose.
There is hereby created and established an Environmental Commission for
the protection, development or use of natural resources, including water
resources, located within the territorial limits of the Borough of Florham
Park pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1968 of the
State of New Jersey.21
§ 32-2. Membership; qualifications; terms; vacancies.
B. The meeting will be held upon two days' notice in the manner of normal
meeting notification, and notice to all directly concerned by the subject
of the meeting.
A. If any person shall undertake any exterior change of a landmark or
improvement within a historic district without first having obtained a
construction permit, such person shall be in violation of this chapter.
B. Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally serve
upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring a notice
describing the violation in detail and giving the owners 10 days to abate
the violation by restoring the landmark or improvement to its status quo
ante. If the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality
with said notice, a copy shall be posted on site and a copy sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at his last known
address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
C. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 days of service or
posting a site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer shall cause to be
issued a summons and complaint, returnable in the municipal court,
charging violation of this chapter. Each separate day that the violation
exists shall be deemed to be a new and separate violation.
D. In the event that any action which would permanently change adversely
the landmark or historic district, such as demolition or removal, is
about to occur without a construction permit having been issued, the
Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to apply to the Superior Court of
New Jersey for such injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent the
destruction of any landmark.
A. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members,
appointed by the Mayor, one of whom shall be a Council member and
one of whom shall be a member of the Borough Planning Board and all
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 31-10 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 32-2
32:63
§ 32-3. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission shall have the following duties to:
of whom shall be residents of the Borough of Florham Park. [Amended
12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 29-01]
B. The members shall serve without compensation.
C. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman
and presiding officer of the Commission.
D. The terms of the first Commissioners shall be for one, two or three
years, to be designated by the Mayor in making the appointments so
that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will expire each
year, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years
and until appointment and qualification of their successors.
E. The Mayor or Council of the Borough may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and
after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel.
F. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of
a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
G. There shall be two alternate members appointed by the Mayor, who
shall be residents of the Borough of Florham Park. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed
shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2
so that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in
any one year. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote first. Procedures concerning filling vacancies and
removal from office shall be the same as for regular members.
A. Study and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council in areas of
conservation and environmental protection, which shall include but not
be limited to pollution control of all types; waste disposal, including
sewage, garbage and solid waste; open space preservation, with
emphasis on outdoor recreation needs, aesthetic flora and fauna
preservation and beautification; and water resources.
B. Plan local conservation programs and inform the public about those
programs.
§ 32-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 32-3
32:64
§ 32-4. Acquisition of property.
The Environmental Commission may recommend to the Borough Council
the acquisition of property, both real and personal, to the Borough of
Florham Park, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any of
its purposes; and shall administer the same for such purposes, subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions) as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or
otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 32-5. Meetings.
§ 32-6. Appropriations by Council.
The Council, at its discretion, may annually fix, determine and appropriate
sums sufficient for the care, custody, leasing and maintenance of such land
acquired for these uses and purposes herein stated, if necessary, and for the
expenses of said Commission.
C. Prepare, print and distribute informational materials, such as books,
maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes, within the limits of funds appropriated to
the Commission and with the approval of the Borough Council.
D. Keep an index of all open areas, publicly and privately owned, in order
to obtain information on the proper use of such areas.
E. Recommend, from time to time, to the Planning Board, plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Borough of Florham
Park for development and use of such areas.
F. Operate conservation programs on lands donated or purchased for
conservation purposes by the Borough of Florham Park.
G. Do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and assigned
to carry out the purposes and objectives of the commission.
A. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairman or, in his absence or disability, at the call of the Vice
Chairman.
B. At all meetings a quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of
the Commission.
C. The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and shall make an
annual report to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Florham Park
on or before the 15th day of December.
§ 32-3 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 32-6
32:65
Chapter 34
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 34-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created, in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to award eligible
members of the Volunteer First Aid Squad for their loyal diligence and
devoted services to the residents of Florham Park.
§ 34-2. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for a fixed annual contribution to a deferred
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below,
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Borough of Florham Park, pursuant to P.L. 1997, c.
388, and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws
of the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code, and
this chapter.
§ 34-3. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the criteria as follows:
§ 34-4. Prior service.
The LOSAP shall provide for contributions as credit for no more than 10
years of prior years' services for each eligible volunteer.
§ 34-5. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 34-6. Points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Florham Park Memorial First Aid Squad, Inc.
A. Number of points: 50.
B. Years of service required: five years.
C. Amounts of award: $100 to $1,150.
A. Past service credit: $50 per member for each year of past service, not to
exceed 10 years.
B. Annual service credit: Up to $1,150 per eligible member per year,
including past service credit in Subsection A above; first year cost not
to exceed $64,400 based on current membership levels.
§ 32-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 34-6
32:66
§ 34-7. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect unless it has been approved by the voters
as a public question at the next general election to be held on November 6,
2001. If approved, the LOSAP Program will be initiated in the year 2002.22
§ 34-8. Recruitment activities. [Added 10-28-2008 by Ord. No.
08-30]
"Recruitment activities" shall be defined to mean that a member has been
recruited to join the Squad, has successfully completed the six-month
probationary period, and is sworn into active membership. Upon swearing
in of the new member, 10 LOSAP points will be awarded to the recruiting
member. No more than 10 points can be awarded per year to any one
member.
A. Points and award amounts:
Points Award
100 or more $1,150
75 to 99 $750
50 to 74 $500
25 to 49 points $250
15 to 24 $100
Less than 15 $0
B. Activities and maximum points allowed: [Amended 10-28-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-30]
Activity
Maximum
Points
Training 10
Drills 10
Business meeting attendance 11
On-call duty/Code 4 response 75
Elected or appointed position 30
Committee participation 20
Appointed committee chairman 5
Recruitment activities 10
22.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 20-01 was approved at said general election.
§ 34-6 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 34-8
32:67
Chapter 35
MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 2.
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
§ 34-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 34-8
35:68
ARTICLE I
Regional Emergency Deployment System
[Adopted 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 16-99]
§ 35-1. Execution of agreement; terms and conditions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq., N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq. and as
otherwise provided by law, the mayor and municipal Clerk are hereby
authorized to execute a mutual aid agreement with the County of Morris
and the municipalities within the County of Morris for the provision of
supplemental law enforcement assistance in the event of an emergency,
disaster or widespread crisis, which agreement shall include, but not be
limited to, the following terms and conditions:
A. Each party agrees that, in the event of an emergency, disaster or
widespread crisis within the municipal jurisdiction of any other party,
the appropriate services and assistance will be provided upon request
and to the extent reasonably possible without endangering persons or
property within the municipality rendering such assistance.
B. All mutual aid rendered pursuant to the mutual aid agreement and
Morris County Regional Emergency Deployment System (MCREDS)
Plan shall be provided without charge or expense to the municipality
receiving such assistance. By executing the mutual aid agreement, each
party acknowledges that it shall be solely responsible for the provision
of any and all salary and other benefits for its personnel, whether paid
or volunteer, rendering assistance within the other municipality to the
same extent as if such personnel were performing their duties within
the municipality providing the assistance.
C. The mutual aid agreement shall have an initial term of one year and
shall be automatically renewed for additional and successive one-year
terms, unless and until one of the parties thereto elects to terminate the
agreement by providing prior written notice to the other parties to the
agreement.
§ 35-1 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS § 35-1
35:69
Chapter 38
PERSONNEL
Chapter 42
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 62.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 42-1. Creation; composition.
Pursuant to Chapter 291 of the Public Laws of the State of New Jersey
of 1975,23 a Planning Board is created in the Borough, consisting of nine
members. The composition of the Planning Board shall be as follows:
§ 42-2. Terms; compensation; vacancies; removal.
A. Class I: the Mayor of the Borough.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board shall be
deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if there is both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board
of Education among the Class IV members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of Education.
E. Two alternate members appointed by the Mayor as Class IV members to
serve noncoinciding two-year terms. [Added 10-18-1983 by Ord. No.
15-83]
A. The term of a member comprising Class I shall correspond with the
official tenure. Terms of the members comprising Class II and Class III
shall be for one year or terminated at the completion of their respective
terms of office, whichever first occurs, except for a Class II member
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 35-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 42-2
38:70
§ 42-3. Officers; Planning Board Attorney; additional staff
expenditures.
§ 42-4. Powers and duties.
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term
of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminated at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever first occurs. The term of a Class IV member
who is also a member of the Board of Adjustment or the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever shall
first occur. The terms of all Class IV members shall be that their first
appointment shall not exceed four years but that as few as possible of
them shall terminate at the same time. Their terms shall be staggered
initially, but thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years. which terms shall run from January 1 of the year in
which the appointment was made.
B. All members of the Planning Board shall serve as such without
compensation.
C. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
D. Members may, after a public hearing, be removed for inefficiency,
neglect of duty or malfeasance in office by the officer or body
appointing them.
A. The Planning Board, upon organization, shall elect from the Class IV
members a Chairman and a Vice Chairman, and they shall also select a
Secretary, who may be either a member of the Planning Board or a
municipal employee. The Planning Board Secretary shall serve as the
administrative officer for the purpose of applications and notices before
the Board. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-16]
B. There is also hereby created the office of a Planning Board Attorney.
The Planning Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or
agree upon the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney,
who shall be an attorney other than for the Borough or the Board of
Adjustment.
C. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of
experts and other staff as it may deem necessary.
D. The Planning Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts and
grants, the amount appropriated by the Borough Council for the use of
the Planning Board.
A. The Planning Board is authorized to organize and to adopt bylaws
concerning its administration and procedure.
§ 42-2 PERSONNEL § 42-4
38:71
§ 42-5. Citizens advisory committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a citizens' advisory
committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties; but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take any other action
as regularly required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
§ 42-6. Environmental Commission.
Whenever an Environmental Commission has been created and has
prepared and submitted to the Planning Board an index of the natural
resources of the municipality, the Planning Board shall make available to
the Environmental Commission an informational copy of every application
for development to the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to
make such informational copy available to the Environmental Commission
shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 42-7. Design Review Committee. [Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No.
3-88]
The Mayor and Council is hereby authorized to appoint the citizens'
advisory committee to be known as the "Design Review Committee," as
authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27, and it shall assist the Planning Board in
its duties but without power to take official action required of the Planning
Board. Such Committee shall consist of three or five persons who shall
be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
Wherever practicable, the members of such Committee shall consist of
B. It shall have all the powers to administer the provisions of the Land
Subdivision Ordinance and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the
Borough,24 in accordance with all of the provisions of such ordinances,
as well as the powers conferred upon it by the Municipal Land Use Law
of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. It is authorized, within the confines of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28, to make and
adopt and from time to time to amend the Master Plan of the Borough.
D. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivisions, site plans or
conditional uses, the Planning Board is authorized to exercise those
powers with regard to variances as were previously reserved for the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, such powers being conferred by the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.25
E. The Planning Board is authorized to perform such other advisory duties
as are assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the governing body
for the aid and assistance of the governing body or other agencies or
officers.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 42-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 42-7
38:72
registered architects, landscape architects, city planners or persons of
similar professional training or experience. The Planning Board shall have
the right to designate one of its Class IV members to provide liaison
between the Committee and the Board. The Planning Board shall then,
after the creation of such Committee, supply any subdivision or site plan
involving exterior building concepts to such Design Review Committee for
its review and recommendations.
§ 42-8. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter and the
remainder of the Code of the Borough. It is, however, governed by the
other sections of the Code as to procedures to be followed with regard
to applications for subdivision and site plan, public hearings, the keeping
of minutes and the handling of decisions and written approvals and
disapprovals of all applications before it.
Chapter 46
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 38. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 54.
§ 46-1. Establishment; composition. [Amended 8-21-2001 by Ord.
No. 17-01; 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 1-06; 5-16-2006 by Ord. No. 6-06;
4-29-2008 by Ord. No. 08-12; 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1]
§ 46-2. Powers and duties of members.
The Police Department shall:
A. The Borough of Florham Park Police Department shall consist of the
following officers:
(1) Chief of Police;
(2) One Captain;
(3) Four Lieutenants; [Amended 12-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-18]
(4) Six Sergeants; [Amended 12-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-18]
(5) Twenty-one Patrol Officers.
B. In addition, the Police Department may employ clerical personnel and
other employees to assist its officers in preserving peace and good
order in the Borough.
§ 42-7 PERSONNEL § 46-2
38:73
§ 46-3. Appropriate authority; rules and regulations. [Amended
8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-13]
The Borough Administrator shall be designated as the "appropriate
authority" as provided in the New Jersey Statutes who shall be responsible
for the overall performance of the Police Department. The Mayor and
Council, by resolution, shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
for the government of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members, which shall be enforced by the "appropriate authority."
§ 46-4. Duties and responsibilities of the Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the appropriate
authority, the Chief of Police shall:
A. Preserve the public peace.
B. Protect life and property.
C. Detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey and
the ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park.
D. Direct and control traffic.
E. Provide attendance and protection during emergencies.
F. Provide appearances in court.
G. Cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies.
H. Provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the disposition and
discipline of the Department and its members and officers.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and control.
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Police Department during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the appropriate authority.
§ 46-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 46-5
38:74
§ 46-5. Qualifications; hiring preference based on residency.
[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-5]
§ 46-6. Discipline of members of Police Department.
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the
Police Department's rules and regulations.
§ 46-7. Appointment of temporary members and officers.
The Mayor and Borough Council may appoint from time to time special
law enforcement officers in accordance with New Jersey Statutes for terms
A. No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not
qualified as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The Mayor and
Borough Council may also require that an applicant for appointment to
the Police Department shall successfully complete a physical, mental,
and psychological examination.
B. Residency preference.
(1) Bona fide residency. A "bona fide resident" is defined as any person
having a permanent domicile within the Borough of Florham Park
which has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or
claiming a residence acquired outside of the corporate limits of the
Borough.
(2) From and after the effective date of this section, those individuals
possessing bona fide residency in the Borough of Florham Park
shall be given preference in the hiring of all officers and employees
to be employed or appointed by the Borough to serve in the Police
Department. No person shall be appointed to a position within the
Department who is not a bona fide resident at the time of
appointment unless all qualified applicants who are bona fide
residents have been appointed or have declined an offer of
appointment.
(3) This section does not require that officers or employees of the
Police Department holding their positions prior to the date of this
section become residents of the Borough.
(4) Where it is determined that there cannot be recruited a sufficient
number of qualified residents for available positions, preference
shall be given for the hiring of nonresidents for such positions in
the following order:
(a) Other residents of Morris County;
(b) Other residents of New Jersey;
(c) All other qualified applicants.
§ 46-5 PERSONNEL § 46-7
38:75
not exceeding one year. They shall possess and exercise all the powers
and duties provided by said statutes during their term in office, but shall
not be continued as regular members of the Police Department and shall
not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize special law
enforcement officers when on duty to exercise the same powers and
authority as regular members of the Police Department including the
carrying of firearms and the power of arrest.
§ 46-8. Third-party assignments. [Added 7-23-2008 by Ord. No.
08-23]
A. Definition. As used in this section:
THIRD PARTY ASSIGNMENTS OF POLICE OFFICERS — Refers to
those situations in which a police officer provides services, such as
either traffic control or security, for a party other than the Borough.
B. Qualifications for assignment. All police officers in good standing within
the Police Department shall be permitted to engage in third-party
assignments, provided that the third-party assignment is approved by
the Chief of Police and shall not result in the police officer working
more than 16 hours in a twenty-four-hour period unless specifically
authorized to do so by the Chief of Police.
C. Rotation list to be maintained. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
administer the assignment of third-party assignments to those police
officers who seek them and may establish reasonable regulations
regarding the assignment and performance of the jobs which are not
inconsistent with the Borough's collective agreement(s).
D. Rate of pay; payment. [Amended 12-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12-17]
(1) For third-party assignments:
(a) During normal business hours, this being defined as Monday
through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., excluding holidays,
the police officer performing the third-party assignments shall
be paid by the Borough at the gross hourly rate of $70 per
hour.
(b) For any emergency third-party assignment, the police officer
performing the third-party assignments shall be paid by the
Borough at the gross hourly rate of $90 per hour. An
emergency third-party assignment is any request for extraduty
work that is received by the police within less than 12
hours of the assignment.
(c) For any third-party assignments which occur during nighttime
hours or on weekends or holidays, the police officer performing
the third-party assignments shall be paid by the Borough at the
gross hourly rate of $80 per hour.26
§ 46-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 46-8
38:76
Chapter 47
PUBLIC RECORDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 96.
Fraudulent checks — See Ch. 98.
Dogs — See Ch. 108.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Taxation — See Ch. 220.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
(2) Payment for such assignments shall be subject to the normal
deductions for federal and state taxes, pension contributions, etc.,
to which the police officer’s regular salary is subject.
E. Administrative and vehicle fees; escrow account.
(1) The Borough shall, in addition to the hourly rate for the police
officer set forth in Subsection B above, charge an administrative
fee of $5 per hour.
(2) An additional fee per vehicle of $50 per day or $10 per hour
(whichever is greater) shall be charged when a marked police
vehicle is used in the performance of an assignment. The decision
whether or not to use a police vehicle will be at the sole discretion
of the Borough of Florham Park Police Department.
(3) At least five business days prior to the performance of any thirdparty
assignment, the third party contracting for such services
shall establish with the Borough an escrow account to guarantee
payment for said services. The third party shall provide an estimate
of the time the police officer(s) will be needed, multiplied by the
hourly rate of $60 per hour. Upon approval of said estimate by the
Chief, 110% of the estimate shall be deposited into the escrow
account. The funds held in the escrow account shall be used for the
payment of the police officer in accordance with Subsection D
above. Upon completion of the third-party assignment, the balance
in the escrow account shall be refunded in full to the third party.
The Police Chief, with authorization from the Borough
Administrator, may provide exceptions to the requirement to
establish an escrow account with the Borough for emergent jobs.
26.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1)(d), regarding third-party assignments already in
place, which immediately followed, was repealed 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20.
§ 46-8 PERSONNEL § 46-8
38:77

ARTICLE I
Fees
[Adopted 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 12-02; amended 10-19-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-20]
§ 47-1. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public records.
Requests for copies of records available pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1, the
Open Public Records Act, shall be requested in accordance with the
requirements of that law from either the Borough Clerk's office or the Police
Department. Copies of records may be purchased for the fees set forth
below. If a fee is not prescribed in this chapter, the fee shall be the actual
cost of duplicating the record.
A. Standard-sized paper documents.
(1) Eight-and-a-half-by-eleven-inch size: $0.05 per page.
(2) Eight-and-a-half-by-eleven-inch size size: $0.07 per page.
B. Large-sized paper documents and maps.
(1) Zoning Map: $0.07 per page if the map is copied by the Borough or
the actual cost of reproduction if it is sent to an outside agency.
(2) Street map: $0.07 per page if the map is copied by the Borough or
the actual cost of reproduction if it is sent to an outside agency.
(3) Site plan: actual cost.
(4) Subdivision plat: actual cost.
(5) Tax Maps: actual cost.
(6) Engineering plans: actual cost.
C. Preprinted documents.
(1) Copy of the Code book: Actual cost charged by publisher.
D. Police reports and photographs.
(1) Police accident reports: same as in Subsection A above, if
requested and picked up in person.
(2) Police accident reports, when copies are requested other than in
person: $5 for the first three pages and $1 per page for each
additional page, as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
(3) Photographs. Copies of color photographs shall be at actual cost.
E. Electronic records.
(1) Copy of videotape. Tape supplied by the municipality: actual cost.
§ 47-1 PERSONNEL § 47-1
38:79
(2) Copy of audiotape. Tape supplied by the municipality: actual cost.
(3) Copy of electronic document or database. The following fees cover
the cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or CD. Any
requests for software conversions shall be subject to the special
service charge described in Subsection G below. For security
reasons, the use of a floppy disk or CD provided by the requestor is
prohibited.
(a) Floppy disk: $0.40.
(b) CD: $0.40.
F. Microfilm: actual cost.
G. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to it
being incurred.
H. Conversion of records from one medium to another. Cost of duplication
plus special service charges as follows:
(1) Conversion of paper record to electronic form: actual cost.
(2) Conversion of electronic files from one software product to
another: actual cost.
(3) If the request for a record is not in a medium routinely used by the
Borough; not routinely developed or maintained by the Borough; or
requires substantial amount of manipulation or programming of
information technologies, the Borough will impose a special charge
based on the cost for extensive use of information technology or for
labor cost of personnel providing the services that is actually
incurred by the Borough or attributable to the Borough for the
programming, clerical and supervisory assistance required, or
both. The requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object
to the special service charge prior to it being incurred.
I. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail.
J. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any request where it is estimated
that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to reproduce.
The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated cost of filling
the request.
§ 47-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 47-1
38:80
§ 47-2. Fees for special services and records.
K. For purposes of this chapter, "actual cost" shall mean the cost of
materials and supplies used to make a duplicate, or the charges
imposed upon the Borough by an outside agency.
A. Vital statistics. The fee for certified copies of birth, marriage, death,
domestic partnership, and civil union certificates shall be $25 for the
first copy, with a charge of $5 for each additional copy. [Amended
8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-16]
B. Police services.
(1) The fee for a letter of good conduct from the Florham Park Police
Department shall be $10.
(2) The fee for fingerprinting by the FPPD shall be $15 per card.
C. The Borough shall charge a returned NSF check fee of $20 for any
checks paid to the Borough.
D. The fee for Borough contract bid packages shall be $25 each.
§ 47-1 PERSONNEL § 47-2
38:81
Chapter 48
PUBLIC WORKS, DIRECTOR OF
§ 48-1. Provisions establishing position adopted by reference.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.5 et seq. establishing the office of
Municipal Superintendent of Public Works in the Borough are hereby
established and adopted.
§ 48-2. Appointment.
The Borough Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed, when
legally qualified, by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council.
§ 48-3. Title; term.
The title of the person holding said post within the Borough shall be
Director of Public Works, and the Director shall be appointed yearly subject
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6.
§ 48-4. Compensation.
The compensation for the Director of Public Works shall be fixed by the
Borough Council by appropriate ordinance.
Chapter 50
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and recreation facilities — See
Ch. 77.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 171.
§ 50-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created a Department of Recreation.
§ 50-2. Director of Recreation.
The Director of Recreation shall administer and enforce all laws, ordinances
and regulations relating to recreation. The Director of Recreation shall have
had experience of a responsible nature in recreational work or recreation
administration and shall:
§ 47-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 50-2
48:82
§ 50-3. Regulations and penalties; fees.
The Director of Recreation, with the approval of the Mayor and Council,
may adopt suitable rules and regulations for the safety and conduct of
persons using recreational facilities and for the preservation of public peace
and order at public events. Any person who shall violate any such rule or
regulation shall be punishable by penalties not in excess of those authorized
by N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. The Department of Recreation may charge and collect,
for the use of the Borough, a reasonable fee for admission to programs or
activities or use of facilities provided under this chapter when specifically
authorized by resolution of the Council.
§ 50-4. Charter club regulations. [Added 6-18-2002 by Ord. No.
10-02]
A. Administer and operate municipal playgrounds, playfields and facilities
for indoor and outdoor sports, athletics and recreational programs and
activities for children and adults.
B. Sponsor and administer cultural and recreational programs and
activities and organizations, as recommended by the Recreation
Advisory Committee.
A. The Charter Club shall be in good standing with its national or regional
organization, and shall conduct itself in accordance with the rules and
regulations of that organization so as to remain in good standing. A
copy of all published rules of the organization must be filed with the
Recreation Director at least 30 days prior to the start of annual club
activity and updated on an annual basis.
B. A copy of the Charter Club's current bylaws, policies or other operating
documents shall be on file with the Recreation Director.
C. The Charter Club shall provide proof of insurance in the form of a valid
certificate of insurance naming the Borough of Florham Park as an
additional insured, to be filed with the Borough Administrator at least
30 days prior to the start of annual Club activity. The Charter Club shall
release and hold harmless and indemnify the Borough of Florham Park
and the Recreation Department from any and all payments, expenses,
costs, attorney fees and from and for any and all claims and liability for
losses or damage to property or injuries to persons occasioned wholly
or in part by or resulting from any acts or omissions by the Charter Club
or its agents, participants, members, directors, officers, guest,
licensees, invitees or for any cause or reason whatsoever arising out of
or by reason of the use of Borough recreational facilities by the Charter
Club.
D. The Charter Club shall provide the Recreation Director with a list of all
officers and members of the Club's grievance committee within 15 days
of their appointments, including names, addresses, e-mail addresses,
phone and fax numbers.
§ 50-2 RECREATION DEPARTMENT § 50-4
50:83
Chapter 52
RETIREMENT
E. The Charter Club shall provide the Recreation Director a list of all
current participants in the Charter Club, including names, addresses
and phone numbers prior to the start of each season and update the list
as changes are made.
F. The Charter Club shall provide a list of coaches, including names,
addresses, e-mail addresses, phone and fax numbers to the Recreation
Director at least 30 days prior to the start of the Club's season. All
coaches must be NYSCA certified. Failure to hold a current certification
will prohibit the individual from coaching at any level.
G. In order to utilize Borough fields and facilities efficiently, and to
minimize any potential conflicts in field use, practice schedules must be
filed with the Recreation Director at least 30 days prior to the start of
the Charter Club's season and game schedules must be filed as soon as
they are available prior to the start of the season. It is the desire of the
Borough to work cooperatively with the Charter Club scheduling
representatives so as to coordinate and best meet the needs of various
users of fields and facilities. The schedule will include practice
schedules, travel team and intramural schedules, as well as coaches
responsible during those scheduled times. All schedules are subject to
the approval of the Recreation Director and may be subject to alteration
based on availability of facilities.
H. Each Charter Club shall establish a grievance committee, separate and
apart from its board of directors. The purpose of the grievance
committee is to handle grievances by Club members and participants.
All grievances must first be considered by the Charter Club's grievance
committee. Any unresolved matters may then be submitted to the
Recreation Director. Matters not resolved at that level may be referred
to the Borough Administrator. Either party may appeal the decision of
the Borough Administrator to the Borough Council whose decision shall
be final. Matters other than alleged violations of the Charter Club's
bylaws or the provisions of this section shall be adjudicated solely
within the organization.
§ 50-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 50-4
50:84
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-35]
§ 52-1. Positions eligible for membership.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 52-2. Positions exempt from membership.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 52-3. Exceptions.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 52-1 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 52-2 above,
the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may determine that the
individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program if that individual:
A. Borough Administrator;
B. Municipal Engineer;
C. Municipal Prosecutor;
D. Municipal Court Judge;
E. Public Defender.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Tax Assessor;
F. Registered Municipal Clerk;
G. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
H. Director of Public Works.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time; or
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
§ 52-1 RECREATION DEPARTMENT § 52-3
50:85
§ 52-4. Implementation and construction of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 52-2 herein, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 52-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 52-4
50:86
Chapter 54
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Administrator - See Ch. 4.
Payment of Claims - See Ch. 12.
Personnel - See Ch. 38.
§ 54-1. Establishment and payment of salaries and wages.
Chapter 56
SELF-FUNDED HEALTH PLAN
§ 56-1. Establishment of Plan and Fund.
There is hereby established a partially self-funded health insurance plan for
Borough employees and retirees to be known as the "Borough of Florham
Park Self-Funded Health Plan" (the "Plan"). There is further established in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6 et seq. an insurance
fund to be known as the "Borough of Florham Park Self-Insurance Fund"
(the "Fund"). The Plan and the Fund shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with the terms of this chapter, N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6 et seq., and
the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Department of
Community Affairs.
A. The Mayor and Council shall prescribe by ordinance or by resolution
the annual salary or hourly wage for all duly appointed employees.
B. The Treasurer shall establish a payroll account in a duly authorized
depository and shall make deposits therein and draw paychecks
thereon in accordance with the following procedures.
C. Bimonthly, on the 15th and last day of the month, the Treasurer shall
voucher funds from appropriation accounts into the payroll account in
accordance with procedures in Chapter 12, § 12-1, of the Code of the
Borough of Florham Park and shall draw payment checks therein in
accordance with approved salary or wage schedules. The Treasurer
shall present the vouchers to the Administrator, who shall record his
approval and present to the Council for authorization or ratification
according to Chapter 12, § 12-1, of the Code of the Borough of Florham
Park. [Amended 10-19-2004 by Ord. No. 16-04]
D. The Borough department heads shall present to the Treasurer, in
advance of each biweekly payment, time in attendance. overtime, sick
time, vacations and other payroll data on forms prescribed.
§ 52-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 56-2
54:87
§ 56-2. Establishment of Fund Commission.
There is hereby established in accordance with the requirements of N.J.SA.
40A:10-8 a Fund Commission (the "Commission") consisting of three
Borough Councilmen or Councilwomen together with a Secretary of the
Commission to be appointed by the governing body. The Commissioners
shall hold office for two years or for the remainder of their term as officials,
whichever is less, and until their successors shall have been duly appointed
and qualified. The Commissioners shall serve without compensation. The
compensation of the Secretary, if any, shall be established and authorized
by the governing body. Vacancies occurring on the Commission shall be
filled for the unexpired term. The Commissioners shall forthwith after
appointment organize for the ensuing year by electing a chairperson from
among their membership.
§ 56-3. Powers and authority of Commission.
In order to maintain the efficient, professional and actuarially sound
operation of the fund, the Borough will contract with a qualified third-party
administrator (the "TPA") to assist the Borough and the Commission in the
proper design and administration of the Plan. Subject to consultation and
review by the governing body, the Commissioners shall have the power and
duty to oversee the TPA, adopt rules and, for the control and investment of
the Fund, assure the Fund has sufficient funds for the payment of claims,
invest assets of the Fund in accordance with the Borough's established
investment policy, and assure the operation of the Plan and the Fund
consistent with their purpose.
§ 56-4. Purpose of the Fund.
The purpose of the Fund is to hold, manage and distribute, in accordance
with the Plan documents and sound fiscal management, money necessary to
pay the valid claims of Borough employees and retirees as required to fulfill
the obligations of the Borough pursuant to the Plan and its health insurance
obligations to its employees and retirees. The Fund exists to pay healthcare
claims and related expenses covered by the Plan, and the Fund shall not be
used for any other purpose.
§ 56-5. Reserve for claims.
The Commissioners and the TPA shall cause the Fund to achieve a
reasonable reserve of up to six months of claims payments to assure that
sufficient assets are available to continue to pay all claims and expenses in
a high-claim year.
§ 56-6. Administration of claims.
Claims shall be administered and paid, after review, by the TPA in
accordance with the TPA administration contract. The TPA shall assure
that all Borough employees and retirees covered by the Plan are fully
informed as to the proper procedure for submitting claims and that all
§ 56-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 56-6
54:88
notices required by law with respect to the Plan are promptly provided to
the Plan participants.
§ 56-7. Additional and excess coverage.
The Borough, directly or through the TPA, shall arrange for the purchase
of "stop loss" or "excess" coverage in order to provide ascertainable limits
to the liability of the Fund. Such coverage shall include, but need not be
limited to, coverage for catastrophic illness for plan participants, aggregate
coverage (below catastrophic coverage) to assure that the Plan's risk level is
capped at a maximum amount as established by the Borough in consultation
with the Commissioners and the TPA, and run-out coverage (also referred
to as a 12/15 contract) to allow claims incurred during the plan year to be
paid out for a period of three months after the end of the plan year.
§ 56-8. Appeals.
The TPA shall, in the first instance, review appeals from denial of claims. In
considering appeals, any relevant supplemental information provided by the
Plan participant or the service provider shall be considered. A third party
retained to review appeals on an independent basis according to the Plan
documents shall handle second-level appeals. In order to assure that the
Plan is consistently, fairly and equitably administered, no member of the
governing body shall be involved in the approval or denial of claims, which
in all cases shall be determined by the terms of the Plan.
§ 56-9. Annual review; open enrollment period.
The Commission shall annually, in consultation with the governing body
and coordination with its TPA and other professional consultants, review
and evaluate the Plan and shall evaluate the Plan in comparison to a fully
insured plan. The base plan option of the Borough's Plan shall be modified
to mirror the design of the fully insured equivalent plan. This review shall
occur at the same time as the annual open enrollment period. At no time
will the Borough be required to offer base plan benefits greater than those
offered by the fully insured equivalent plan.
§ 56-10. Continuation of Fund; termination.
The fund shall continue from year to year without lapse until the self-fund
insurance plan is terminated by action of the governing body. In the event
of such a termination, after payment of all claims and expenses of the plan,
any fund balance remaining shall revert to the Borough's general fund.
Chapter 58
(RESERVED)
Chapter 60
§ 56-6 TOWN CENTER TASK FORCE § 56-10
60:89
TOWN CENTER TASK FORCE
§ 60-1. Purpose.
Development and use of the center of the Borough of Florham Park is
essential to the community character, economic stability and quality of life
of the Borough, its residents and visitors. In order to obtain the widest and
most comprehensive views, judgments and outlooks in relation to planning
and development of the Borough Center, the Town Center Task Force
("TCTF") is hereby established. For the purposes of the jurisdiction of the
TCTF, the Town center is defined as those properties located within the B-1
and PB-2 Zoning Districts and as specified in the attached map.27
§ 60-2. Creation.
There is hereby created and the Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a
citizens' advisory committee to be known as the "Town Center Task Force,"
as authorized and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27. The TCTF shall assist
the Planning Board in its duties, as further described herein, but shall
not have power to take official action required of the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The TCTF shall consist of 10 persons who
shall be appointed annually by the Mayor. TCTF members shall be drawn
from residents as well as interested and willing business representatives.
The Planning Board shall designate one of its Class IV members to serve as
liaison between the TCTF and the Board.
§ 60-3. Responsibilities and duties.
The Town Center Task Force (TCTF) shall have the following responsibilities
and duties:
A. The TCTF shall receive development applications filed with the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment for properties located
in the B-1 and PB-2 Zones. The TCTF shall prepare reports for the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to consider in their
review of those development applications and designate the number of
persons who reviewed the application and who approved/voted on the
report. The report of the TCTF shall focus on the following five
parameters: lighting, signage, sidewalks, landscaping and property
aesthetics.
B. The TCTF shall be notified of conceptual development plans proposed
for properties located in the B-1 and PB-2 Zones and be invited to
attend Planning Board meetings in which they are scheduled to be
discussed.
27.Editor's Note: The map is attached to Ord. No. 07-12 and on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 56-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 60-3
60:90
Chapter 62
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board - See Ch. 42.
Subdivision and site plan review - See Ch.
212.
Zoning - See Ch. 250.
§ 62-1. Establishment; composition; terms; vacancies; alternate
members.
C. The TCTF shall be given notice of the Planning Board undertaking any
update or reexamination of the Borough's Master Plan or any element
thereof and given the opportunity to forward comments.
D. In relation to the responsibilities noted above, the TCTF may meet or
correspond with applicants and developers in order to obtain
information and data concerning development plans and to provide
their insights.
E. The TCTF role is advisory only and is not authorized to grant any
approvals or to enter into any agreements with developers or property
owners on behalf of the Borough.
F. The TCTF shall develop a set of standards for the parameters listed in
Subsection A of this section, which standards, once approved by the
Planning Board and the governing body, shall be adopted by ordinance
and applied to each application before the Planning Board and Zoning
Board involving property located in the specified zones.
G. The TCTF shall retain consultants when necessary to evaluate an
application, the costs of which shall be paid by the applicants from the
escrow funds deposited for the application.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is established in the Borough pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. which Board shall consist of seven residents
of the Borough, who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
B. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so determined so as
to stagger their expiration dates evenly over the first four years of their
appointments, provided that no member initially appointed shall be
appointed for a term to exceed four years. Thereafter, however, each
member shall be appointed for a four-year period. At the time of the
first appointments, the present members of the Board will remain for
the duration of their terms.
C. No member of the Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office or
position in the Borough.
§ 60-3 TOWN CENTER TASK FORCE § 62-1
60:91
§ 62-2. Organization; additional staff; Board Attorney;
compensation.
§ 62-3. Rules and regulations; powers and duties.
D. A vacancy shall be filed immediately by the Mayor but only for the
expiration of the term of the person so creating the vacancy.
E. The Mayor may also appoint not more than two alternate members, who
shall be designated by the Board Chairman as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2," and they shall serve in rotation during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member or members. The term of each
alternate member shall be two years. [Added 2-19-1980 by Ord. No.
4-80]
A. Upon organization, the Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its members and shall also select a Secretary, who may be a
member of the Board or another municipal employee. The Board
Secretary shall serve as the administrative officer for the purpose of
applications and notices before the Board. [Amended 9-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-16]
B. The Board may also employ or contract for such other staff, experts or
Services as it deems necessary and for which funds are available.
C. There is the office of Board Attorney, and that may be filled annually at a
compensation to be agreed upon between the Board and the applicant.
The Attorney, however, shall not represent either the governing body or
the Planning Board.
D. The Board shall fix compensation for all staff and other employees but
shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Mayor and Council for its use.
A. The Board of Adjustment is authorized to organize and to adopt bylaws
concerning its administration and procedure and to enact such rules
and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions
and purposes of this chapter and the enabling legislation.
B. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to confer the broadest
powers upon the Board of Adjustment as more particularly described in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. It shall in all cases follow the provisions
applicable to it as set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291
of the Laws of 1975,28 as from time to time it may be revised, and it shall
from time to time furnish any persons requesting such information
copies of its rules and regulations pertaining to appeals so that
applications may be properly filed with the Board for its decision
thereon.
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 62-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 62-3
60:92
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 68
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
C. The Board shall comply with subsequent sections of this Code, and
more particularly Chapter 212, as it sets forth the standardization of
applications, appeals, hearings and decisions.
§ 62-3 TOWN CENTER TASK FORCE § 62-3
60:93

ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 10-24-1970 by Ord. No. 14-70; amended in its entirety
3-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-4]
§ 68-1. through § 68-2. (Reserved)
§ 68-3. Destruction of or interference with alarm apparatus;
excessive false alarms; fees; violations and penalties.
A. Any individual who intentionally, willfully, recklessly or maliciously
destroys or injures any pole, alarm box, wiring, sensors or any other
apparatus of any alarm system located within the Borough, or who
willfully or maliciously interferes with the same or any part thereof or
who hinders or impedes any of the operations intended to be
accomplished thereby or who intentionally or recklessly causes or
assists in causing a false alarm or fire, burglary or other emergency to
be given in any manner shall, upon conviction thereof before the
Municipal Court of the Borough, be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, § 1-16, of this Code.
B. Fees for excessive false alarms (fire, burglar or other).
(1) The owner of any alarm system located within the Borough which
transmits more than three false alarms in any one calendar year
shall be fined, in accordance with a fee schedule established
annually by the Mayor and Council, by the Borough of Florham
Park Police or Fire Department, whichever department responded
to the alarm. An owner shall not be fined in connection with any
false alarms transmitted while an alarm is being repaired or
serviced if, prior to the transmission of an alarm, the owner has
notified the Police Department of said service or repair.
(2) An alarm company or alarm servicing agency shall be fined, in
accordance with a fee schedule established annually by the Mayor
and Council for each false alarm that is transmitted in connection
with the repair or service of an alarm, unless prior to the
transmission of an alarm, the alarm company or alarm servicing
agency has notified the Police Department of said service or repair.
(3) If the fine is disputed or is not satisfied within 10 days of receipt of
the notice of fine from the Police or Fire Department, a formal
summons shall be issued by the Police or Fire Department, and the
person or persons in violation of this section shall be prosecuted in
the Borough Municipal Court and shall be subject to all penalties
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code, in addition to the unpaid
fine.
(4) There shall be no waiver of rights under this article because of the
Borough's failure to prosecute or decision not to prosecute in any
specific instance.
§ 68-1 TOWN CENTER TASK FORCE § 68-3
60:95
(5) A "false alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or
maintenance, or the negligence, or reckless or intentional act or
behavior of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or his guests,
tenants, employees, students or agents. This shall be determined at
the sole discretion of the superior officer on the scene from either
the Fire or Police Department.
(6) In the instance of false alarms in any building other than a
residence, the fine and associated penalties shall be assessed on
the commercial enterprise, college or university.
(a) The fine that shall be assessed for false alarms, as defined in
this section, shall be as follows:
Number of Unintentional
False Fire Alarms in
Calendar Year Fee To Be Assessed
1 to 3 $200
4 to 5 $300
6 $375
7 $500
8 $625
9 $800
10 $1,000
(b) An additional $1,000 will be assessed for every unintentional
false alarm call made after the 10th unintentional false
alarm.29
29.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Radio Transmitter Alarm Box, adopted 11-10-1970 by Ord.
No. 15-70, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-16-1998
by Ord. No. 8-98.
§ 68-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 68-3
60:96
Chapter 72
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 85. Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
§ 72-1. License fees. [Amended 2-21-1970 by Ord. No. 3-70;
2-9-1971 by Ord. No. 2-71; 3-14-1972 by Ord. No. 1-72; 3-20-1973
by Ord. No. 3-73; 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. 6-73; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No.
4-05]
§ 72-2. Hours of sale. [Amended 2-9-1971 by Ord. No. 2-71;
9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95]
A. Annual license fees for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the Borough
are hereby fixed as follows:
(1) For a plenary retail consumption license: $2,500.
(2) For a plenary retail distribution license: $2,500.
(3) For a club license: $188.
B. Club licenses shall be issued as approved by the Borough Council.
A. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or permit the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except New Year's Day of each year.
B. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or permit the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on January 1, commonly
called "New Year's Day," between the hour of 5:00 a.m. and the hour
designated in Subsection A when sales may be resumed.
C. During the hours when the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by
Subsections A and B, the entire premises licensed under a plenary retail
consumption license shall be closed, and no member of the public shall
be permitted to enter or remain thereon, provided that this requirement
shall not be deemed to prohibit the licensee and bona fide employees of
the licensee from remaining on the premises for purposes of counting
the cash and cleaning the premises, nor shall this section be deemed to
prohibit the licensee and his family or bona fide employees of the
licensee, who are regular and bona fide residents in the licensed
premises, from remaining upon the premises for purposes of such
residence. The exceptions are:
§ 68-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 72-2
72:97
Chapter 77
AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 80.
Bingo — See Ch. 85.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 171.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
Poolrooms and billiard parlors — See Ch. 184.
§ 77-1. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate any miniature golf course, any game of
similar nature or character, any roller-skating or ice-skating rink, any tennis
court or other indoor recreational or amusement facility within the Borough
unless such person shall first have obtained a license for such purpose from
the Mayor and Council of the Borough.
§ 77-2. Application; issuances; duration; fee. [Amended 6-20-2000
by Ord. No. 17-00; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 33-06]
The Mayor and Council may, after application in an acceptable manner and
form, grant a license to operate any amusement or recreational facility as
defined in § 77-1 for a term not exceeding one year from the date of the
issuance of such license. The fee for licenses covered by this Code is $200
annually.
(1) Hotels; restaurants. Hotels and restaurants may continue their
normal operations exclusive of the sale, serving or delivery of or
consumption of alcoholic beverages during such hours when that
activity is prohibited, and there shall be no consumption of
alcoholic beverages permitted by the hotel or restaurant in any
public area, eating room or bar of the facility during the prohibited
hours.
(2) Clubs. Clubs and organizations holding plenary retail consumption
licenses also known as "club licenses" shall be specifically
controlled by Subsection C(1) above, and, while their regular
business hours are not affected by this section, the sale, servicing,
delivery or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in any
area of the licensed premises during the prohibited hours, and all
bars or barrooms shall be closed to the public or members during
those prohibited hours.
D. The hours mentioned in this chapter refer to prevailing time.
§ 72-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 77-3
77:98
§ 77-3. Safety requirements; inspections.
The Mayor and Council may, at its discretion, as a contingency for the
issuance of such license, require that the licensee maintain safety standards
and apparatus necessary to protect the users of the facility. Periodic
inspections of such facility shall be made to ensure compliance with the
license requirements so as to ensure the public health, safety and welfare
of the users of the facility.
§ 77-4. Operation; posting of license.
No person operating a licensed facility shall make, suffer or permit any
improper noise or any disturbance on the premises occupied. Such person
shall not block or obstruct any sidewalk or roadway adjacent to the
premises so occupied or use or permit or suffer the same to be done. No
person shall violate any of the terms of the license as issued pursuant to this
chapter, and such person shall keep such license posted in such facility at
all times.
§ 77-5. Revocation of license.
The Mayor and Council shall have the right to revoke any license issued
under this chapter for any violation of this chapter or for the violation of this
Code or any other ordinance of the Borough.
§ 77-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No.
3-88]
Any person violating a provision of this chapter by operating a facility
encompassed by this chapter without a license shall be punished as set forth
in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
Chapter 80
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 42.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 72.
Amusement and recreation facilities — See
Ch. 77.
Bingo — See Ch. 85.
Loitering — See Ch. 150.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
Poolrooms and billiard parlors — See Ch. 184.
Site plan review — See Ch. 212.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Vending machines (Board of Health) — See
Ch. 274.
§ 77-3 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 80-1
80:99
§ 80-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:
§ 80-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. These devices shall include, but shall not be
limited to, pinball machines, mechanical grab machines, air hockey, rifle
or pistol target shooting, not requiring use of slugs or bullets but using
only electronic transmissions to register or score, pool, billiards, marble
machines, simulated motor vehicle operations, aptitude testings, strength
testings, computer and/or electronic games. This list is intended to be
illustrative only, and the term "coin-operated and non-coin-operated
amusement machine or device" shall include all games, machines or devices
of a similar nature. regardless of what name may be given to them. This
definition specifically excludes nonamusement machines which are in the
nature of vending machines in supplying such items, such as food,
beverage, cigarettes, novelties or other such items for sale, and such
machines are not intended to be included within this definition. It shall
include video-type games or machines or similar devices that use a display
screen for points, lines and dots of light that can be manipulated to simulate
games or other types of entertainment. It shall not include, nor shall this
chapter apply to, music-playing devices.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who supplies any automatic amusement
device to another for use in his premises, whether under lease or any similar
arrangement.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose premises any automatic amusement
device is placed or kept for operation.
A. To license, regulate and control those automatic amusement devices
which are operated for the purpose of making a profit
B. To prevent dishonest business practices by requiring persons intending
to engage in the business referred to in this chapter to provide
preliminary information to be licensed and to conform to the provisions
hereof.
C. To regulate the business of amusement devices so as to prevent
nuisances to patrons and the public, fire hazards from overcrowding
and poor ingress and egress at premises where amusement devices are
located.
D. To prohibit gambling, loitering or the creation of an unhealthy
atmosphere for the youth of the community or other foreseeable
undesirable effects of such devices.
§ 80-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 80-2
80:100
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
§ 80-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful to maintain, use, operate or conduct in any public or
quasi-public place or in any building, store or other place wherein the public
is invited or wherein the public may enter in the Borough or to permit
such maintenance, use, operation or conduct of any automatic amusement
game or device, unless the owner of the game or device has first obtained a
license for that purpose from the Mayor and Council.
§ 80-4. Exceptions; restrictions.
§ 80-5. Fees; issuance and posting of license; transferability.
§ 80-6. Application.
A. The provisions of this chapter requiring an operator's license shall not
apply to any church, university, fraternal or veterans organization or
other religious group, charitable or nonprofit organization which
operates any coin-controlled amusement device for the use of its
members and their guests and/or premises owned or controlled by it
within the Borough.
B. No license shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age.
A. The fee for all applications for licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be
$500 in addition to all licensing or transfer fees.
B. A fee of $200 per annum shall be charged for each commercial
amusement device located on the premises for any portion of a calendar
year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. For each machine
for which a fee is paid, the Borough Clerk shall issue an annual license,
which license must be displayed on said machine in a prominent
location, readily visible to members of the public and enforcing officials.
Each such license shall be nontransferable and shall designate thereon
an identification number or serial number for the machine for which it
has been issued. [Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 33-06]
A. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made and
delivered to the Borough Clerk on forms to be supplied for the purpose
and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant.
B. The following personal information is required concerning the
applicant, if an individual, and concerning each stockholder holding
10% or more of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each
director, if the applicant is a corporation, and concerning the partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, and
concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the
business premises:
§ 80-2 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 80-6
80:101
(1) Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant or officer thereof submitting the
application.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex and color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least 2 inches x 2 inches in size.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has been previously licensed by any
public or governmental authority to maintain coin-controlled
amusement devices for use by the public or has previously applied
for such a license and whether or not such a license has been
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor.
(7) All criminal convictions, fully disclosing the offense for which
convicted and the circumstances thereof.
(8) A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by
the Police Chief or his authorized representative.
(9) The name under which the place is being operated and the location
of the same.
(10) The number and type of alcoholic beverage license, where
applicable.
(11) The number and type of machines sought to be licensed.
(12) The location where each automatic amusement game is to be
located.
(13) The name and address of the person from whom each device is to
be purchased. rented or otherwise obtained.
(14) A description of each automatic amusement game sought to be
licensed, including, for each device, the name of the manufacturer,
model number and serial number.
(15) Terms of agreement governing the acquisition and installation of
said automatic amusement game.
(16) Information indicating whether the distributor, the applicant or any
person connected with the operation of the place wherein the game
or device is to be installed has ever been convicted of any crime or
found guilty of the violation of any ordinance pertaining to
gambling or gaming.
§ 80-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 80-6
80:102
§ 80-7. Term of license; transferability; renewal.
(17) Such other information as may be required by the Police Chief or
the Borough Administrator to discover the truth of the matters
hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application.
(18) Authorization for the Borough, its agents or its employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application.
C. The application must contain the total number of square feet to which
the applicant customarily invites or permits the public to occupy and
use, but shall not include any area used for storage, office, kitchen,
counter space, walks, alleys, drives, parking facilities or such other
areas to which the public has no access. A sketch or plan of the
proposed licensed premises shall be attached to the application.
D. The truth of the information submitted in any application of this section
shall be sworn to, and any willful misstatement therein shall be
considered a violation of this section and subject the offender to the
penalties provided herein.
E. Upon receipt of an application for the license under this section, the
Police Chief or the Borough Administrator shall conduct investigation
into the owners of the device to be licensed and the location at which
such device is to be used.
F. In the event that the Municipal Clerk determines that such application
is in violation of this chapter or in the event that it is determined that
the installation of such device at a particular location constitutes a clear
and present potential for the disruption of the peace and good order of
the Borough of Florham Park, then the Municipal Clerk shall deny such
application.
G. Upon the Municipal Clerk's denying any application, the unsuccessful
applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial to the Borough
Council within 10 days of receipt of written denial by written notice of
appeal served upon the Municipal Clerk. The Borough Council shall
schedule a hearing on such appeal within 30 days thereof and issue its
decision within 30 days of such hearing.
H. No license shall be issued unless the application and license fee
requirements have been met and an investigation into the fitness of the
applicant conducted.
A. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for terms of one year,
commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year of
issuance.
B. A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving
notice to the Borough Clerk to that effect and giving a description of the
new machine, including manufacturer, model number and serial
§ 80-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 80-7
80:103
§ 80-8. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
number. A license may be transferred from one place to another by
application to the Borough Clerk to that effect and supplying the
required information as to the new premises. There shall be a fee for all
transfers from one place to another in the amount of $200 per place or
transfer.
C. Premises licenses. An operator shall annually renew a premises license
by filing notice with the Borough Clerk between October 1 and
November 1 of any calendar year preceding the calendar year for which
said license is to be renewed. The notice shall be accompanied by
payment of the annual fee.
A. Revocation of licenses. Every license issued hereunder is subject to
revocation by the Borough Clerk should the licensed operator distribute
or operate any amusement or entertainment machine or device
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other law, ordinance,
rule or regulation or fail to cooperate fully with any enforcement officer
or agency. Any material misstatement or omission in the license
application or in any information submitted therewith or the failure to
notify, in writing, the Borough Clerk of any changes by addition or
deletion or amendment to said application or information during the
term of any license or renewal shall constitute sufficient ground for
revocation of said license by the Borough Clerk.
B. Seizure of machines and devices. If the Chief of the Florham Park Police
Department shall have probable cause to believe any amusement or
entertainment machine or device is being used for gambling, such
machine or device may be temporarily seized by the Police Department
and impounded and may be considered as contraband by law.
C. Conditions of issuance. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be
deemed to be granted upon the express condition that, in addition to
any other sanction or penalty, the issuing, licensing or approval
authority may:
(1) After due notice by personal service or registered or certified mail
and after due hearing, suspend or revoke the license of any person
for violating any provision of this chapter or for other good cause.
(2) Suspend temporarily, pending a hearing or notice thereof, any such
license when such is deemed by the Administrator to be
immediately necessary to prevent emergent danger to the public
welfare, good or morals. Any such temporary suspension without
notice shall be for a period of not longer than 10 days.
(3) The foregoing provisions shall be deemed supplementary to and
not in lieu of any provision in any other section of this chapter for
revocation or suspension of licenses.
§ 80-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 80-9
80:104
§ 80-9. General regulations.
§ 80-10. Restrictions of licensed premises.
A. No operation of any commercial amusement device shall be permitted
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
B. No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards,
whether in cash or otherwise, as an inducement to use said machines.
C. No operator shall permit any person using a commercial amusement
device to operate the same for any gambling purpose prohibited by law.
In the event that it is determined judicially or by admission of the
operator that any commercial amusement device is being operated as a
gambling device, the machine may be confiscated and destroyed or sold
at public auction, and the license of the operator may be revoked after a
hearing.
D. No operator shall permit any minor under the age of 16 years,
unaccompanied by a parent on the business premises while school is in
session nor to remain on the premises after 9:00 p.m.
E. No operator shall permit the noise level on any licensed premises to
interfere with the reasonable use of any adjacent structures or
premises.
F. Every commercial amusement device required to be licensed under this
chapter shall have permanently affixed thereto an individual
identification number or serial number, which number shall not be
transferable from one machine to another. All such identification or
serial numbers shall be located on said machines immediately adjacent
to the location on such machine where the machine's license shall be
displayed.
G. All commercial amusement devices accessible to the public on any
licensed premises shall be arranged so as to permit a clear view of the
interior of the room or rooms involved from the exterior of the
operator's premises at all times.
H. No games subject to this chapter may be operated within 1,000 feet of a
school, up to the 12th grade, or house of worship. The distance shall be
measured for similar restrictions imposed and as interpreted for
alcoholic beverage licensed premises by the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission. This section of this chapter shall not be construed to
require the removal of any automatic amusement devices which are in
place as of the effective date of this chapter.
A. All such premises shall be subject to the following conditions and
requirements:
§ 80-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 80-10
80:105
§ 80-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No.
3-88]
Any person who violates any provision of the chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code. Each
day that a violation occurs or is committed shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1) Any premises in which the operation of such machines is a use shall
be approved by the Planning Board and be in compliance with the
following regulations.
(2) There shall be 100 square feet of operating area for each machine.
The calculation of the operating area includes the main area of the
building only and shall not include areas of the premises which are
used for other purposes, such as for eating, toilet facilities, exits or
entrances and other uses not directly associated with or essential
to the amusement machines and shall exclude access and walkways
primarily serving the machines. No change in the primary use area
is authorized in order to accommodate amusement machines.
(3) The number of machines shall in no event exceed 10% of the net
floor area of the licensed premises described herein.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one off-street space
for each two licensed machines where there exists more than two
such machines.
(5) Adequate special parking facilities shall be provided for bicycles,
mopeds and motorcycles, as determined by the Planning Board as
part of the site plan review.
(6) No such enterprise shall be located closer than 1,000 feet,
measured door to door, to any other premises in which the
operation of such machines is a primary use or to a primary or
secondary school.
(7) No sound from any licensed machines shall be discernible in any
adjacent premises.
B. In considering the approval of such premises, the Planning Board shall
consider the potential impact of the use at the proposed location on
such factors as traffic circulation and safety, the impact on surrounding
businesses and residences, any potential detrimental effects to the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Florham Park and the effect
of the use on the purposes and achievements of the Land Use
Ordinance of the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 80-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 80-11
80:106
Chapter 81
ATHLETIC CODE OF CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Department — See Ch. 50.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 171.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATHLETIC CODE OF CONDUCT AGREEMENT — The written form of
acknowledgment adopted and incorporated under the provisions of this
chapter as the "Borough of Florham Park Athletic Code of Conduct
Agreement," or otherwise implemented by a sports organization with the
express approval of the Borough of Florham Park.
CODE OF CONDUCT — A written specification of the behavior of parents,
guardians, players, spectators, coaches and officials adopted and
implemented by each sports organization which must at a minimum
incorporate this chapter and shall be agreed to in writing by the participant
and the parents or legal guardian of each minor participant of any sports
organization that utilizes any facility, sports field or other property owned,
operated or maintained by the Borough of Florham Park.
SPORTS EVENT — Any competition, practice, clinic or instructional event
involving one or more sports teams or organizations at a facility, sports field
or other property owned, operated, or maintained by Florham Park.
SPORTS ORGANIZATION — Any sports association, league, charter club or
club which is affiliated with, or receives monetary or other support from,
the Borough of Florham Park or the Borough of Florham Park Recreation
Department, or utilizes any facility, sports field or other property owned,
operated, or maintained by Florham Park. Sometimes "sports organization"
may also be referred to as "sports organization" or "sports team."
§ 81-2. Requirement to establish a code of conduct.
A. Any sports organization that receives funding from the Borough of
Florham Park, or utilizes any facility, sports field or other property
owned, operated or maintained by the Borough of Florham Park, shall
be required to adopt and implement a Code of Conduct incorporating,
at a minimum, the provisions of this chapter.
B. The parent(s) or guardian(s) of any minor, and each participant, in any
sports organization shall be required to execute an athletic code of
conduct agreement acknowledging that they have received and read
§ 80-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 81-2
80:107
§ 81-3. Proscribed conduct, acts and behavior.
§ 81-4. Authority of sports officials.
Any parent, official, coach or spectator at any sporting event shall be
subject to the authority of all field officials, including umpires and referees,
authorized volunteers and elected league officials of the sports team or
teams sponsoring the sports event or in the absence of such persons at a
sports team's practice or instructional event to the authority of the ranking
sports team coach on the premises. Such authority shall include the
the sports organization's code of conduct and that they agree to be
bound thereby. The form of acknowledgement shall be as indicated on
the "Borough of Florham Park Athletic Code of Conduct Agreement"
adopted under this chapter or in a form expressly approved and
authorized by the Borough of Florham Park.
C. Each sports organization shall be responsible for providing notice of the
code of conduct to each player and the parents and guardians of each
child participating in sports events within the Borough of Florham Park.
D. Any sports organization which utilizes any facility, sports field or
property that is owned, operated or maintained by the Borough of
Florham Park shall also be responsible for providing notice of the code
of conduct to each visiting sports team headquartered outside of the
Borough of Florham Park and for ensuring the enforcement of the
provisions of the code of conduct during all sports events.
A. The following conduct, acts and behavior are prohibited:
(1) Any parent, guardian, player, spectator, coach or official at any
sports event who initiates a fight, scuffle, or any type of physical
abuse or threats of abuse towards any player, coach, official,
parent, or spectator.
(2) Any parent, guardian, player, spectator, coach or official at any
sports event who enters the field of play, court or rink during any
sporting event for the purpose of physically or verbally abusing or
confronting coaches, players or officials.
(3) Any parent, guardian, player, spectator, coach or official at any
sports event who verbally abuses officials, players or spectators
including the use of obscene or profane language or gestures,
racial, ethnic or sexual slurs.
(4) Any parent, guardian, player, spectator, coach or official at any
sports event who throws or causes to be deposited any object on
the field of play, court or rink during any sports event.
(5) Any parent, guardian or signatory at any sports event who commits
any act in violation of the Athletic Code of Conduct Agreement
adopted or approved pursuant to this chapter.
§ 81-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 81-4
80:108
authorization to direct any person or persons involved in any incident in
violation of this chapter or the applicable sports team's code of conduct to
immediately remove themselves from the premises.
§ 81-5. Code of Conduct Committee.
The Borough of Florham Park hereby establishes the Code of Conduct
Committee, which shall be authorized to review any appeals for penalties
imposed by any sports organization for violations of this chapter. The Code
of Conduct Committee shall be convened at the request of the Recreation
Director for matters requiring such review and shall be made up of at
least three but not more than seven persons, who shall be appointed by
the Recreation Director. A Committee quorum shall consist of a majority
of members of the Committee, and decisions by the Committee must be
supported by greater than a majority of the quorum present to hear appeals.
The Committee may also consist of up to two alternate members in the
event of any conflict of interest or unavailability of a Committee Member.
§ 81-6. Violations penalties; enforcement.
§ 81-7. Violation procedures and hearing.
A. Any person determined to have violated the provisions of this chapter
may be banned from attendance at all sports events for a period to be
determined by the sports organization. A permanent ban may be
imposed in the event of a second or subsequent violation of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the imposition of
any additional penalties or discipline as provided for under the
provisions of the applicable sports organization's bylaws, organizing
documents, rules, regulations or code of conduct, or by any
participating league's code of conduct or rules and regulations.
B. Any person banned for 12 months from sports events for a violation of
this Code of Conduct prior to being allowed to resume attendance at
any sports event shall be required to complete anger management or
equivalent counseling program consisting of no less than 12 hours of
instruction and shall provide proof of satisfactory completion to the
Code of Conduct Committee. Any banning for less than 12 months may
include up to 12 hours of anger management.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude or limit the
application of any other remedy, civil or criminal, provided under any
other provision of law, nor shall it impair the ability of any participating
sports organization from imposing any penalties it shall deem
appropriate. Such penalties by the participating league may be
considered by the sport organization's Code of Conduct or the Borough
of Florham Park Code of Conduct Committee when imposing any
penalty under this chapter.
A. When it is determined that a person has violated this chapter after a
hearing before the sports organization's officers, or the organization's
§ 81-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 81-7
80:109
Chapter 82
BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 38. Public records — See Ch. 47.
committee to hear Code of Conduct violations, the organization shall
forward a letter to such violator notifying him or her of the date,
location, and nature of the violation, as well as the period of banning
and/or other action taken in response to such violation. The letter shall
be delivered via regular and certified mail, or by personal delivery,
and if mailed, the effective date shall be the date of mailing. Personal
delivery shall be effective on delivery.
B. Any person receiving such a notice who wishes to contest same shall
appeal to the Borough of Florham Park Code of Conduct Committee
within seven calendar days of the mailing of said notice by forwarding a
copy of said notice with a written request for appeal specifically setting
forth the basis of such person's contest of the notice of violation. The
request for appeal shall be delivered personally or by regular and
certified mail to the Borough of Florham Park Recreation Director at
Borough of Florham Park Municipal Building, 111 Ridgedale Avenue,
Florham Park, New Jersey 07932. If mailed, the effective date of the
notice shall be the date of mailing.
C. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Code of Conduct Committee shall
convene within 10 days and provide an opportunity for said person and
any interested persons to appear and be heard with respect to the
occurrence of any violation and the action taken by the sports
organization. The sports organization issuing any violation must be
notified of the date and time of the hearing.
D. The Code of Conduct Committee shall be authorized to hear testimony
under oath, review affidavits and such other information or
documentation relevant to the violation. The Committee, upon a
majority vote of the members present at such hearing, may sustain,
overturn, or modify the notice of violation and the period of banning or
other action taken in response to such violation consistent with this
chapter or the sports team by-laws or Code of Conduct.
E. All Notices of violation and bannings shall remain in effect until
overturned or modified by the Code of Conduct Committee.
F. In the event any notice of violation is not appealed within 10 days of
such notice, said notice of violation and the action taken by the sports
team official, including banning from sports events, shall become final.
§ 81-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 82-1
80:110
§ 82-1. Background check for employment.
The Borough Administrator or his/her designee is authorized to request
a criminal history background check of any person for an official
governmental purpose including, without limitation, employment, licensing,
and the procurement of services.
§ 82-2. Background check for persons participating in youth
programs.
Any person 18 years of age or older at the time of commencement of
participation in any youth activity, regardless of the capacity (whether as
a volunteer or as an employee), for any program that is organized by
the Borough of Florham Park, sponsored by the Florham Park Recreation
Department, or granted charter club status by the Borough of Florham Park,
and that utilizes Borough facilities, must undergo a mandatory background
record check. Each person shall file an application for the criminal
background check with the State Police via its authorized vendor, submit
to fingerprinting, and bear any and all costs involved with obtaining the
criminal background check.
§ 82-3. Request for records; receipt of records; notification of
disqualification.
The records which the Borough Administrator or his/her designee is
authorized to request and receive from an employee or volunteer shall
be the criminal history record information from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Section, and the State Police Bureau of
Identification; provided, however, that in the case of youth program
volunteers and employees, neither the entity coordinating the program, if
the Borough should employ such, nor the Borough shall receive a copy of
the detailed criminal record but will instead receive from the State Police
notification that the background check revealed information which would
serve to disqualify the person who may then file an appeal pursuant to
§ 82-10 hereof.
§ 82-4. Grounds for disqualification.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-3, a person may be disqualified
from serving as an employee or volunteer of a youth-serving organization if
that person's criminal history record background check reveals a conviction
of any of the following crimes and offenses:
A. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(1) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et. seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et
seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
§ 82-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 82-4
80:111
§ 82-5. Requests submitted to State Bureau of Investigation.
In order to obtain detailed criminal history record information, the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee shall request that the prospective
employee or volunteer submit the required application, fee, and fingerprint
data to the State Bureau of Identification via its authorized vendor. The
State Bureau of Identification shall receive all criminal history record
information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and shall disseminate
that information directly to the applicant.
§ 82-6. Recognition of comparable programs.
Any person who has undergone a background check that meets the same
standards as those conducted by the State Police, through its authorized
vendor, who can provide proof of the background check and results, is
exempt from the requirements contained herein until three years have
elapsed since the most current background check, so long as the most
current background check is within six months from the date of his/her
application in a comparable background check program, and further
provided that it meets the threshold standards of the program utilized by
the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 82-7. Term of effectiveness.
Each person who is required to submit to a background check in accordance
with this chapter must submit to a new criminal background record check
every three years if the person wishes to continue as a volunteer or
employee with the youth program within the Borough. Background record
checks subsequent to the initial one may not involve fingerprinting.
§ 82-8. Exemptions.
Any celebrity guests will be allowed to participate in programs within
the Borough as long as they are under the supervision of an approved
background check participant. Further, this ordinance does not apply to
volunteers and employees of teams and/or organizations that are not based
in the Borough of Florham Park.
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.;
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes;
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance analog as set forth in
Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes except Paragraph
(4) of Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons
offenses described in Subsection A of this section.
§ 82-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 82-9
80:112
§ 82-9. Administration of program.
The Florham Park Chief of Police or his designated representative shall
work with the Borough Administrator, the Director of Recreation, or any
other organization in administering this program.
§ 82-10. Grounds for appeal; procedure for appeal; determination of
rehabilitation.
A. Any person who feels that he or she has been erroneously or wrongly
prohibited from participation in any activities covered by this section
may appeal to both the Borough Administrator and the Director of
Recreation, in the case of volunteer and paid participation in youth
programs; or to the Borough Administrator in all other cases. The
decision of the Borough Administrator and/or the Director of
Recreation, as the case may be, shall be final.
B. A person may challenge the accuracy of the criminal history record. The
challenge shall be filed with the Borough Administrator, or his/her
designee, who may request that the applicant follow the procedure
outlined in § 82-3, to obtain a detailed criminal history check for the
appeals process. The challenge may be coordinated with the Chief of
Police.
C. Rehabilitation.
(1) A person may claim to be rehabilitated. The claim shall be filed with
the Borough Administrator, or his/her designee, who may request
that the applicant follow the procedure outlined in § 82-3, to obtain
a detailed criminal history check for the appeals process. The claim
may be coordinated with the Chief of Police. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation,
the following factors shall be considered:
(a) The nature and responsibility of the position that the convicted
person would hold, or has held, as the case may be;
(b) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(c) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(d) The date of the offense;
(e) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(f) Whether the offense was an isolated or a repeated one;
(g) Any social conditions that may have contributed to the offense;
(h) Any other evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment
received, acquisition of additional academic or vocational
schooling, successful participation in correctional work-release
§ 82-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 82-10
80:113
§ 82-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 82-12. Access to information limited; records exempt from public
disclosure; use of information limited.
programs, or the recommendations of those who have had the
person under their supervision.
(2) If it has been determined by the Director of Recreation and/or the
Borough Administrator that the disqualified person has been
successfully rehabilitated, the person shall be included on the list
of qualified employees and volunteers.
(3) No person may appeal a disqualification on the ground of
rehabilitation if the person has been rejected because that person
has been convicted, adjudicated delinquent, or acquitted by reason
of insanity of aggravated sexual assault; sexual assault; aggravated
criminal sexual contact; kidnapping pursuant to Paragraph (2) of
Subsection c of N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1; endangering the welfare of a child
by engaging in sexual conduct which would impair or debauch the
morals of the child pursuant to Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4;
endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to Paragraph (4) of
Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or enticing pursuant to
Section (1) of P.L. 1993, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6); criminal sexual
contact pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b if the victim is a minor;
kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3 if the victim is a minor and the
offender is not the parent of the victim; knowingly promoting
prostitution of a child pursuant to Paragraph (3) or Paragraph (4) of
Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1; or an attempt to commit any of
these enumerated offenses.
A. Failure to comply with this chapter may result in the Borough
withholding funding for the youth-serving organization, prohibiting the
use of facilities, withholding funding for facility maintenance, or
expulsion from all coaching and employment opportunities.
B. Any individual who has been advised, verbally or in writing, of his/her
disqualification to participate and who continues to participate, may be
subject to a fine of not less than $250 and not more than $2,500. Each
continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Access to criminal history record information shall be limited in
accordance with law, including N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
13:59-1.1 et seq.
B. The results of any and all criminal background checks supplied to the
Borough of Florham Park shall be filed and maintained in a secure
cabinet or room and shall not be made available to the public.
Appropriate steps must be taken to safeguard such records. The
records shall be exempt from public disclosure under the common law
§ 82-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 82-12
80:114
Chapter 85
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 72. Amusement and recreation facilities — See
Ch. 77.
or the New Jersey right-to-know law. The records shall only be retained
for such period of time as is necessary to serve their intended and
authorized purpose and thereafter shall be destroyed.
C. Criminal history record information shall be limited in use solely by the
individual(s) for which it was obtained, and shall not be disseminated to
persons or organizations not authorized to receive the records. This
information shall be limited solely to the authorized purpose for which
it was given and it shall not be disseminated to any unauthorized
persons. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
access to criminal history records information may be subject to
criminal and/or civil penalties.
§ 82-12 BINGO § 82-12
85:115

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-16-1969 as Ch. 11, § 11-1, of the 1969 Code]
§ 85-1. Alcoholic beverages.
Whenever bingo games or raffles are being conducted anywhere on
premises licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, the
licensee shall not sell, serve or deliver or allow to be sold, served, delivered
or consumed any alcoholic beverages anywhere on the premises during the
period between the commencement of the first game and the conclusion of
the last game or during the conduct of a raffle.30
30.Editor's Note: See also N.J.S.A. 5:8-33.
§ 85-1 BINGO § 85-1
85:117

ARTICLE II
Bingo on Sundays
[Adopted 5-16-1978 by Ord. No. 14-78]
§ 85-2. Authorization.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-31, bingo establishments within the Borough may
be licensed to operate on Sundays.
§ 85-2 BINGO § 85-2
85:119
Chapter 90
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 90-1. Word usage; definitions.
§ 90-2. Permit required.
No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street,
alley or other public ways or lands in the Borough without first obtaining
a permit from the Director of Public Works and the Borough Construction
Office. If less than 100 square feet or less than 10 feet in height, no
construction permit is required (see N.J.A.C. 5:23).
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the plural number include the singular
number; and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Florham Park, County of Morris, State of
New Jersey.
BUILDING — A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter
or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for
residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial,
institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. A
structure of the following dimensions shall not fall within this definition:
a structure which is less than eight feet wide in any side horizontal
dimension and its height does not interfere with existing overhead
power lines, but in no case exceeds eight feet, and its weight is not
greater than 2,500 pounds.
CONSTRUCTION OR BUILDING OFFICIAL — The public officer(s)
authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works of the
Borough of Florham Park or his duly authorized representative.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 85-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 90-3
90:120
§ 90-3. Application.
A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application
for such permit with the Director of Public Works and the Borough
Construction Office.
A. Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by
the Director of Public Works and the Construction Office, and shall be
filed in the office of the Director of Public Works and the Borough
Construction Office.
B. Contents. The application shall set forth:
(1) A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street
number of its present location, construction materials, dimensions,
number of rooms and conditions of exterior and interior.
(2) A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be
moved, giving the lot and block number if located in the Borough.
(3) A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building
be removed, giving lot and block number, if located in the Borough;
and, if the building is to be relocated in the Borough, a plot plan,
prepared by a New Jersey licensed engineer or land surveyor,
showing the proposed location of the building shall be attached.
(4) A description of how the building is to be moved.
(5) A road map depicting the highways, streets, alleys or land over,
along or across which the building is proposed to be moved.
(6) Proposed moving date and hours.
(7) A copy of a building permit, including footings and foundations,
covering construction for the building at the new site if latter is
within the Borough.
(8) Any additional information which the Director of Public Works or
Construction Office shall find necessary to a fair determination of
whether a permit should be issued, such as utility disconnect
certifications and well capping documents.
C. Accompanying papers.
(1) Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with
the application sufficient evidence that all taxes and any Borough
charges against the same are paid in full.
(2) Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than
the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill
of sale signed by the owner or other sufficient evidence that he is
entitled to move the building.
§ 90-3 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 90-3
90:121
§ 90-4. Deposit; insurance.
An application hereunder shall be accompanied by the following:
(3) The applicant must submit all certifications required by N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.17.
(4) Certification of removal of underground storage tanks shall be
provided.
(5) Receipt from Treasurer. A receipt from the Borough Treasurer for
the sum of the fee and cash deposit as hereinafter required shall be
attached to the application.
(6) A report from a structural engineer as to the stability and safety of
the structure is required prior to issuance of a permit to move.
D. Fee. The Department of Public Works (DPW) fee shall be $250, plus
$100 per day for every day the building will occupy Borough streets.
The total fee as estimated shall accompany the application, and, in the
event that the building occupies Borough streets longer than the time
estimated for which a fee was paid, then the remaining amount due
shall be deducted from the cash deposit as hereinafter required. The
Construction Office will set fees in accord with published schedule.
A. Cash deposit. A cash deposit or surety bond from a corporation licensed
to do business in the State of New Jersey in the sum of $50,000 as an
indemnity for any damage which the Borough may sustain by reason of
damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant
or other property of the Borough, which may be caused by or be
incidental to the removal of any building over, along or across any
street or land in the Borough and to cover any cost and expense
incurred by the Borough in connection with the moving of the building
in question. The Director of Public Works shall, upon completion of the
removal of the building, certify to the Borough Council the cost to
repair any damage or other expense incurred by the Borough as the
result of the building removal. The amount of cost or expense incurred
by the Borough, including cleanup in the event of collapse, shall be
deducted from the deposit prior to its return to the permittee, after
approval by the Borough Council.
B. Insurance policy. An insurance policy issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey and in a form
approved by the Borough Attorney, providing personal and property
liability coverage in the respective amounts of $1,000,000 per accident
and $500,000 per person and $50,000 per accident on property. Said
policy shall name the Borough of Florham Park as a coinsured along
with the applicant and provide indemnification of the Borough against
any claim, alleged or otherwise, of damages to persons or private
property arising out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any
building over, across or along any street or land of the Borough.
§ 90-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 90-5
90:122
§ 90-5. Designation of approved streets.
The Director of Public Works shall prepare a list of designated streets or
land over which the building may be moved. The Director of Public Works
shall have the list approved by the Chief of Police and shall reproduce the
list upon the permit in writing. In making their determinations, the Director
of Public Works and the Chief of Police shall act to assure maximum safety
to persons and property in the Borough and to minimize congestion and
traffic hazards on public streets.
§ 90-6. General restrictions.
A. Every permittee under this chapter shall:
(1) Use of designated streets. Move a building only over streets or land
designated for such use in the written permit.
(2) Notification of revised moving time. Notify the Director of Public
Works and any affected homeowners, in writing, of a desired
change in the moving date and hours as proposed in the
application.
(3) Notification of damage. Notify the Director of Public Works, in
writing, of any and all damage done to property belonging to the
Borough within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred.
(4) Display of lights. Cause red lights to be displayed during the
nighttime on every side of the building while standing on a street,
in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall,
at all times, erect and maintain barricades across the streets in
such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by
reason of the removal of the building. Before a building shall be
permitted to stand overnight on any street, approval of location
shall be secured from the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments
of the Borough and the Director of Public Works.
(5) Street occupancy period. Limit the time involved in moving the
building across Borough streets to four days and, by the end of the
fourth day, locating the building on the designated site or outside
territorial limits of the Borough, unless an extension is granted by
the Borough Council.
(6) Compliance with governing law. Comply with the Department of
Transportation provisions, all applicable Building Codes, the Fire
Code, the Zoning Ordinance31 and all other applicable ordinances
and laws upon relocating the building in the Borough. County
approval is required if the new location of the building is outside
the Borough of Florham Park.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Construction Codes, Uniform; Ch. 134, Firesafety; and Ch. 250,
Zoning.
§ 90-5 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 90-6
90:123
§ 90-7. Enforcement.
§ 90-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, General penalty,
of this Code. Each and every day a violation of this chapter occurs shall be
considered a separate offense.
Chapter 94
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
(7) Payment of expense of officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer
ordered by the Director of Public Works to accompany the
movement of the building to protect the public from injury.
(8) Clearing of old premises. Prior to 5:00 p.m. on the day the building
is moved, all rubbish, materials and foundation must be removed.
All excavations should be filled to existing grade at the original
building site so that the premises is left in a safe and sanitary
condition. The owner must comply with all provisions of the
Borough Construction Office. A demolition permit is required for
removal of the foundations.
B. The relocated structure may not be occupied without approval
inspection by the Construction Official.
A. Enforcing officers. The Director of Public Works, the Police Department
and Construction Office shall enforce and carry out the requirements of
this chapter.
B. Original premises left unsafe. The Borough shall proceed to do the work
necessary to tender the original premises in a safe and sanitary
condition if the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the cash deposit.
If the deposit is not sufficient to cover the cost, any additional amount
shall be a lien upon the land in the same manner as delinquent taxes.
§ 90-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 94-1
94:124
§ 94-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any accessory structure
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
CONSTRUCTION OR BUILDING OFFICIAL — The public officers who are
authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter.
OWNER — The owner or owners in fee of the property or a lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or any other person, firm or corporation, directly
or indirectly in control of a building, structure or real property, and shall
include any subdivision thereof of the state.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the Borough
relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning
buildings in the Borough.
§ 94-2. Determination of unfit or unsafe building.
A. The building official may determine that a building is unfit or unsafe for
human habitation or occupancy or use in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.32 and/or Subsection B of this section.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, a building shall be considered unfit or
unsafe for human habitation or occupancy or use when it has any one or
all of the following defects:
(1) Foundation elements insufficient to adequately support the
building at all points.
(2) Foundations containing holes, cracks, loose bricks, stones or
mortar and otherwise in a condition of deterioration so as to not
exclude vermin and water.
(3) Interior walls or other vertical structural members which list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
(4) Exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or more of damage or
deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of
damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering.
§ 94-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 94-2
94:125
§ 94-3. Powers and duties of Construction Official.
The Construction Official, upon advice from the appropriate subcode
official, is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary
or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:23-2 et seq.
§ 94-4. Issuance of complaint.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official or Zoning Officer
by a public authority or by at least two residents of the Borough charging
that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or
whenever it appears to the Construction Official, on his own motion, that
any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the
Construction Official shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis
for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and
parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in
that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before
the building official, or his designated agent, at a place therein fixed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.3 et seq.
§ 94-5. Repair, vacation or demolition.
If, after notice and hearing as provided in the preceding section, the
Construction Official determines that the building under consideration is
unfit for habitation or occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his findings
of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest a notice of unsafe
(5) Improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which
the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(6) Damage by fire, wind, dilapidation or other causes so as to have
become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the residents of the Borough.
(7) Light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect
the health, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or
may live therein.
(8) inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire, panic or other
calamity.
(9) Parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure
members of the public or property.
(10) It exists in violation of any provision of the Building code, Fire
Prevention Code, Plumbing Code, Sanitary Code or other ordinance
of the Borough relating to construction and sanitary facilities.
(11) It is vacant, unguarded or open at its doors or windows.
§ 94-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 94-5
94:126
structure describing the building or structure deemed unsafe and specifying
the required repairs or improvements to be made to render the building
safe and secure, or requiring the unsafe building or structure to be vacated
or demolished within a stipulated time.
§ 94-6. Service of complaint or order.
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the name
cannot be ascertained by the building official in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the building official shall make an affidavit to that effect,
then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be
made by publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and published
in the county and circulating in the Borough. A copy of such complaint or
order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the
complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded
or lodged for record with the Clerk of the county. See also N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.32
et seq.
§ 94-7. Repair or removal by Borough.
If the owner of the building or structure fails to remediate the structure
or building, the Construction Official shall seek compliance using the
procedures set forth in N.J,A.C. 5:23-2.32 et seq.
§ 94-8. Collection of costs.
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter and by statute determined in favor of
the Borough and such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing or removal or at demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized
from the sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract
for removal or demolition thereof shall be a lien against the real property
upon which such cost was incurred.
§ 94-9. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts or of any department of the Borough to enforce any provisions
of this code or other ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or to punish
violations thereof. The powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition
and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance.
§ 94-5 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 94-9
94:127
Chapter 96
CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 108.
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or
neutered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Borough Clerk or other official designated
by the Borough Council to administer the issuance of licenses under the
provisions of this chapter.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 96-2. Rabies vaccination.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep or
maintain any cat over seven months of age within the Borough of
Florham Park unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions
of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those held by a
state or federal licensed research facility or a veterinary establishment
where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or
other treatments or licensed animals shelters, pounds, kennels or pet
shops.
§ 94-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 96-2
96:128
§ 96-3. License requirements.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
The rabies vaccination certificate must be validated through October 31
of the licensing year. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 19-03]
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the Borough Clerk or other official designated by the
Council thereof to license cats in the Borough a license and official
registration tag with license number or a registration sleeve for each
cat owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon such cat a collar or
other device with the license number securely fastened or displayed
thereto. Acceptable methods of displaying license number shall include
but are not limited to break-away or elastic collars. License tags or
sleeves are not transferable to other cats. The number of cats allowed
per household is five. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 19-03]
B. Time for applying for license. All cats must be licensed by January 31 of
the licensing year. The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age
or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make application for a
license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after such acquisition
or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a nonresident
keeping a cat within the Borough for no longer than 30 days.
[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 19-03]
C. Cats brought into the Borough.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this
Borough any cat licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve and who shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more
than 30 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this
Borough any unlicensed cat and who shall keep the same or permit
the same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than
§ 96-2 CATS § 96-3
96:129
10 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag
sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application, contents, preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which the
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long- or shorthaired
variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Borough
Clerk or other official designated to license cats in the Borough.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the Borough and shall be numbered serially and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name Borough of Florham Park.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. There shall be no issuance of any
such license or official registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless the
owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved
by and administered in accordance with the recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States
Department of Human Services or has been certified exempt as
provided by § 96-2 of this chapter. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
G. License fee schedule. [Amended 9-20-1994 by Ord. No. 3-94;
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 19-03; 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 22-06]
(1) Persons applying for the license and registration tag shall pay the
annual fee for such license of $15 for nonspayed or nonneutered.
The fee for all persons who present proof that their cat has been
neutered or spayed is $12. For each renewal, the fee for the license
shall be the same. There is a fee of $5 for replacement of a lost tag
or license. Such licenses and renewals thereof shall expire on
January 1 of each year.
(2) Persons who fail to obtain a license as required by January 31 of the
licensing year shall be subject to a nonrefundable delinquent fee of
$15 per animal and subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court of
the Borough. Late fees will be effective as of February 1 of the
licensing year, and summonses will become effective March 1 of the
licensing year.32
32.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 08-6, adopted 3-18-2008, the deadline for the
imposition of the late fee for failure to obtain license renewals shall be extended for the
calendar years 2008 and 2009 until February 29.
§ 96-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 96-3
96:130
(3) All contested summons fees are at the discretion of the Municipal
Judge. The fee(s) applies to owners who did not comply by January
31 of the licensing year.
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) Licenses from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay
the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of a license and
registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and
said license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall
expire on the last day of January in the following year.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
the licensing year for any cat in this Borough. Any valid New Jersey
license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall be
accepted by this Borough as evidence of compliance, provided that
such license was based upon proof of rabies inoculation.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Borough Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve
for that particular cat at a fee of $5.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of
any health official, police officer, animal control officer or other
authorized person.
K. Removal of tag forbidden; attaching tag wrongfully. No person except
an official in the performance of his/her duties shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any cat without the consent of the
owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a cat for which it
was not issued.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this chapter shall be forwarded to
the Borough Treasurer and shall be placed in a special account
separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough and shall be
used for the following purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing
of cats liable to seizure, for local prevention and control of rabies,
providing antirabies treatment under the direction of the local Board of
Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies and for administering the provisions of this chapter. Any
unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of said third
fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there
shall be transferred from special account to the general funds of the
Borough any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total
amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal years
next preceding.
§ 96-3 CATS § 96-4
96:131
§ 96-4. Interference.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 96-5. Custody; impoundment.
A. Seizure. The Pound Master, Dog Warden or Dogcatcher or other
designated authority or any police officer of the Borough shall take into
custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded
and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as provided in Subsections B
and C:
(1) Any cat off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the cat, which the Dog Warden or any of the other
persons charged with the enforcement of this chapter has reason to
believe is a stray cat.
(2) Any cat without a current registration tag on its collar or any cat
which the Dog Warden or any of the other persons charged with the
enforcement of this chapter has reason to believe is diseased.
B. Notice of seizure; contents; service.
(1) If any cat so seized wears a collar having inscribed thereon or
attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or if the cat has proper identification marking as
herein provided or if the owner or other person keeping or
harboring the cat is otherwise known, the Pound Master, Dog
Warden or Dogcatcher or any official charged with the enforcement
of this chapter or any person authorized by them on their behalf
shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the
collar or the person whose name is registered as the owner, or on
the owner or on the person keeping or harboring the cat, if
otherwise known, a notice in writing. The notice shall state that the
cat has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed
if not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.
(2) A notice under this section may be served by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's
usual or last known place of abode or at the address given on the
collar or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to
that person at his usual or last known place of abode or to the
address given on the collar.
C. Destroying or disposing of cats. When any cat so seized has been
detained for seven days after notice, when notice can be given as above
set forth, or has been detained for seven days after seizure when no
notice has been given as above set forth or because of lack of name and
address of owner, and if the owner or person keeping or harboring the
cat has not claimed the cat and paid all expenses incurred by reason of
its detention and if the cat is unlicensed at the time of seizure and the
§ 96-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 96-5
96:132
§ 96-6. Abandonment.
No person shall abandon any cat, no matter what its age may be, within the
Borough.
§ 96-7. Right of entry.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any cat which he/she may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such cat, except within the premises
of the owner of the cat if the owner is present and forbids the same. In
that situation, an appropriate warrant may be obtained in the interest of the
health, safety and welfare of the Borough.
§ 96-8. Violations and penalties.
In addition to other penalties and sanctions of this Code, any person who
violates or who fails to refuse to comply with this chapter shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than $10 for each offense. to be recovered by and in the
name of the Borough.
Chapter 98
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
§ 98-1. Drawing checks on insufficient funds.33
owner or person keeping or harboring the cat has not produced a
license and registration tag for the cat, the Pound Master, Dog Warden,
Dogcatcher or other designated authority or any person authorized by
them in that behalf may cause the cat to be destroyed in a manner
causing as little pain as possible.
D. Pound fee; maintenance charge. For every cat impounded, there shall
be detention expense charged in the amount of $5, which shall include
maintenance for the first calendar day. Thereafter there shall be a
maintenance charge for each cat so seized at the rate of $2 per day. No
owner or person keeping or harboring a cat shall be permitted to claim
an impounded cat unless a license and registration tag can be produced
for the cat.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or as agent or
representative of another person, or as an officer or agent of any
corporation, or as a member of a partnership, with intent to defraud, to
make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of
money in a sum not in excess of $200 upon any bank or other
depository, knowing at the time of so doing that the maker, or drawer,
33.Editor's Note: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:21-5.
§ 96-5 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 98-1
98:133
Chapter 103
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 90.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Signs — See Ch. 199.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 216.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems — See Ch. 278.
§ 103-1. Adoption of standards.
The State Uniform Construction Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., is hereby
adopted, including all powers and authority granted therein to the Borough.
Also specifically adopted are the regulations known as the Regulations for
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., as from
time to time amended, promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department
of Community Affairs, pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended.34
§ 103-2. Enforcing agency.
has no funds or insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank or
other depository for the payment in full of such instrument upon its
presentation although no express representation is made in reference
thereto.
B. The making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order as
stated in this section shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud,
and the certificate of protest of nonpayment of same shall be
presumptive evidence that there were no funds or insufficient funds in
or credit with such bank or other depository and that the person
making, drawing, uttering or delivering the instrument knew that there
were no funds or insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other
depository.
C. The word "credit" as used in this section shall be construed to mean an
arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository for the
payment of the check, draft or order.
A. Establishment; composition; chief administrator.
(1) There is established in the Borough a Uniform Construction Code
Enforcing Agency, known as the "Borough of Florham Park Uniform
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 98-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 103-2
98:134
§ 103-3. Board of Appeals.
There shall be a Construction Board of Appeals, which shall consist of five
members. Board members shall be appointed for terms of four years, or as
specified by the Department of Community Affairs (DCA).
Construction Code Enforcing Agency," consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official,
Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and
such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the State Department of Community Affairs shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code,35
and such other assistants and/or inspectors, as may be necessary,
to be appointed by the Borough Council.
(2) The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
Enforcing Agency.
B. Qualifications. Each official position created herein shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,36 and N.J.A.C. 5:23-5.1 et seq., provided that, in lieu of any
particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be
retained by contract, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.5A. More than one
such official position may be held by the same person, provided that
such person is qualified to hold each such position pursuant to P.L.
1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23-5.7, but only one person can be
appointed to the position.
C. Central office; location. The public shall have the right to do business
with the Enforcing Agency at one office location, except for
emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances, which
office shall be located in the Municipal Building at 111 Ridgedale
Avenue, Borough of Florham Park, County of Morris, State of New
Jersey.
A. Appointments; terms; removal. The Mayor and the Borough Council
shall appoint the Board members and any alternate members so
desired. For the members first appointed, the Borough Council shall
designate the appointees' terms so that one shall be appointed for a
term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three
years and two for terms of four years. At the expiration of such terms
and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of four years.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term (N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.3).
Members may be removed by the authority appointing them for cause.
B. Selections; qualifications of members. No more than two members of
the Board shall be selected from the same profession or business. At
least one of the members shall be either a registered architect or
35.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 103-2 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 103-3
98:135
§ 103-4. Fees. [Amended 7-21-1998 by Ord. No. 13-98; 3-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 3-03; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 21-03; 5-20-2008 by Ord. No.
08-18; 5-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-10; 10-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-22]
licensed professional engineer with building construction experience,
or other person as qualified as a building subcode official (N.J.A.C.
5:23A-1.3). At least one member of the Board shall be as qualified as a
plumbing subcode official and one as qualified as an electrical subcode
official. At least one regular member shall be as qualified as a fire
protection subcode official; and at least one regular member shall be
certified as a fire official (N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.3).
C. Agency employees; municipal and county employees. No employee of
any Local Enforcing Agency may serve on the Board of Appeals
exercising appeals jurisdiction over such Enforcing Agency. Other
municipal and county employees may serve on such Board, provided
that they be disqualified from consideration of matters affecting
municipal- or county-owned or leased structures.
D. Experience; training. Each member shall be qualified by experience or
training to perform his duties as a member of the Board, which shall be
no less than that which is required of a construction or subcode official.
E. Chairperson. The governing body shall designate one of the members to
serve as Chairperson.
F. Alternate members. At least five alternate members of the Board of
Appeals shall be appointed in the same manner as the regular Board,
with staggered terms and different areas of expertise as set forth in
Subsections A and B above. When a regular member of the Board is
absent, the alternate in the same qualification category shall serve in
the regular member's place, unless that alternate is unavailable. If the
alternate is unavailable, the Chairperson of the Board shall determine
which alternate member shall vote in the place of the absent member.
Alternate members shall have the right to participate in all Board
deliberations but shall not vote unless serving in the place of a regular
member. [See N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.3(d).]
G. Conflict of interests. A member of the Board shall not pass on any
question in which he is engaged as contractor or material dealer or in
which he has been involved in the preparation of plans or specifications
or in which he has any personal or professional interest.
H. Compensation. The members and alternates of the Board shall serve
without compensation.
A. The permit fees for the portion of the work involving the building
subcode shall be based on the following as presented in Exhibit 1.37
37.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 103-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 103-4
98:136
§ 103-5. Reports; surcharge fees.
B. The permit fees for the portion of the work involving the plumbing
subcode shall be based on the following as presented in Exhibit 1.38
C. The permit fees for the portion of the work involving the electrical
subcode shall be based on the following as presented in Exhibit 1.39
D. The permit fees for the portion of the work involving the fire subcode
shall be based on the following as presented in Exhibit 1.40
E. The elevator subcode fees are based on the fees established by the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs listed in N.J.A.C. 5:23. All
permits and inspections requests are handled by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs Elevator Safety Unit.
F. Private, on-site inspection and plan review agencies. Whenever the
Borough contracts for services of a private, on-site inspection and/or
plan review agency to enforce one or more subcodes, the following shall
apply:
(1) The fees charged for work done by that agency shall be the fees
established by Borough contract as a percentage of the fees set by
the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23.
These fees shall be available for public inspection at the
Construction Department.
(2) The Construction Department shall add an administrative
surcharge of 15% of the relevant subcode fees to cover its costs
associated with administering the third-party agency.
G. Fees for certificates of occupancy, approval, compliance and continued
certificates of occupancy shall be as presented in Exhibit 1.41
(1) Where a written request for a temporary certificate of occupancy is
made for reasons other than uncompleted work covered by the
permit (such as prior approvals from state or municipal agencies),
the duration of the temporary certificate of occupancy shall be
reasonably consistent with the time required for compliance with
the conditions of the prior approval.
(2) If requested by an owner, agent or applicant, there shall be no fee
charged for a certificate of approval issued pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23(j).
(3) There shall be no fee for a certificate of compliance.
38.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
39.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
41.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 103-4 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 103-5
98:137
§ 103-6. Compensation of construction and subcode officials.
[Added 7-21-1998 by Ord. No. 13-98]
The compensation of the Construction Official and the subcode officials
will be set by the Borough Council by ordinance, resolution or third-party
contract.
Chapter 105
CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY
UNDERAGED PERSONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 72.
§ 105-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as the guardian of the underaged
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
PERSON UNDER THE LEGAL AGE and UNDERAGED PERSON — One who
has not attained the age of 21 years and who does not have a right, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 9:17B-1b, to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling,
or other person related by blood or affinity.
A. Annual report; preparation and submission; contents. The Construction
Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials, prepare and
submit to the Mayor and the Council annually a report recommending a
fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the Agency and any
other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.42 The fee
schedule must be submitted to the Borough Clerk by December 1 of
each year.
B. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,43 the Enforcing Agency shall collect, in addition to the
construction fees, a surcharge fee in accordance with N.J.A.C 5:23-4.19.
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
43.Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27-119 et seq.).
§ 103-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 105-2
105:138
§ 105-2. Consumption by underaged persons on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 105-3. Penalties.
A. A violation shall be punished by a fine of $250 for a first offense and a
fine of $350 for any subsequent offense; and
B. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone, for six months, the driving privilege of the
defendant.
C. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement
of that person's driving privilege, the court shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the court. If a person,
at the time of the imposition of sentence, is less than 17 years of age,
the period of license postponement shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
D. If the person convicted under this chapter is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Division of Motor Vehicles the required report. The court
shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
section. Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division of Motor
Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
E. In the event a suspension or postponement of driving privilege is
ordered, court shall immediately collect the defendant's driver's license
certificate and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles. If for any
reason the license certificate cannot be collected, the court shall
include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye
color and sex of the defendant as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
F. In the event a suspension or postponement of driving privilege is
ordered, the court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if
the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to give a
written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
§ 105-2 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 105-4
105:139
§ 105-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to nor prohibit:
Chapter 108
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 96.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Sanitation (Board of Health) — See Ch. 265.
A. Any underaged person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite;
B. An underaged person consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in
the presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or
relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages; nor
C. An underaged person from possessing alcoholic beverages while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocational school or postsecondary
educational institution; however, this chapter shall not be
construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this section,
N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law, against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 105-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 105-4
105:140
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 108-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COURT — The Municipal Court of the Borough.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein the business of boarding or selling
dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in a dog and every
person who has such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room, cage or exhibition pen, not part of a kennel,
wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
RUN AT LARGE — The running or standing of any dog who is off the
premises of the person owning or keeping or harboring it and not securely
fastened to a tether, leash, cord or chain or the like, not to exceed eight
feet in length, held by its owner or other person capable of controlling said
dog.[Amended 2-16-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1]
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 108-2. Annual canvass. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 20-03]
The Florham Park Health Department shall conduct (biannually) a canvass
of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the Borough of Florham Park to
be reported to the State of New Jersey by September 1 of the licensing year.
§ 108-3. Enforcing authority.
A. The Mayor, with the consent of the Borough Council, is hereby
empowered to appoint a Poundmaster, Dog Warden or Dogcatcher, or
he may designate some other authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The Council may, by resolution, enter into a contract with any humane
society, animal shelter or similar association or with one or more
persons to exercise the duties of Dog Warden or Poundmaster and to
enforce this chapter.
§ 108-1 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 108-3
105:141
§ 108-4. Prohibited acts.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit, suffer or allow
the dog to:
§ 108-5. Impoundment; notice; redemption or destruction;
expenses.
C. All police officers of the Borough, regular and special are hereby given
full power and authority and are charged with the duty to enforce this
chapter.
A. Run at large within the Borough.
B. Be off the premises of such owner or person so harboring the dog, or
upon a street or other public place in the Borough, except when
restrained by a leash or when otherwise under the strict control of some
responsible person able to control the dog.
C. Cause any injury to any person or animal. [Amended 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 20-03]
D. Do any damage to any shrub, tree or other property in any street, park
or other public place in the Borough.
E. Soil or defile or commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk, pedestrian
street crossing, school yard or municipal playground.
F. Habitually bark, howl or cry. The habitual barking, howling or crying of
a dog in the Borough is hereby declared to be a disturbing noise within
the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, Subdivision 8, and a nuisance.
G. Be or become a public nuisance, or to create a condition hazardous to
safety and health.
H. Run at large upon any Borough playing field or open recreation area,
public building, public facility, turfed area, playground or pedestrian
walkway of any public school, public park or other public recreation
area within the Borough. Dogs on a leash are allowed in such areas,
which include but are not limited to, the Borough Complex, Emmett
Fields, Stobaeus Field and Park and Beechcrest Field and Park areas. It
is the responsibility of each dog owner who brings a leashed dog onto
such areas to clean up after and curb the dog. Allowing a dog to run at
large in or upon these areas or failure to clean up after a dog is a
violation of this chapter. [Added 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 12-91;
amended 2-16-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1]
I. Keep a potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog unless according to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-24 through 4:19-26. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
20-03]
A. The Poundmaster, Dog Warden or Dogcatcher or other designated
authority or any police officer of the Borough shall take into custody
§ 108-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 108-5
105:142
and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and
thereafter destroyed or disposed of:
(1) Any dog running at large or any dog off the premises of the owner
or of the person keeping or harboring the dog, contrary to any of
the provisions of § 108-4 or which is committing a nuisance or
doing any injury or damage in violation thereof.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the Dog Warden or any of the other
persons charged with the enforcement of this chapter believes is a
stray dog.
(3) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring the dog, except when on a leash and in
the control of a responsible person capable of maintaining such
control.
(5) Any dog on the premises of the owner which gives evidence of
being mad and vicious or dangerous to public health and safety.
B. If any dog seized under this chapter wears a collar or harness having
inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any
person or a registration tag or the owner or the person keeping or
harboring the dog is known, the Poundmaster, Dog Warden or
Dogcatcher, or any official charged with the enforcement of this chapter
or any person authorized by them on their behalf, shall forthwith serve
on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or
the person keeping or harboring the dog, if known, a notice in writing
stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of
or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of the
notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
D. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice
when notice can be given as above set forth or has been detained for
seven days after seizure when no notice has been given as above set
forth or because of lack of name and address of owner, and if the owner
or person keeping or harboring the dog has not claimed the dog and
paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention and if the dog is
unlicensed at the time of seizure and the owner or person keeping or
harboring the dog has not produced a license and registration tag for
the dog, the Poundmaster, Dog Warden, Dogcatcher or other designated
§ 108-5 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 108-5
105:143
§ 108-6. Interference with officials prohibited.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 108-7. Right of entry.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize and impound when such
officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog, except upon the premises of the
owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the same.
§ 108-8. Disposition of moneys.
All license fees and money collected or received under the provisions of this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Borough, who shall place
the money in a special account and thereafter dispose of the money in such
account, all in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11.
§ 108-9. (Reserved)44
authority, or any person authorized by them in that behalf, may cause
the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
E. The expenses referred to in Subsection D, which shall be paid by the
owner or person keeping or harboring a dog that has been impounded,
shall be $3 for impounding the dog and $1 per day for maintenance. No
owner or person keeping or harboring a dog shall be permitted to claim
an impounded dog unless a license and registration tag can be
produced for the dog.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 108-9, Violations and penalties, amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No.
3-88, was repealed 5-17-1988 by Ord. No. 10-88. For current provisions, see § 1-16 of Ch.
1, General Provisions.
§ 108-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 108-9
105:144
ARTICLE II
Licenses
§ 108-10. License required. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
20-03]
§ 108-11. Application; registration number; reports.
§ 108-12. Fees. [Amended 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 26-79;
11-24-1981 by Ord. No. 18-81; 9-20-1983 by Ord. No. 14-83;
7-15-1986 by Ord. No. 9-86; 9-20-1994 by Ord. No. 3-94; 12-16-2003
by Ord. No. 20-03; 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 21-06]
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age (seven
months) shall, no later than January 31 of the licensing year or after
acquisition thereof as provided in this chapter and in the month of
January annually thereafter, apply for and procure from the Clerk of the
Borough or other official designated by the Council thereof to license
dogs in the Borough a license and official metal registration tag for
each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each
such a dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely
fastened thereto. The owner of a newly acquired dog shall make
application for a license and registration tag within 10 after such
acquisition or age attainment.
B. Registration for potentially dangerous dogs: refer to State of New
Jersey Statutes Annotated, Title 4, Agricultural and Domestic Animals,
Section 4:19-37.
A. The applicant shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which the license and registration are sought and whether it is
of a long- or short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
The applicant shall also provide written proof of spaying/neutering of
dog. The applicant shall also provide proof of rabies certificate
validation issued by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the
latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccine and Recommendations of
Immunization Published by the National Association of State Public
Health Veterinarian. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 20-03]
B. The information on the application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or
other local official designated to license dogs.
C. In addition, he shall forward to the State Department of Health each
month, on forms furnished by the Department, an accurate account of
registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of.
D. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of applications.
§ 108-10 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 108-12
105:145
§ 108-13. Newly acquired dogs; dogs attaining licensing age; dogs
brought into Borough.
§ 108-14. Removal or use of registration tag.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
A. Persons applying for the license and registration tag shall pay the
annual fee for such license of $15 for nonspayed or nonneutered. The
fee for all persons who present proof that their dog has been neutered
or spayed is $12. For each renewal, the fee for the license shall be
same. There will be a fee of $4 for replacement of a lost tag or license.
Such licenses and renewals thereof shall expire on January 1 of each
year.
B. Persons who fail to obtain a license as required by January 31 of the
licensing year shall be subject to a nonrefundable delinquent fee of $15
per animal and subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court of the
Borough. Late fees will be effective as of February 1 of the licensing
year, and summonses will become effective March 1 of the licensing
year.45
C. All contested summons fees are at the discretion of the Municipal
Judge. The fee(s) applies to owners who did not comply by January 31 of
the licensing year.
A. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and
registration tag for such dog and shall pay the necessary fee for the
same within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this state any
dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the state for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog
unless such dog is licensed under § 108-16.
C. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this state any
unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the state for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such
dog is licensed under § 108-16.
45.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 08-6, adopted 3-18-2008, the deadline for the
imposition of the late fee for failure to obtain license renewal shall be extended for the
calendar years 2008 and 2009 until February 29.
§ 108-12 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 108-14
105:146
ARTICLE III
Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds
§ 108-15. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person who has not secured a kennel license
to keep or harbor more than three dogs at one time, puppies under four
months old excepted, provided that this provision shall not apply to persons
harboring dogs in excess of the limit herein set forth on April 5, 1960,
provided that such owners do not hereafter acquire or harbor additional
dogs in excess of such limit and provided that the harboring of such dogs
does not create a nuisance.
§ 108-16. Application.
§ 108-17. Issuance; duration; revocation; transferability.
§ 108-18. Fees. [Amended 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 21-97]
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs in the Borough for a license entitling him to
keep or operate such establishment.
B. The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose for which it is to be
maintained and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the
Zoning Officer and the Board of Health of the Borough showing
compliance with local and state rules and regulations governing the
location of and sanitation at such establishment.
A. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year and be
subject to revocation by the Borough on recommendation of the State
Department of Health or the Board of Health of the Borough for failure
to comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department or
Local Board governing the same after the owner has been afforded a
hearing by either the State Department or Local Board.
B. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishment.
C. Such license shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises.
A. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
fewer dogs shall be $100 and for more than 10 dogs, $150.
B. The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $100.
§ 108-15 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 108-18
105:147
§ 108-19. List of licenses issued.
The Clerk or other official designated to license dogs in the Borough shall
forward to the State Department of Health a list of all kennel, pet shop,
shelter and pound licenses within 30 days after the licenses therefor are
issued, which list shall include the name and address of the licensee and the
kind of license issued.
§ 108-20. Dogs to remain on premises.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on a leash or in a crate or other safe control.
C. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
§ 108-18 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 108-20
105:148
Chapter 113
DRAINAGE FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Soil removal — See Ch. 203.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Sewage disposal systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 269.
§ 113-1. Permission required; applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct or install a drainage
ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other type of drainage structure or
obstruction affecting the drainage of any premises in the Borough without
first obtaining permission therefor from the Borough Engineer.
§ 113-2. Application.
Applications for permission under § 113-1 shall be submitted in writing to
the Borough Engineer and shall include the following:
§ 113-3. Conditions.
The application under § 113-2 and site shall be examined by the Borough
Engineer for its compliance with the master drainage system of the
Borough. In passing upon such applications, the Borough Engineer shall
require that all drainage structures which drain water off the premises of
the applicant shall be extended and tied into storm drains, ditches or other
existing governmentally owned or controlled drainage for the area. He shall
also require that the pipe or structure, taking into consideration the size
of the area to be drained, shall be of adequate size and installed to the
proper grade. If all standards are complied with and the drainage pipe or
A. This chapter applies to drainage activity by property owners outside of
the Borough Planning Board and Board of Adjustment review process.
[Added 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 32-98]
A. A map or diagram of the property, with the location of all present or
proposed ditches, streams, brooks, pipes and drainage structures.
B. Elevations based on United States Geodetic data of all such features
shown.
C. The percent of grade of the flow line of the proposed drainage
structure, pipe or other construction.
D. The disposition which will be made of the water being drained or
channeled from the premises.
§ 108-20 DRAINAGE FACILITIES § 113-3
113:149
structure meets good construction and engineering practice, permission
shall be granted by the Engineer.
§ 113-4. Obstruction of ditches and pipes.
All drainage ditches, culverts, drains, pipes and drainage structures shall be
kept open and free flowing at all times. It shall be unlawful for any person to
throw or place any debris or material of any manner whatsoever or to cause
such to be thrown or placed into any drainage ditch or drainage structure
under the control of the Borough or any municipal, county, state or federal
governmental agency.
Chapter 115
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 113-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 113-4
115:150
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 10-18-1988 by Ord. No. 20-88]
§ 115-1. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44,
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7), a Drug-Free School Zone Map is to be produced by the
Borough Engineer and is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and areas within the borough of property which
is used for school purposes or which is owned by or leased by any Board of
Education within the borough, and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of
such school property.
§ 115-2. Map to be official record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 115-1
of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased by any Board of Education within the borough or is
used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 115-3. Notice of changes in location of schools.
The Board of Education, or the chief administrative officer in the case
of any private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the
continuing obligation to promptly notify the Borough Engineer and the
Borough Administrator of any changes or contemplated changes in the
location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or Board of Education or which is used for
school purposes.
§ 115-4. Filing of map; copies.
The Clerk of the borough is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file
the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 115-1 of this
chapter, and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the
Morris County Clerk and to the office of the Morris County Prosecutor.
§ 115-5. Findings and determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
§ 115-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 115-5
115:151
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 115-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the State of New Jersey
and that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
borough.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a Board of Education.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school
or Board of Education and was being used for school purposes as of July
9, 1987, that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 115-1 of this chapter. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or Board of Education,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of
such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or a school
board or that such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
§ 115-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 115-5
115:152
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Areas
[Adopted 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 6-9846]
§ 115-6. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997, c. 327
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), a Drug-Free Public Area Map has been drafted by
the Borough Engineer, and is hereby approved by the Borough Police
Department and it is hereby further approved and adopted as an official
finding and record of the location and areas within the Borough of Florham
Park of property which is utilized as public housing facilities, public parks
and public buildings which are owned, leased or controlled by the Borough
of Florham Park, and of the areas on or within 500 feet of said properties.
§ 115-7. Map to be official record.
The Drug-Free Public Areas Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 115-6
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record of
the location and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet of the real estate
comprising public housing facilities, public parks and public buildings
which are owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of Florham Park,
until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of the
public housing facilities, public parks and/or public buildings and Drug-Free
Public Areas within the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 115-8. Filing of map; copies.
The Clerk of the Borough of Florham Park is hereby directed to receive
and to keep on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant
§ 115-6 of this article and to provide, at reasonable cost, a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such
a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the
map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further
directed that a true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided
without cost to the Morris County Clerk and the office of the Morris County
Prosecutor.
§ 115-9. Findings and determinations.
The following matters are hereby determined, declared, recited and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 115-6
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecution arising under the criminal laws of the State of New Jersey
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renaming of former Ch. 115, Drug-Free
School Zone, as Ch. 115, Drug-Free Zones, and the designation of §§ 115-1 through 115-5
as Art. I, Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 115-6 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 115-9
115:153
and that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings which are owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of
Florham Park.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is utilized in connection
with public housing facilities, public parks and public buildings
which are owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of Florham
Park.
(3) That such property continues to be used as public housing
facilities, public parks and/or public buildings.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as Drug-Free Public Area was owned, leased or
controlled by the Borough of Florham Park and was being used for
public housing facilities, public parks and/or public buildings as of
January 9, 1998, that being the effective date of P.L. 1997, c. 327
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to § 115-6 of this article. The failure of
the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for public housing facilities, public parks
and/or public buildings and which is owned, leased or controlled by the
Borough of Florham Park, whether the absence of such depiction is the
result of inadvertent omission or the result of any change in the location
and boundaries of such property which has not yet been incorporated
into a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official
finding and record that such property is not owned or leased by the
Borough of Florham Park, or that such property is not used for public
housing facilities, public parks or public buildings.
D. All of the requirements of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1)
concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free
Public Area map have been complied with.
§ 115-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 115-9
115:154
Chapter 117
EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS AND CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and recreation facilities — See
Ch. 77.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 80.
§ 117-1. Carnivals prohibited; exception.
§ 117-2. Rules and regulations governing operation of carnivals.
A. No aggregation or combination of shows or exhibits traveling together
from place to place commonly known as a "carnival" shall be allowed,
held, produced or exhibited in whole or in part in the Borough of
Florham Park, except as hereinafter set forth. As used herein, the term
"carnival" shall also include any show, exhibit or event open to the
public and utilizing or having amusement-type activities such as rides,
games, games of chance, displays, exhibits and concessions.
B. Only charitable and religious organizations may be given special
permission by the Borough Council of the Borough of Florham Park to
hold, produce or exhibit such shows, carnivals or exhibitions, pursuant
to the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth, and under such
additional rules and regulations as the Borough Council may then
prescribe.
C. Carnival-type events conducted at the New York Jets facility, Fairleigh
Dickinson University, or the College of St. Elizabeth are exempt from
the prohibitions and requirements of this chapter, except that
notification of the occurrence of such events must be given to the
Florham Park Police Department a minimum of 30 days prior to the
commencement of the event, and except to the extent that the Chief of
Police may deem some of the requirements set forth herein to be
necessary to apply to the event in order to maintain the public safety
and welfare of the community.
A. Permit required. Any carnival or similar event shall not be held,
conducted or advertised unless and until an application shall have been
made to the governing body of the Borough of Florham Park and a
permit shall have been issued. Simultaneously with such application to
the governing body of the Borough of Florham Park, the applicant shall
also provide the information hereinafter required to the Police
Department of the Borough of Florham Park.
B. Any charitable or religious organization wishing to hold a carnival or
similar event shall submit to the governing body of the Borough of
Florham Park and the Police Department of the Borough of Florham
§ 115-9 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 117-2
115:155
Park, to the attention of the Chief of Police, a fully detailed statement of
the proposed event, which will include the following:
(1) Type and number of rides.
(2) Type and number of games.
(3) Proposed lighting and telephone services.
(4) Dates and times of events.
(5) Gate entrances, location of gate entrances and exits.
(6) Perimeter fencing.
(7) Names and such other information as is required in order for the
Florham Park Police Department to conduct criminal background
checks of all employees and volunteers who will be associated with
the carnival. The Florham Park Police Department may use
information obtained during such background checks to either
deny the permit or to preclude any employee or volunteer from
involvement with the carnival, as permitted by law.
(8) Any other relevant information which will be beneficial to the
Borough Council and the Police Department in assisting and
assuring the safety of all residents, participants and patrons of the
proposed event.
C. Hours of operation.
(1) Opening. If permitted by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Florham Park, the hours of operation for any such carnival or event
shall commence at a reasonable hour, not otherwise in conflict with
any other ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park, but in no
event sooner than 10:00 a.m.
(2) Closing time.
(a) The normal hour of closing shall be 10:00 p.m. It is understood
and agreed that to ensure compliance with 10:00 p.m. closing,
those responsible for administering and operating the carnival
shall cease the sale of tickets at 9:00 p.m. and any lines of
attendance for rides or games shall be similarly closed at 9:30
p.m.
(b) The responsible parties operating or otherwise administering
the carnival or other event shall prominently post information
with respect to time of closing and the related rules on the sale
of tickets and closure of lines so that the same are visible to all
those attending the carnival or event.
(3) Where appropriate, application may be made to the governing body
of the Borough of Florham Park for a modification of the hours of
operation. The governing body may, in its sole discretion, approve
§ 117-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 117-2
115:156
or deny any such change after consultation with the Chief of Police
of the Borough or his designee.
D. Duration. The governing body of the Borough of Florham Park will have
the authority to establish a limit on the duration of the carnival, based
on community safety issues and other community events.
E. Limited access to the carnival or event. Entrances and exits must be
limited in number and should be properly and adequately identified.
Further, in order to provide a safe and secure area and prevent accident
or injury to those in attendance, the area of the carnival or event must
have its entire perimeter fenced. Such fencing may be of any type that
will prevent unlawful entry. However, no fencing shall be allowed that
would cause injury or harm to those persons present at the event. The
entrances and exits shall be clearly marked as to their location at or
about the perimeter of the event, and, in addition, there shall be
suitable signs directing those in attendance to the location of the
entrances and exits.
F. Security. The Chief of Police of the Borough of Florham Park, or his
designee, shall have the authority to determine the number of police
officers to be assigned to any carnival or event. This decision shall be
based upon, but not necessarily limited to, past experience with events
of like nature, anticipated attendance, time of year or other seasonal
factors, traffic-related considerations and the like. The cost associated
with such security shall be the responsibility of and paid by the person
or entity administering the carnival or other event.
G. Continued authority of the Chief of Police. Once the carnival or event
begins operation, the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall have the
continuing authority to close the event, modify the hours of operation or
impose other additional restrictions as a result of problems which may
arise, such as disorderly groups of persons, disasters, noncompliance
with the rules and regulations set forth herein or such other situation
wherein the best interests of the public require any such action. In
addition to the powers set forth herein, the Chief of Police, or his
designee, shall have the additional authority to regulate the number of
persons in attendance. The Chief of Police shall have the further
authority to require the use of other equipment or aids necessary to
ensure the safety and protection of all persons. Such equipment or
other aids may include the use of flares, temporary "no parking" signs
and any other equipment of like or similar nature. In the event that such
equipment, supplies, signs or the like shall be required, the cost of the
same shall be passed on and become the responsibility of those
administering the carnival or event.
H. Additional information to be provided. The Borough Council of the
Borough of Florham Park shall be provided proof of all necessary state
approvals and other authority to operate the carnival or event. All
mechanized rides, or the like, shall be properly certified by the State of
New Jersey, or other licensing agency, as to their safety. The entity or
§ 117-2 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 117-2
115:157
§ 117-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation found guilty of violating the
terms and provisions of this chapter, including the terms and conditions
of any permit issued pursuant hereto, shall be liable to a fine up to the
amount of $500 in discretion of the Judge imposing the same. Each such day
for which a violation continues unabated shall be deemed a separate and
continuing violation.
other body proposing the carnival shall also make provision for
adequate first aid and/or medical facilities in the event of accident or
injury occurring on the premises.
I. Signs. Sufficient signs shall be erected in strategic locations so as to
direct motorists and pedestrians to the locations of entrances and exits
for the carnival or event. Such signs shall be posted in consultation with
the Police Department of the Borough of Florham Park.
J. Parking. Every effort shall be made by that entity or organization
administering the event to provide ample parking for workers,
volunteers and the general public. A proposed plan for parking shall
accompany the application for the permit. The proposed plan of parking
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Chief of Police of the
Borough of Florham Park and shall include provision for a reasonable
number of handicapped parking spaces.
K. Upon conclusion of the carnival or event, the equipment, rides, games,
displays and facilities shall be promptly dismantled and removed. No
dismantling or removal of equipment will be allowed after 10:00 p.m.
Any such dismantling shall be done in a manner so as to minimize noise
and disruption to nearby property owners. The property shall be
cleaned and restored to the condition in which it was found prior to the
carnival.
L. Responsible parties. The application submitted to the governing body of
the Borough of Florham Park shall be signed by the organization, group
or entity hosting the carnival and shall also be signed by the carnival
owners or operators. If the carnival or event is to be held on lands or
premises not owned by the entity or group sponsoring the event, then
the signature of the owner of the property shall also be affixed to the
application, stating consent thereto.
M. Insurance certificates must be submitted evidencing coverage
sufficient in the opinion of the Borough Administrator for such event,
with the Borough to be named as an additional insured under said
policy coverage.
§ 117-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 117-3
115:158
Chapter 117A
FALSE 9-1-1 CALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 68.
§ 117A-1. Purpose.
For various reasons, false 9-1-1 calls have become an increasing problem
in the Borough of Florham Park. Each false call requires response by
emergency response personnel, involves unnecessary expenses to the
Borough and dilutes the Borough's ability to respond to legitimate
emergencies. Such false calls affect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens.
§ 117A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY — For purposes of this chapter, an emergency exists when
a person reasonably believes that immediate response by public safety
personnel is essential due to the risk or actual occurrence of death or bodily
harm, property damage, or any other situation which reasonably requires
the immediate response of public safety personnel.
§ 117A-3. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person, business or entity
to utilize and abuse the 9-1-1 emergency service for purposes of eliciting
response from the Police Department, Fire Department or Rescue Squad in
the absence of an actual police, fire and/or medical emergency. Pursuant to
this ordinance:
A. No person shall use the 9-1-1 emergency telephone number system for
any purpose other than to report an emergency.
B. No person shall use the 9-1-1 system to report an emergency knowing
that the fact situation which he/she reports does not exist.
C. No person shall dial 9-1-1 and hang up without reporting an emergency
if, in fact, no emergency exists.
D. No parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of a
person under the age of 18 years shall permit or by insufficient control
allow such person to violate the provisions of this ordinance.
E. Any person convicted of improperly utilizing the 9-1-1 emergency
service as set forth above shall be guilty of abusing the service and shall
§ 117-3 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 117A-3
115:159
§ 117A-4. Unintentional 9-1-1 calls; fee schedule.
Chapter 118
FERTILIZER APPLICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous or toxic substance
discharge — See Ch. 144.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 207.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 213.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Sanitation — See Ch. 265.
Water supply systems — See Ch. 278.
be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250 or imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days, or both.
A. Unintentional calls to 9-1-1 made due to human error, equipment
malfunctions, or equipment programming shall be the joint
responsibility of the person or establishment dialing the unintentional
9-1-1 call and the owner, tenant, business occupant, occupant or person
in control of a premises or telephone equipment, including wireless
phones from which such false 9-1-1 calls originate.
B. The person dialing the unintentional 9-1-1 call, or the owner, tenant,
business occupant, occupant or person in control of a premises or
telephone equipment, including wireless phones, from which such false
9-1-1 calls originate, shall be subject to a forfeiture in an amount set
forth in the schedule contained in Subsection C below, and which may
be amended from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Borough
Council. No forfeiture shall be assessed for the first three unintentional
false calls in a calendar year (January 1 through December 31).
C. The forfeiture that shall be assessed for unintentional false 9-1-1 calls,
as defined in this section, shall be as follows:
Number of Unintentional False
9-1-1 Calls In Calendar Year Fee to be Assessed
1 to 3 No fee
4 to 5 $250
6 $375
7 $500
8 $625
9 $800
10 $1,000
An additional $1,000 will be assessed for every unintentional false
9-1-1 call made after the 10th unintentional false 9-1-1 call.
§ 117A-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 117A-4
115:160
§ 118-1. Purpose; applicability.
§ 118-2. Findings.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the outdoor application of
fertilizer so as to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering
waterways, thereby helping to protect and improve surface water
quality.
B. This chapter does not apply to fertilizer application on commercial
farms.
A. Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface water
bodies can result in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and
aquatic plants (eutrophication). Excessive plant growth can result in
diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH, which, in
turn, can be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die
off, the decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen
levels. The presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of
the affected water for recreation and water supply.
B. Healthy vegetated areas are protective of water quality by stabilizing
soil and filtering precipitation. When fertilizers are applied to the land
surface improperly or in excess of the needs of target vegetation,
nutrients can be transported by means of stormwater to nearby
waterways, thereby contributing to the problematic growth of excessive
aquatic vegetation. Most soils in New Jersey contain sufficient amounts
of phosphorus to support adequate root growth for established turf.
Over time, it is necessary to replenish available phosphorus, but
generally not at the levels commonly applied. Other target vegetation,
such as vegetable gardens and agricultural/horticultural plantings, will
have a greater need for phosphorus application, as will the repair or
establishment of new lawns or cover vegetation. A soil test and fertilizer
application recommendation geared to the soil and planting type is the
best means to determine the amount of nutrients to apply. Timing and
placement of fertilizer application is also critical to avoid transport of
nutrients to waterways through stormwater runoff. Fertilizer applied
immediately prior to a runoff-producing rainfall, outside the growing
season, or to impervious surfaces is most likely to be carried away by
means of runoff without accomplishing the desired objective of
supporting target vegetation growth. Therefore, the management of the
type, amount, and techniques for fertilizer application is necessary as
one tool to protect water resources.
C. This chapter does not apply to the application of fertilizer on
commercial farms, but improper application of fertilizer on farms would
be problematic as well. Stewardship on the part of commercial farmers
is needed to address this potential source of excess nutrient load to
water bodies. Commercial farmers are expected to implement best
§ 117A-4 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 118-2
115:161
§ 118-3. Definitions; word usage.
§ 118-4. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do any of the following:
management practices in accordance with conservation management
plans or resource conservation plans developed for the farm by the
Natural Resource Conservation Service and approved by the Soil
Conservation District Board.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their
use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other
substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients which is
used for its plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed
to have value in promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for
sale, or intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This
term shall be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot,
driveway, or other material that prevents infiltration of water into the
soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero,
except that it shall not be considered to include animal (including
human) or vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood
ashes that have not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established
by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 118-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 118-4
115:162
§ 118-5. Application of phosphorus fertilizer prohibited; exceptions.
§ 118-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Florham Park.
§ 118-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within a twenty-five-foot buffer of any water body.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time
after the end of the recognized growing season for Zone 6a, as
identified on the USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map, which recognizes
the Borough's growing season to be from March 15 to October 31.
A. No person may do the following:
(1) Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as
demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and target
vegetation and in accordance with a soils test and the associated
annual fertilizer recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative
Research and Extension.
B. Exceptions:
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided that the application is in accordance
with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules;
(b) Reestablishing or repairing a turf area.
(2) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the surface of the soil, directly to the feeder roots.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
§ 118-4 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 118-7
115:163
Chapter 120
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 171.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
§ 120-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either digitally or on
film, videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes, intended for viewing on video receivers, television, in theaters,
on the Internet or for institutional use. Filming performed by one individual
using a hand-held camera without assistance from others shall be excluded
from this chapter.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public right-of-way, public park or playground, public building and property
or other public place within the Borough which is within the jurisdiction and
control of the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 120-2. Permit required; application; time restrictions.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall film or permit filming within the
Borough of Florham Park without first obtaining an application for
permit therefor, obtaining the required approvals and filing the
completed/approved permit, together with the applicable permit fee,
with the Borough at least 10 calendar days prior to the first date that
filming is to take place.
B. Florham Park Borough filming permit applications may be obtained
from the Office of the Borough Clerk during normal business hours.
Application for such permits shall be in a form approved by the Borough
Administrator and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount
established by ordinance of the Borough of Florham Park.
C. The following information shall be included in the permit application:
(1) Location of filming;
(2) Proposed duration of filming, including date(s) and hours;
(3) Amount of space required on public streets/highways/sidewalks,
etc.;
(4) Contact information of applicant, including the on-site person; and
§ 118-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 120-2
115:164
§ 120-3. Issuance of permits; filming restrictions; appeals;
exceptions to limitations.
(5) Traffic control plan approved by the Traffic Bureau of the Florham
Park Police Department (if required).
D. One permit shall be required for each location.
E. Duration of time authorized.
(1) One permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor filming on two
calendar days and indoor filming on two calendar days within a
period of not more than five calendar days beginning on the date of
issuance of the permit, provided that each such date on which
filming is to take place shall be specified in the permit.
(2) Permission for filming in excess of four days as described in
§ 120-2E(1) may be granted by the Borough Council upon filing of a
request with the Borough Clerk seven calendar days in advance of
the Borough Council meeting at which the matter is to be
considered. A copy of the permit application shall be attached to
the request. See also § 120-3J.
F. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Administrator may, at the request of the applicant and with proper
notice given to approving authorities and any affected property owners/
tenants, issue a new permit for filming on other dates subject to full
compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. No additional fee
shall be paid for this permit.
A. A permit shall be limited to no more than five calendar days.
B. No more than two permits shall be issued by the Borough of Florham
Park for filming that will take place in any residential zones without a
waiver pursuant to § 120-3J.
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) No permit shall be issued by the Borough Clerk unless a completed
application is filed with the Borough Clerk's office at least 10
calendar days prior to the first date filming is to take place.
(2) No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Borough with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(a) Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
[1] For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of
$1,000,000 and any occurrence in the aggregate amount
of $3,000,000;
§ 120-2 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 120-3
115:165
[2] For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate
amount of $500,000; and
[3] A certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the Borough
Clerk which shall name the Borough of Florham Park as an
additional insured on the policy.
(b) An agreement, in writing, in a form approved by the Borough
Attorney, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the Borough of Florham Park, its officers, employees
and agents from any and all liability, expense, claim or
damages resulting from the use of public lands;
(c) The posting of a cash bond of $500 or a maintenance bond of
$1,000, running in favor of the Borough and protecting and
insuring that the location utilized will be left after filming in a
satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment,
and that due observance of all Borough ordinances, rules and
regulations will be followed. Within two business days of the
completion of the filming, the Borough will return the bond if
there has been no damage to public property or public expense
caused by the filming;
(d) A contractual agreement with the Florham Park Police
Department for paid police coverage during the time indicated
in the permit (if required);
(e) Proof of service of written notification of proposed dates and
lands to be used for production activities to any and all tenants
and property owners who will be directly affected by the
filming and its site location, and simultaneously said tenants
and property owners shall be informed that objections may be
filed with the Borough Clerk. Such notification is to take place
at least three business days prior to the requested shooting
date, with proofs submitted to the Borough Clerk prior to
issuance of the permit;
(f) A written approval from the Florham Park Police Department
authorizing issuance of the permit and providing any traffic
control requirements and public safety conditions.
D. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Florham
Park Police Department with respect thereto.
E. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
§ 120-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 120-3
115:166
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit to the extent possible
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
F. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
G. Filming, including setup and final cleanup, shall be permitted Monday
through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or
sunset, whichever is earlier.
H. The Borough Administrator may refuse to issue a permit whenever he/
she determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a written report thereon by the Florham Park Police
Department and by other Borough departments involved with the
proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/or the time set
forth in the application would violate any law or ordinance or would
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties or, in the opinion of the Florham Park Police Department,
would unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or welfare.
Further, the Borough reserves the right to require one or more on-site
police officers in situations where the proposed production may impede
the proper flow of traffic, the cost of said officers to be borne by the
applicant as a cost of production. If any services are required by
employees from other Borough departments, the cost of such
employees is to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production.
I. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Borough Administrator or
the Borough of Florham Park denying or revoking a permit or a person
requesting relief pursuant to § 120-3J herein may appeal to the Borough
Council. A written notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the
appeal shall be filed with the Borough Clerk no later than 10 calendar
days from the date of the denial or revocation of the permit. The
Borough Council shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30
calendar days of the day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The
decision of the Borough Council shall be in the form of a resolution. A
resolution supporting the decision of the Borough Administrator or
granting relief pursuant to § 120-3J shall be adopted by the Borough
Council at the first regularly scheduled public meeting of the Borough
Council after the hearing on the appeal, unless the appellant agrees, in
writing, to a later date for the decision.
J. The Borough Council may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements
or limitations of this chapter and may authorize filming on other public
property not defined as public lands and may authorize filming other
than during the hours herein described or may extend the duration of a
permit beyond five calendar days or may permit filming at a particular
location in a residential zone on more than two occasions during any
§ 120-3 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 120-3
115:167
§ 120-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
is as follows:
one calendar year or may waive any other limitation or requirement of
this chapter whenever it determines that strict compliance with such
limitations will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant and
that such a permit may be issued without endangering the public's
health, safety and welfare.
K. Copies of the approved permit will be sent by the Borough Clerk to the
Police Department, Fire Department, the Department of Community
Services, and the Board of Health. Copies shall be sent to any
appropriate New Jersey state agencies, including the New Jersey Film
Commission.
L. The applicant shall notify the Police Department, the Fire Department,
Director of Community Services and the Board of Health 24 hours
before filming takes place and shall permit the Police Department, the
Fire Department, the Board of Health or other Borough inspectors to
inspect the site and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall
comply with all safety instructions issued by Borough inspectors,
including the Police Department, the Fire Department and the Board of
Health.
M. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Borough for any lost revenue or repairs to
public property.
A. Permit:
(1) Basic filming for other than nonprofit applicants: $100.
(2) Basic filming for nonprofit applicants filming for educational,
noncommercial use: $25.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit fee:
(1) Five hundred dollars per day, except as set forth in § 120-4B(2)
hereof.
(2) One hundred dollars per day for nonprofit applicants filming for
educational, noncommercial purposes.
C. Waiver of fees for student. The fees set forth in § 120-4 shall be waived
when filming is done by a student in a grade school, middle school, high
school, college, university or other bona fide educational institution
upon receipt by the Borough Clerk of a written certification from a
teacher or administrator at the school attended by the student stating
that the filming is for educational purposes only and is not intended for
commercial use.
§ 120-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 120-5
115:168
§ 120-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 per day
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 120-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 120-7. Severability.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this chapter.
Chapter 122
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department - See Ch. 46.
§ 122-1. Discharge prohibited; exceptions.
A. The filming of news stories within the Borough of Florham Park;
B. Filming by one individual using a hand-held camera without the
assistance of other persons; and
C. Filming for authorized Florham Park Borough municipal government
purposes as may be authorized by the Florham Park Borough Council or
the Borough Administrator.
A. The discharge of firearms anywhere within the borough is prohibited.
B. The provision of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Responsible persons, groups, associations or corporations for
target practice, rifle ranges, skeet shooting and similar activities.
(2) Members of the Police Department of the borough when acting in
the performance of official duties.
§ 120-5 FIREARMS § 122-2
122:169
§ 122-2. Violations and penalties.47
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
Chapter 125
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
§ 125-1. Blocking access prohibited.
No person owning or occupying premises in front of which a fire hydrant
is located shall permit hedges, shrubbery and the like to grow against such
hydrant or so near to it, nor shall any person throw or deposit snow or ice
against any fire hydrant or so near to it, as to interfere with ready access to
it for water supply or ready recognition of it.
§ 125-2. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforceable by any member of the Borough Police
Department, Fire Chief or the Fire Official of the Borough. Summons for
violation of this chapter may be served upon a defendant by affixing it
to the vehicle involved in the violation. In the event that such violation
represents an immediate hazard to the safeguard of the public safety and
welfare, the enforcing officer may, after notifying owner, if possible, at his
discretion, have such vehicle or obstruction removed. The person, persons
or corporation responsible for such violation thereof would pay the
reasonable cost.
§ 125-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the regulations to be promulgated pursuant to
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code. The Judge may also consider whether or
not such person is responsible for or has paid the reasonable fees for the
removal of any such object or vehicle in violation of this chapter.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 122-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 125-3
125:170
Chapter 131
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Parking lots — See Ch. 167.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
§ 131-1. Establishment.
Authority is hereby vested in the Chief of Police of the Borough, in
conjunction with the recommendations of the Chief of the Fire Department,
Fire Official and the Zoning Official, to establish and designate fire and
emergency access lanes in and around parking yards and parking places
which are open to the public or to which the public is invited in the Borough.
§ 131-2. Designation.
The fire and emergency access lanes may include but are not limited to any
parking or no-standing areas, traffic directional lanes and areas designated
solely for pedestrian traffic. The fire zones to be established pursuant to
§ 131-1 shall be designated in such areas of such public properties as will
ensure fire equipment and other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of
ingress, egress and operation to such properties in the event of fire or other
emergency.
§ 131-3. Location; purpose; installation; specifications; signs and
lighting.
A. The fire and emergency access lanes shall be in those locations and of
sufficient design as may be reasonably required by the public safety
officials.
B. The purpose of these lanes is to guarantee unimpaired ingress and
egress in and around public parking areas and to and around all
buildings located in these areas in the event of fire or other emergency
for police, fire and other emergency vehicles.
C. Such lanes shall be installed by the property owner with acceptable
signs and paint on the pavement provided by such property owner and
installed and maintained under the guidance and direction of the Chief
of Police, the Fire Chief and the Fire Official of the Borough.
D. The number, location, width, length and markings of such fire lanes
shall be determined by the Police Chief, the Fire Chief and the Fire
Official of the Borough.
§ 125-3 FIRE LANES § 131-3
131:171
§ 131-4. Obstruction prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation or any of their agents or employees, shall
leave standing or cause to be parked any vehicle in any of the
aforementioned lanes nor cause any other obstruction in these designated
lanes.
§ 131-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforceable by any member of the Borough Police
Department, Fire Chief or the Fire Official of the Borough. Summons for
violation of this chapter may be served upon a defendant by affixing it to the
vehicle involved in the violation. In the event that such violation represents
an immediate hazard to the safeguard of the public safety and welfare, the
enforcing officer may, at his discretion, have such vehicle or obstruction
removed. The person, persons or corporation responsible for such violation
thereof would pay the reasonable cost.
§ 131-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the regulations to be promulgated pursuant to
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code. The Judge may also consider whether or
not such person is responsible for or has paid the reasonable fees for the
removal of any such object or vehicle in violation of this chapter.
Chapter 134
FIRESAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 125.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
§ 134-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
15-04]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter 70, subject to such modifications and amendments
E. Signs and lighting for such lanes and the means of ingress to and egress
from such lanes shall be determined according to standards as
established by the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 and
shall, in any event, conform to all those requirements as set forth in
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
§ 131-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 134-1
131:172
as the Department of Community Affairs shall from time to time deem
appropriate, shall be locally enforced in the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 134-2. Enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency established by this chapter shall be a part of the
Borough Volunteer Fire Department and shall be known as the "Bureau of
Fire Prevention," which shall be under the direct supervision and control of
the Fire Official, who shall be report to the Fire Chief.
§ 134-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Borough of Florham
Park, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code. (NOTE: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.)
§ 134-4. Inspections. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04]
The local enforcing agency established by this chapter shall carry out
inspections in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
A. The Fire Official shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council upon
recommendations provided by the Public Safety Commissioner, based
on qualifications established by the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
[Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04]
B. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of one year, and the Mayor and
Council shall fill any vacancy occurring during the year from a list of
qualified applicants who have applied for the position. Residents of the
Borough and members of the Fire Department will be given preference
in the selection process. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04]
C. The Fire Official and inspectors shall be removed from office during the
term of appointment only for good cause shown and after having been
given the opportunity for a hearing before the Mayor and Council.
D. From time to time, inspectors and employees may be necessary to aid
the local enforcing agency, and the Mayor and Council shall appoint
them upon recommendation by the Fire Official.
E. The Fire Official and all inspectors shall be properly qualified, and their
individual appointments may be delayed or denied because of a lack of
sufficient training or experience.
§ 134-1 FIRE LANES § 134-5
131:173
§ 134-5. Certificates of smoke detector and carbon monoxide
compliance. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04]
The local enforcing agency shall be responsible for the issuance of
certificates of smoke detector and carbon monoxide compliance in
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
§ 134-6. Variances. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04]
Variances shall be granted in accordance with the requirements of the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code by the local enforcing agency.
§ 134-7. Appeals.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206, Subdivision b, and 52:27D-208, any person
aggrieved by any ruling, action, order or notice of the local enforcement
agency, including the declaration of a violation of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act, shall have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of
the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 134-8. General restrictions.
No person shall:
§ 134-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
15-04]
Penalties for violations of the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code shall be as set forth therein.
§ 134-10. Service of notice. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04]
Service of all notices, rules, decisions and orders shall be as set forth in the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
A. Obstruct, hinder, delay or interfere by force or otherwise with the local
enforcing agency in the exercise of any power or the discharge of any
function or duty under the provisions of the Act.
B. Prepare, utter or render any false statement, report, document, plans
or specification permitted or required under the provisions of the Act.
C. Render ineffective or inoperative or fail to properly maintain any
protective equipment or system installed or intended to be installed in a
building or structure.
D. Refuse or fail to comply with a lawful ruling, action, order or notice of
the local enforcing agency.
E. Violate, or cause to be violated, any of the provisions of the Act.
§ 134-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 134-11
131:174
§ 134-11. Additional inspections; certificate of registration.
[Amended 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 14-04]
In addition to the inspections required pursuant to the Act and the
regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections shall be required:
§ 134-12. Fees. [Amended 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 14-04; 9-24-2015
by Ord. No. 15-18]
A. All mercantile, industrial, educational and recreational occupancies,
other than life-hazard uses covered by these regulations, shall be
known as Type FP1 and shall be inspected for compliance with the
provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code semiannually by the
local enforcing agency.
B. The owners of all buildings, other than life-hazard uses, in the Borough
of Florham Park shall file with the local enforcing agency, on forms
provided by said agency, an application for a certificate of registration.
It shall be a violation of the code for an owner to fail to complete and
return such an application within 30 days after having been served with
it.
A. The following 2015 fee schedule is adopted for the inspection of those
buildings not covered by the State Inspection Fee Schedule as set forth
in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Fee
0 to 1,000 $65
1,001 to 2,000 $80
2,001 to 3,000 $80
3,001 to 4,000 $80
4,001 to 5,000 $80
5,001 to 6,000 $135
6,001 to 7,000 $135
7,001 to 8,000 $135
8,001 to 9,000 $135
9,001 to 10,000 $135
10,001 to 11,000 $250
11,001 to 12,000 $250
12,001 to 15,000 $250
15,001 to 20,000 $370
20,001 to 25,000 $370
§ 134-11 FIRE LANES § 134-12
131:175
§ 134-13. Knox-Box® requirements. [Added 8-23-2011 by Ord. No.
11-14]
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Fee
25,001 to 30,000 $370
30,001 to 35,000 $500
35,001 to 40,000 $500
40,001 to 45,000 $500
45,001 to 50,000 $500
50,001 to 55,000 $500
55,001 to 60,000 $500
60,001 to 65,000 $500
65,001 to 70,000 $500
70,001 to 75,000 $500
75,001 to 80,000 $750
80,000 to 85,000 $750
85,001 to 90,000 $750
90,001 to 95,000 $750
95,001 to 100,000 $750
B. For each 5,000 square feet or part over 100,000 square feet, there will
be charged an additional $100.
C. Fees for smoke detector inspections/carbon monoxide detectors:
(1) Commercial buildings: $75.
(2) Residential: The application fee for a certificate of smoke detector
and carbon monoxide alarm compliance (CSDCMAC), as required
by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, shall be based upon the amount of time
remaining before the change of occupancy is expected, as follows:
(a) Request for a CSDCMAC received more than 10 business days
prior to the change of occupant: $75.
(b) Request for a CSDCMAC received fewer than 10 business days
prior to the change of occupant: $125.
A. Applicability.
(1) The following structures shall be equipped with a rapid-access key
box ("Knox-Box®") within six months of the effective date of this
section:
§ 134-12 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 134-13
131:176
(a) Any commercial or industrial structure protected by an
automatic suppression system (sprinkler or standpipe);
(b) Any commercial or industrial structure protected by an
automatic fire alarm system having a connection to a central
monitoring station facility;
(c) Any multifamily residential structure that possesses a common
corridor for access to living units and that also restricts
building access by locking building entryway doors and/or has
a common utility room for sprinkler or fire alarm appliances;
(d) Any facility that is required to prepare and have readily
available material safety data sheets and/or hazardous
chemical inventory forms as per federal and state codes.
(e) Other properties or structures where Fire Department or
Police Department access would be delayed, as determined by
the Fire Chief, Police Chief or Fire Official.
(2) All commercial buildings under construction must provide a
temporary Knox-Box® for emergency access before construction
begins.
(3) All newly constructed structures of the type described in
Subsection A(1) above shall be equipped with a Knox-Box® prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(4) Any commercial or industrial structure with an external audible fire
alarm and/or any complex with perimeter fencing which limits
emergency vehicle access is required to provide a Knox key or Knox
padlock.
B. Installation.
(1) Applications for a Knox-Box® shall be obtained from the Florham
Park Fire Department.
(2) The owner or operator of a structure required to have a Knox-Box®
is responsible for installation of the Knox-Box®. This box shall be a
UL-type approved by the Fire Chief, Police Chief or Fire Official.
(3) The Knox-Box® shall be installed on the front of the structure near
the main entry door five feet above the ground, unless installation
of the Knox-Box® at a height higher or lower than five feet above
the ground is approved by the Fire Chief, Police Chief or Fire
Official.
(4) The size of the Knox-Box® that is required to be installed will be
determined by the number of keys or units that the box will support
at the property location, as approved by the Fire Chief, Police Chief
or Fire Official.
§ 134-13 FIRE LANES § 134-13
131:177
(5) More than one Knox-Box® may be required to be installed as per
the building size or complex size as per the Fire Chief, Police Chief
or Fire Official.
(6) A Knox-Box® tamper switch connected to the building's fire alarm
system may be required.
C. Contents.
(1) The contents of the Knox-Box® shall include the following:
(a) Keys to locked points of ingress or egress, whether on the
interior or exterior of such buildings.
(b) Keys to all mechanical rooms.
(c) Keys to all locked electrical rooms.
(d) Keys to elevators and their control rooms.
(e) Keys to fire alarm panels.
(f) Keys (special) to reset pull stations or other fire protective
devices.
(g) Keys to any other areas as requested by the Borough of
Florham Park's Fire or Police Department.
(h) A card containing the names and telephone numbers of
emergency contact people for such buildings or any code
numbers associated with their fire protection systems. These
contact persons must be available on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(2) In lieu of having the interior keys in the exterior Knox-Box®, a
second Knox-Box® may be located within the main lobby of the
building to hold these keys.
D. Maintenance.
(1) The operator of the building shall immediately notify the Borough
of Florham Park's Fire or Police Department and shall provide new
keys when a lock is changed or rekeyed. The keys to such lock shall
be secured in the Knox-Box®.
(2) The operator of the building shall be responsible for the Knox-Box®
to be in proper working condition and for replacing or making
repairs as may be necessary.
E. Temporary key lock box during times of construction.
(1) Before any work is started on any regulated building or property
complex that would require the installation of a rapid-access key
box, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator to apply
for a Knox-Box®.
§ 134-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 134-13
131:178
Chapter 137
FIRES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
(2) Application for this temporary Knox-Box® shall be made at the
Florham Park Fire Headquarters.
(3) This temporary Knox-Box® will be supplied by the Fire Department
and must be returned prior to issuance of any certificate of
occupancy.
(4) This temporary Knox-Box® must be mounted and keys installed in
a location approved by the Florham Park Fire Department prior to
securing the site or building.
(5) The fee for this Knox-Box® shall be equal to the fee set by the New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
for a Type 1 permit.
F. Security caps. When a building is protected by an automatic sprinkler
system or by a standpipe system, the Fire Chief, Police Chief or Fire
Official may require the Fire Department connection to have a Fire
Department connection security cap installed. The Fire Department
connection security cap shall be a type approved by the Fire Chief,
Police Chief or Fire Official.
G. Violations and penalties.
(1) Failure to install a Fire Department connection security cap, Knox-
Box®, and Knox padlock or to provide a key box within 30 days of
the date required under the directions of this section enables the
Borough to install said device or equipment at the owner's expense.
(2) Any violation of this section by any owner or operator is hereby
declared to be a misdemeanor offense subject to a fine of $2,000.
Each day that such violation shall continue after notification shall
be considered a separate violation, carrying an additional penalty
of $100 per day.
§ 134-13 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 134-13
137:179

ARTICLE I
Burning Leaves and Rubbish
[Adopted 12-16-1969 as Ch. 19, § 19-1, of the 1969 Code]
§ 137-1. General prohibition.
No person shall burn or cause to be burned any leaves, straw, refuse,
shavings or rubbish on any public street, road, square, alley, lane, gutter or
sidewalk in the borough.
§ 137-1 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 137-1
137:181

ARTICLE II
Open Fires
[Adopted 8-19-1975 as Ord. No. 13-75]
§ 137-2. General prohibition.
No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or shall furnish the
materials for any such fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained in any yard, lot or elsewhere in the borough.
§ 137-2 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 137-2
137:183
Chapter 140
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solicitation, canvassing and sales — See Ch.
179.
Retail establishments — See Ch. 191.
Signs — See Ch. 199.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Sanitation — See Ch. 265.
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — All general sales open to the public conducted from or
on a residential premises for the purpose of disposing, by sale, barter or
otherwise, personal property, including but not limited to all sales entitled
"garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "rummage," "room," "backyard,"
"patio," or "estate." This definition shall not include a situation where no
more than three specific items are held out for sale, and all advertisements
of such sale specifically name those items to be sold.
GARAGE SALE SIGN — A temporary sign no larger than two feet by two feet
indicating the location, time, and date of a garage sale within the Borough.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, charitable or religious
institutions or nonprofit corporations, homeowners' associations,
unincorporated associations and family and neighborhood groups.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and maintained
by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the
normal course of living or in maintaining that residence and not acquired
elsewhere; no consignments.
§ 140-2. Permits and fees.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
Borough of Florham Park without first filing with the Borough Clerk the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Clerk a
license to do so, to be known as a "garage sale license." The fee for such
license shall be and the same is fixed hereby at $5.
B. Only two such licenses shall be issued to any one residence within a
twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for more than
three consecutive calendar days.
§ 137-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 140-2
137:184
§ 140-3. Signs.
§ 140-4. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. Thursday through Saturday, or 12:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. on Sunday.
§ 140-5. Application for permit; information to be filed.
For the purposes of this chapter, any person desiring to secure a permit
to conduct a garage sale shall, at least one week prior to the date and
time set for such sale, complete and submit to the Borough Clerk an
application for the issuance of a permit and shall pay the required fee. Said
application shall be in such form as the Borough may establish and contain
the following information:
C. Each license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout
the entire period of the licensed sale.
D. The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which the sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and
decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No
person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor
permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets
in the area of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable
orders of the Police or Fire Departments in order to maintain the public
health, safety and welfare.
E. Personal property offered for sale at a garage sale may be displayed in a
driveway, or in a garage, or in the rear yard or lawns of the owner to
tenant of the premises. No personal property offered for sale at a
garage sale shall be displayed on any sidewalk, road, highway, street or
public right-of-way.
A. No more than three garage sale signs may be posted off of the property
where the sale is to be held.
B. Signs shall be limited in size to two feet by two feet.
C. Signs shall not be attached to trees, utility poles or traffic regulation
signs.
D. Signs should not be posted on Borough-owned property.
E. Signs shall not be posted more than four days prior to the day of the
sale and must be removed within 24 hours of the end of the sale.
F. Anyone who fails to comply with any of the above rules will be in
violation of this chapter.
§ 140-2 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 140-5
137:185
§ 140-6. Issuance of permit.
The Borough Clerk shall receive applications and the required filing fee
and if, upon review of the application, the same is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and any regulations promulgated hereunder,
shall issue the permit, and said Clerk shall number the applications and
permits in chronological order beginning with the current year and the
number.
§ 140-7. Nontransferability of permit.
No permit issued by the Borough shall be to any other individual, nor shall
the place of sale be changed without cancellation of the permit and issuance
of a new permit upon application and payment of the required fee for the
new location.
§ 140-8. Miscellaneous regulations.
§ 140-9. Enforcement.
A. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting the sale.
B. The name of the owner of the property, the names of the person or
persons and their addresses and telephone numbers if other than the
owners, who will be participating in said garage sale and consent of the
owner if the applicant is other than the owner.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The dates and times of such sale.
E. The relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any
other person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sale.
F. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any local, state or federal agency.
G. A sworn statement of affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
A. Sales shall not impede nor disrupt traffic or neighborhood parking
regulations.
B. All unsold sale items must be removed from the premises or stored
away at the end of the sale.
C. No tents or other structures larger than 10 feet by 10 feet shall be
erected.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Florham Park Police Department.
§ 140-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 140-9
137:186
§ 140-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, family group, corporation or other entity conducting any such
sale or similar activity without being properly permitted therefor or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any terms and provisions of this chapter
or any other rules, regulations or provisions adopted or approved by the
Council shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be punishable
in a fine not to exceed $300 per offense. Each day that such sale or violation
continues without being permitted shall be considered and shall constitute
a separate offense.
Chapter 142
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-16.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Outdoor fires — See Ch. 137.
Discharge of hazardous or toxic
substances — See Ch. 144.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
Sanitation (Board of Health) — See Ch. 265.
B. Copies of the permit shall be provided to the Police Department upon
issuance of the permit.
C. The permit holder is hereby made responsible for the maintenance of
good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of such
garage sale.
D. No permit holder shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the
premises where the sale is being held or permit vehicles to impede
passage of the traffic on any roads or streets in the area of the premises
where the sale is being conducted.
§ 140-9 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 140-10
137:187

ARTICLE I
Collection
[Adopted 3-20-1979 by Ord. No. 6-79]
§ 142-1. Solid waste collection; private contract; violations and
penalties. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 9-91; 9-20-1994 by
Ord. No. 13-94]
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms and usages
shall have the stated meanings:
ALUMINUM — Aluminum cans of beverage-type, marked thereon as
"recyclable" or "aluminum," and excluding cans of any other type.
BOTTLES — Includes glass bottles and jars made of silica, soda ash and
limestone, being transparent or translucent and breakable, excluding
any plastic or metal, or any other glass products such as window glass
and used containers for hazardous waste.
COLLECTOR — Any business or person licensed by the New Jersey
Public Utilities Commission for the collection and disposal of solid
waste in the Borough of Florham Park.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — The term used to identify a type of
paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface
(alternating ridges and grooves) and is placed between two flat
surfaces for the sake of strength and which is commonly used to form
cartons.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Includes all solvents, acids, pesticides,
herbicides, oils, chemicals and other toxic or hazardous materials.
INSTITUTION — An established organization or foundation dedicated
to public service or culture, including but not limited to religious,
educational, health care and governmental establishments.
MIXED PAPER — All glossy-surfaced inserts such as advertisements
and magazine supplements, telephone books, magazines, catalogues,
junk mail and other paper products of a colored nature. This does
not include cardboard, corrugated boxes or other noncolored paper
products which can be stacked, tied or presented for recycling in
manageable and conveniently sized bundles.
NEWSPRINT — Black-and-white newspaper of the type distributed
daily or weekly.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade papers generally used in offices that are
of high quality and do not have a glossy finish, including but not limited
to computer, letterhead, ledger and photocopy paper.
PERSON — See the definitions of "responsible solid waste generator"
and "residents."
PROOF OF COLLECTION SERVICE — A written record, lot, bill or
document evidencing receipts of service for the collection of solid waste
§ 142-1 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-1
137:189
for the preceding quarter of a year from a person lawfully engaging in
private solid waste collection services within a municipality.
RECYCLABLES — Includes newsprint, cardboard, corrugated boxes,
noncolored paper, bottles, aluminum and yard waste.
RECYCLING GOALS — The municipality accepts the state policy
directive of achieving at least a 50% recycling rate of municipal solid
waste by 1995.
REGULAR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE — The scheduled
pickup and removal of solid waste from residential, commercial or
institutional premises located within the boundaries of any municipality
at least once a week.
RESIDENTS — Occupants or owners or lessees of dwellings or of
business structures in the Borough of Florham Park, and shall be
referred to herein as "householders" or "businesses" respectively.
RESPONSIBLE SOLID WASTE GENERATOR — Any property owner,
tenant or occupant of any single-family residential dwelling or multiple
dwelling or the owner of any commercial or institutional building or
structure located within the boundaries of any municipality who
generates solid waste at those premises (herein referred to as
"person").
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials
resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and
from domestic and community activities, and shall include all other
waste materials, including liquids, except for solid animal and
vegetable wastes collected by swine producers licensed by the State
Department of Agriculture to collect, prepare and feed such wastes to
swine on their own farms.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The activity related to pickup and
transportation of solid waste from its source or location to a solid waste
facility or other destination.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A receptacle, container or bag suitable
for the depositing of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The storage, treatment, utilization,
processing or final disposal of solid waste.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, branches and other vegetative
matter.
B. Contract for solid waste collection. All persons, residents and
commercial entities maintaining premises or property within the
Borough of Florham Park who are solid waste generators shall enter
into a contract for regular solid waste collection service.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any multiple dwelling
to provide a sufficient number of appropriate solid waste
§ 142-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-1
137:190
§ 142-2. Collection by Borough; pickup of large items. [Amended
9-20-1994 by Ord. No. 13-94]
§ 142-3. Borough compactor.
containers for the deposit of nonrecyclable waste materials to be
disposed of as solid waste.
(2) In all instances, each person generating solid waste shall contract
with any person lawfully providing private solid waste collection
services within the Borough.
(3) In the event that a solid waste collector refuses any request to
provide any person with the opportunity to contract for solid waste
collection services, that person shall notify the Borough, which will
notify the Board of Public Utilities of that refusal.
C. Proof of contracted services.
(1) All persons generating solid waste within the Borough shall at least
once each year provide proof of collection service.
(2) The Borough shall notify each person at least once every six months
from the effective date of this section of the requirements of this
section and the date and manner by which proof of collection
service is to be submitted.
(3) Each collector of solid waste properly authorized to and providing
the service within the Borough of Florham Park shall assist the
Borough in identifying those persons who fail to comply with this
section.
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person found to have violated this section shall be subject to
the provisions of § 1-16 of this Code and in no event be fined less
than $25.
(2) Any collector who fails to comply with this section shall be reported
to the Board of Public Utilities.
A. The Borough will collect yard waste, leaves and other household refuse.
B. Grass clippings may be left on lawns, composted on site or be prepared
for curbside pick up by the Borough.
C. Residents may arrange with the Borough for pickup of bulk items, e.g.,
refrigerators, and may also deposit household refuse in the Borough
compactor.
A. The use of the Borough compactor is limited to persons who reside in
the Borough for disposal of nonputrescible, nonflammable, nontoxic
household waste.
§ 142-1 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-3
137:191
B. Access to the Borough compactor shall be controlled through the
issuance of a permit at the Borough Hall. Each applicant shall also
receive a printed form of rules and regulations which shall be
controlling whenever the compactor is used. [Amended 9-20-1994 by
Ord. No. 13-94]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the compactor without first
obtaining a permit, to allow the use of said permit by a nonresident, to
use the compactor for any other than a permitted use or to act contrary
to the published rules and regulations. [Amended 9-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 13-94]
§ 142-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-3
137:192
ARTICLE II
Separation and Recycling of Solid Waste
[Adopted 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2348]
§ 142-4. Acceptance of municipal solid waste recycling goal.
As set forth in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13b.(4)(c), the Borough of Florham Park
accepts the goal of fifty-percent recycling of municipal solid waste by 2015
and shall monitor its level of recycling and solid waste disposal and shall
strive to achieve the recycling of 50% of the municipal solid waste
generated within its borders.
§ 142-5. Source separation requirements.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the Borough of Florham Park to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other
solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such
premises. Designated recyclable materials shall be placed separately at
the curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be hereinafter
established by schedules promulgated by the Director of the
Department of Community Services.
B. "Designated recyclable materials" means those materials designated
within the Morris County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include:
(1) Aluminum cans: cans made from aluminum that was manufactured
to hold a serving of a beverage. Specifically omitted from this
definition are aluminum foil and aluminum pie plates.
(2) Glass bottles and jars: bottles and jars made from glass including
clear, brown and green glass. A bottle is defined as a receptacle
having a narrow neck and a mouth that can be corked or capped. A
jar is defined as a wide-mouthed container that can be capped.
Caps and lids not included. Specifically omitted from this definition
are drinking glasses, windows, mirrors, light bulbs, and anything
made of Pyrex® or ceramic.
(3) Plastic bottles (coded 1 and 2): plastic bottles coded to indicate that
they are comprised of the specific types of plastic compounds
(polymers) known as polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) or high
density polyethylene (HDPE). See the symbols below. A bottle is
defined as a receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can
48.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Separation and Recycling of
Solid Waste, adopted 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 17-86, as amended.
§ 142-4 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-5
137:193
be corked or capped. Caps and lids not included. Any item made of
plastic that is not a bottle, and any plastic bottle without one of the
symbols shown below is specifically omitted from this definition.
Empty bottles which contained hazardous materials, such as motor
oil, antifreeze, etc. should not be recycled.
(4) Steel (tin) cans: an airtight container for the distribution or storage
of goods, composed of thin, usually ferrous, metal. Examples are
soup cans and tuna fish cans.
(5) Newspaper: a publication containing news, information and
advertising, usually printed on low-cost paper called newsprint.
Newspaper may include glossy inserts which come with the paper,
dependent upon the market conditions at the time.
(6) Corrugated cardboard: shipping containers made with kraft paper
linerboard and corrugated medium.
(7) Mixed paper: various categories of recyclable paper, including, but
not limited to, white and colored paper used in printers,
photocopiers and fax machines, white and colored ledger paper,
carbonless copy paper, construction paper, undeliverable mail,
mailed promotional letters/advertisements/circulars, magazines,
catalogues, envelopes, soft cover books.
(8) Leaves: vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn
when they fall from trees and then are raked from residents' and/or
commercial lawns.
(9) Grass clippings: vegetative material generated when grass (lawns)
are cut.
(10) Brush: branches, woody plants and other similar vegetative
material. Leaves and grass do not constitute brush.
(11) Natural wood waste: logs, stumps, branches and other wood tree
parts. Dimensional lumber is omitted from inclusion in this
definition.
(12) Oil-contaminated soil: nonhazardous soil that contains petroleum
hydrocarbons (gasoline, diesel, kerosene, jet fuel, No. 4 and No. 6
heating oils and certain other refinery products including coal tar).
This type of soil shall be determined to be nonhazardous in
accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:26.
§ 142-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-5
137:194
(13) Used motor oil: motor oil from motor vehicles, lawn mowers, boats,
etc., which has served its intended useful purpose.
(14) Lead-acid batteries: storage batteries in which the electrodes are
grids of lead containing lead oxides that change in composition
during charging and discharging, and the electrolyte is dilute
sulfuric acid. These include starting batteries such as car batteries
that deliver a short burst of high power to start the engine. In
addition, they may include deep cell batteries found on boats or
campers used to power accessories like trolling motors, winches or
lights.
(15) Hazardous dry cell batteries: rechargeable batteries, such as
nickel-cadmium, nickel-iron, nickel metal hydride, lithium ion,
small sealed lead acid, etc. These are often used as substitutes for
nonrechargeable batteries in standard sizes such as AAA, AA, C, D
and 9V. Rechargeable batteries are commonly found in cordless
tools, cellular and cordless phones, laptop computers, cameras,
remote controls, toys, etc. Also included in this definition are
nonrechargeable batteries that are hazardous as defined by the
Resource Conservation Recovery Act ("RCRA"), regardless of the
RCRA exclusion of household waste from the definition of
hazardous waste pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 261.4(b). Nonrechargeable,
hazardous batteries include older alkaline and carbon zinc
batteries, as well as silver oxide, mercury and magnesium buttontype
batteries, etc. It should be noted that domestically
manufactured alkaline and carbon zinc nonrechargeable batteries
made after circa 1994 eliminated mercury content to the point that
they should not be considered RCRA hazardous and therefore are
not included in this material category.
(16) Metal appliances: appliances composed predominantly of metal,
and may include stoves, washing machines and dryers, for
example, if the appliance is predominantly metal. Also included are
air conditioners, refrigerators and dehumidifiers if they are
predominantly metal. If these appliances on the latter list contain
refrigerants that are prohibited by the Clean Air Act from being
knowingly vented, the refrigerant must be recovered accordingly.
(17) Whole tires*: tires that are whole, not chipped into small pieces.
*Tires are allowed to be recycled and/or incinerated for energy
recovery.
(18) Electronic waste: televisions and portable, desktop or personal
computers, which includes a computer central processing unit and
associated hardware including keyboards, modems, printers,
scanners, and fax machines, a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube
device, a flat panel display or similar video display device with a
screen that is greater than four inches measured diagonally and
that contains one or more circuit boards, including a television, and
cell phones.
§ 142-5 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-5
137:195
§ 142-6. Preparation of recyclables for collection or delivery.
§ 142-7. Compliance requirements.
C. Hazardous waste. Residents are prohibited from depositing hazardous
items with solid waste. Householders and businesses shall place such
items in tightly closed and labeled containers and deliver only on
certain specified days to the Morris County hazardous waste disposal
facility.
A. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk,
or, in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition.
B. Designated recyclable materials shall be prepared for collection in
accordance with rules promulgated by the Morris County Municipal
Utilities Authority.
C. Designated recyclable materials may be delivered to the Borough's
Recycling Center.
D. Sale or donation. Any person who is an owner, lessee, or occupant may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, partnership or
corporation (whether operating for profit or not for profit) as long as
the recycling individual or company submits documentation to the
Recycling Coordinator on a quarterly basis.
A. Residential compliance requirements. The owner of any property shall
be responsible for compliance with this article. For multifamily units,
the management or owner is responsible for setting up and maintaining
the recycling system, including collection of recyclable materials, in
accordance with guidelines or regulations established by the
appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty notices will be
directed to the owner or management, in those instances where the
violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and
every six months during their occupancy.
B. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
(1) All nonresidential generators, including commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments, of solid waste shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this article.
(2) The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the commercial,
institutional or industrial property owner or their designee. All
commercial, institutional or industrial properties which provide
§ 142-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-7
137:196
§ 142-8. Coordination of recycling program by Recycling
Coordinator.
The Recycling Coordinator, in conjunction with the Director of Public Works
and the Director of Community Services, shall jointly coordinate and
structure the recycling program in the following manner:
outdoors litter receptacles and disposal service for their contents
shall also provide receptacles for designated recyclable materials,
for those materials commonly deposited, in the location of the litter
receptacle, and shall provide for separate recycling service for
their contents.
(3) All nonresidential facilities shall report on an annual basis to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including the
amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and
recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
(4) All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code,
shall, in addition to compliance with all other recycling
requirements, be required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil
created in the processing of food or food products, and maintain
such records as may be prescribed, for inspection by any code
enforcement officer.
A. Promulgate necessary schedules and instructions which, as from time
to time amended, become enforceable provisions of this article when
approved by the Mayor and Borough Council.
B. Supervise activities at the Recycling Center and collection points.
C. Submit to the Mayor and Council timely budget estimates to conduct
this activity.
D. Designate personnel, as necessary, and make them available to
supervise the Recycling Center.
E. Plan for and furnish storage facilities for recyclables.
F. Record and report, as required, volumes of recyclables collected,
stored, sold and otherwise disposed of.
G. Maintain supplies of forms and distribute them to the businesses and
collectors, respectively, as required.
H. Inspect solid waste containers at random times and places to verify
compliance with this article.
I. Prepare and maintain an annual recycling tonnage report which shall
be submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection and the
Morris County Recycling Coordinator.
§ 142-7 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-8
137:197
§ 142-9. Prohibition of collection of solid waste mixed with
recyclable materials; enforcement; penalty for noncompliance.
J. Enforce the mandates of this article and failures to comply.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
C. Designated recyclable materials placed at the curb or the Recycling
Center are the property of the Borough, or its authorized agent. It is a
violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the Borough to
tamper with, collect, remove or otherwise handle, or cause to be
tampered with, collected, removed or otherwise handled, such
recyclables.
D. Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of
Health, the Recycling Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official,
the Housing Officer, and the Morris County Office of Health
Management are hereby individually and severally empowered to
enforce the provisions of this article. An inspection may consist of
sorting through containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect,
by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
E. Penalty for noncompliance with source separation requirement. Any
person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by a fine not less than $25, nor more than $1,000. Each day for which a
violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be immediately deposited into the Recycling Trust Fund. Monies in the
Municipal Trust Fund shall be used for the expenses of the municipal
recycling program.
§ 142-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-9
137:198
ARTICLE III
Disposal of Pet Solid Waste
[Adopted 10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 35-05]
§ 142-10. Title.
This article shall be known as "The Disposal of Pet Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 142-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Florham Park so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 142-12. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability-assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 142-13. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 142-10 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-14
137:199
§ 142-14. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability-assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 142-15. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Florham Park Police
Department.
§ 142-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,500.
§ 142-14 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-16
137:200
ARTICLE IV
Proper Handling of Yard Waste
[Adopted 10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 34-05]
§ 142-17. Title.
The Ordinance shall be known as "The Proper Handling of Yard Waste
Ordinance."
§ 142-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the Borough of Florham Park, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 142-19. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 142-20. Prohibited conduct.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street except as permitted by
§ 142-21. If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street, the
party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste
from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 142-17 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-21
137:201
§ 142-21. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not
be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
§ 142-22. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Florham Park Police
Department.
§ 142-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,500.
§ 142-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-23
137:202
ARTICLE V
Litter Control
[Adopted 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-10]
§ 142-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering in
the Borough of Florham Park to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of its residents and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 142-25. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 142-26. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
§ 142-24 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 142-27
137:203
§ 142-27. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Florham Park.
§ 142-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200.
§ 142-29. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 142-30. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 142-27 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 142-30
137:204
Chapter 144
HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCE DISCHARGE
§ 144-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Removal and Clean-up of Hazardous or
Toxic Substance Discharge Ordinance of the Borough of Florham Park."
§ 144-2. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to authorize and direct the
removal, cleanup, containment and abatement of any hazardous and/or
toxic substance discharge or spill within the Borough and to provide for the
reimbursement and recovery of all associated costs from the responsible
persons.
§ 144-3. Administration enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Borough Administrator, in cooperation
with other Borough department heads, to authorize and direct the activities
necessary to effect the containment, abatement, removal and cleanup of
any such discharge or spill within the Borough; the Borough Administrator
shall also be authorized to seek full reimbursement for the recovery of all
costs related to any removal and cleanup activities performed by Borough
forces. The removal and cleanup of discharges of hazardous substances by
the Borough shall be consistent with the regulations established by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 144-4. Definitions.49
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — Includes the Fire Department, First Aid Squad, Borough Road
Department, Department of Public Works, Police Department, Sewerage
Authority50 and the Office of the Administrator.
DISCHARGE — Any action, intentional or unintentional, or omission
resulting in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying or dumping of hazardous or toxic substances into the waters, onto
the lands or into the air, which threatens or does cause damage to Borough
property or Borough residents and threatens the environment.
EMERGENCY APPARATUS AND PERSONNEL — Includes any apparatus,
equipment, materials and personnel within the Borough and allocated to or
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 188, Property Maintenance, § 188-4, for additional definitions.
50.Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer Utility.
§ 142-30 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 144-4
137:205
controlled by the Borough Police, Health and Public Works Departments,
Office of the Administrator, the Sewerage Authority,51 Florham Park
Volunteer Fire Department and First Aid Squad.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Those elements, gases, compounds and
petroleum products which are defined as such by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, or as defined in the
National Fire Protection Association Guide of Hazardous Materials, or as
are set forth in the list of hazardous substances adopted by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), or as are defined on the list of
toxic pollutants designated by the United States Congress or the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency. For the purpose of this chapter, sewage
and sewage sludge shall also be considered as "hazardous substances."
PERSON — Any public or private corporations, associations, societies,
firms, agencies, partnerships, joint-stock companies, individuals, not-forprofit
service organizations or any other entity, private, public or
commercial.
PETROLEUM — Includes oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form,
including but not limited to oil, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, oil
sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils and substantives
or additives utilized in the refining or blending of crude, petroleum or
petroleum stock.
REMOVAL AND CLEANUP COSTS — All costs incurred by the Borough as a
result of a discharge of hazardous or toxic substance as follows:
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractor
trailers, construction equipment, farm machinery and military vehicles and
equipment.
§ 144-5. Responsibility and liability.
In the removal or attempted removal of hazardous or toxic substances;
or
A.
In performing reasonable measures to prevent, contain or mitigate
damage to the health, safety or welfare of the public, including but
not limited to public, semipublic and private property, surface waters,
subsurface waters, water columns and bottom sediments, soils and
other affected property, including wetlands, wildlife and other natural
resources within the environment.
B.
A. Any person who, through an intentional or unintentional act or omission
and/or is otherwise responsible for the discharge of hazardous
substances which requires containment, abatement or removal, shall be
liable and responsible for the reimbursement and payment of all costs
incurred by the Borough or any of its departments or agents or
51.Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer Utility.
§ 144-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 144-5
137:206
§ 144-6. Calculation of costs.
§ 144-7. Violations and penalties.
contracted employees as a result of such cleanup activity. The remedy
provided by this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies
provided by law.
B. Any person who owns or operates any vehicle or equipment which
causes a leak, spill or fire of hazardous material on any public,
semipublic or private property within the Borough shall be responsible
and liable for the reimbursement to the Borough in full for all costs
incurred by the Borough in the rendering of the necessary services,
containment and abatement or removal of said hazardous condition.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, costs incurred by the Borough shall
include but shall not necessarily be limited to the following: actual labor
costs of personnel, including workers' compensation benefits, fringe
benefits, administrative overhead, cost of equipment and equipment
operation, fire-fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent
material, sand and sand recovery drums, booms and specialized
protective equipment and clothing, including but not limited to acid
suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing, costs of materials,
goods and supplies and the cost for the contracting for services and
materials not provided by the Borough but supplied at its direction and
authorization.
B. Within seven business days from the date of a cleanup, all persons
having participated in the cleanup and being responsible for the
expenditure of funds, private or public, shall present to the Borough
Administrator a specific itemization of all costs associated with
containment, abatement, removal and cleanup. Upon receipt, the
Borough Administrator shall send the person(s) responsible for the
discharge of the hazardous substance or material a letter directing
payment(s) to either the Borough or such other person who has a legal
claim to payment or reimbursement. Such person(s) shall be advised
that full payment(s) is expected within 30 calendar days after receipt of
the statement of charges.
A. Any person(s) responsible for the discharge of a hazardous or toxic
substance and who fails to reimburse the Borough or its directed payee
in full within the time frame prescribed under § 144-6 of this chapter
shall be subject, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, to a fine not
exceeding the sum of $2,000 and/or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or both. These penalties shall be in addition to any
other penalties prescribed and levied by the State of New Jersey and/or
the federal government.
B. The imposition of any penalties through the Municipal Court shall not in
any way relieve the person found guilty from making full
reimbursement to the Borough.
§ 144-5 FIRES, OUTDOOR § 144-7
137:207
Chapter 145
INSURANCE
C. In the event that said cleanup is on private property or emanates from
private property and that property owner is proven responsible, any
such unpaid moneys owed by that property owner shall become a lien
on said property, subject to collection by the Borough as provided for by
law, with costs, interest and attorney's fees.
(1) This chapter shall not be held to be in conflict with Chapter 188 of
this Code, and to the extent inconsistencies exist, this chapter shall
prevail due to the emergent nature of the violation and the
necessity to immediately effect a cleanup.
(2) To the extent that it is not in conflict with this chapter, § 188-16,
entitled "Violations and penalties," shall be read and applied in pari
materia with this chapter.
§ 144-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 144-7
145:208
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 4-17-1979 as Ord. No. 8-79]
§ 145-1. Authority.
The Code of the Borough of Florham Park is amended and supplemented
with the addition of a new Article pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 through
17:36-13, for the payment of tax liens on fire-damaged properties from
existing insurance policies.
§ 145-2. Payment of claims restricted.
It shall be unlawful in the Borough of Florham Park for any insurance
company to pay any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on real
property located within the Borough of Florham Park to any claimant
pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after June 1, 1979,
until such time as all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or
charges due and payable as appearing on the official certificate of search
of the Borough of Florham Park have either been paid by the owner of
such real property or by the insurance company pursuant to § 145-3 of this
chapter.
§ 145-3. Agreement for payment of delinquent taxes.
It shall be permissible for the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Florham
Park to enter into an agreement with the owner of any firedamaged
property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal
liens by installment payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the
redemption of tax liens by installment payments. if the Mayor and Council
are satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or
improve the fire-damaged property.
§ 145-4. Precedence of claims.
A claim of the Borough of Florham Park made in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 though 17:36-13 shall be
paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy,
except the claim to a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged property
where the fire insurance policy, at the time of the loss, listed the mortgagee
as a named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee to the
proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien under this Article, only
to the extent of the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the
mortgage contract.
§ 145-5. Applicability.
In addition to the standard provisions for fire insurance policies set forth in
state statute, every fire insurance policy issued on property located within
§ 145-1 INSURANCE § 145-5
145:209
the Borough of Florham Park shall be subject to the provisions of this
article.
§ 145-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 145-5
145:210
Chapter 146
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Hazardous or toxic substance
discharge — See Ch. 144.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 213.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 215.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 216.
Sewage disposal systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 278.
§ 146-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Florham Park,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 146-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Florham Park, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
§ 145-5 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS § 146-2
146:211
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Florham Park or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. NOTE: In municipalities with combined sewer systems, add
the following: "MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are
sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and
to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources."
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 146-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Florham Park any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 146-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 146-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 146-5
146:212
§ 146-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,500.
Chapter 150
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
§ 150-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Includes any adult person having care or custody
of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court
or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the
front or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other
place of business and public grounds, areas and parks, as well as parking
lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of
the person charged with violating this chapter or, in the case of a minor, not
owned or under the control of his parent or guardian. It shall also include
quasi-public places to which the public in general is invited.
§ 150-2. General restrictions.
A. No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
(1) Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace or
in any way contribute to such danger as it already exists.
(2) Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
(3) Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
(4) Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 150-1.
B. This section shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an
offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
§ 146-5 LOITERING § 150-2
150:213
§ 150-3. Order to leave.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 150-2, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.
§ 150-4. Minors.
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter.
§ 150-5. Violations and penalties.52
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
Chapter 152
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
§ 152-1. Compliance with New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
required. [Amended 7-19-2005 by Ord. No. 27-05]
The deign, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of
mechanical systems, including heating systems, ventilating systems, cooling
annoy or disturb the person to whom, or in whose hearing, they are
made.
A. Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a
violation of this section, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this
fact by the Chief of Police or any other person designated by him to give
such notice.
B. If, any time within 30 days following the giving of notice as provided in
Subsection A, the minor to whom such notice related again violates this
section, it shall be presumed. in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
that the minor did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent
or guardian.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 150-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 152-1
152:214
systems, steam and hot water heating systems, water heaters, process
piping, boilers and pressure vessels, appliances utilizing gas, liquid or
solid fuel, chimney and vents, mechanical refrigeration systems, fireplaces,
barbecues, incinerators, crematories and air pollution systems shall be
installed and maintained in compliance with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, which was adopted as part of the Borough Code
pursuant to Chapter 103 thereof, including all referenced codes and
standards relevant to their installation. This chapter shall be enforced
pursuant to the terms of Chapter 103.
Chapter 155
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 68.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
§ 155-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter shall have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gases on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including but not limited to apartments,
§ 152-1 NOISE § 155-1
155:215
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities, or a municipality with a Department-approved noise
control ordinance, and the employee has received noise enforcement
training and is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must
be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized
to issue a summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
OCTAVE BAND SOUND — Sound constant in level and character, measured
in decibels with a sound-level meter.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of
the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The NCO need not
determine the title, specific words or the artist performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either an imaginary line, including its vertical
extension that separates one piece of real property from another; the
vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multidwelling-
unit building; or on a multi-use property, the interface between
the two portions of the property on which different categories of activity
are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is
residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real property line
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 155-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 155-1
155:216
would be the interface between the residential area and the commercial
area).
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 155-2. Applicability.
§ 155-3. Declaration of findings and policy; applicability.
A. This Noise chapter applies to sound from the following property
categories:
(1) Industrial facilities.
(2) Commercial facilities.
(3) Public service facilities.
(4) Community service facilities.
(5) Residential properties.
(6) Multi-use properties.
(7) Public and private rights-of-way
(8) Public spaces.
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This Noise chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities.
(2) Public service facilities.
(3) Community service facilities.
(4) Residential properties.
(5) Multi-use properties.
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to public health, welfare,
safety and the quality of life, and whereas a substantial body of science
§ 155-1 NOISE § 155-3
155:217
§ 155-4. Noise control officer. (NCO)
§ 155-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially
abated, and whereas the people have a right to and should be ensured
of, an environment free from excessive sound, now, therefore, it is the
policy of the Borough of Florham Park to prevent excessive sound that
may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of the citizens or degrade
the quality of life.
B. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from
sources within the Borough of Florham Park.
A. A noise control officer is a person who meets the criteria set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.1 1, and completes a course given by the Department of
Environmental Sciences of Cook College, Rutgers, the State University
of New Jersey, or any other noise certification course which is offered
by an accredited university and approved by the Department. The
Health Officer is to be recognized as the noise control officer unless
specified otherwise by the Mayor and Council.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 155-5 of this chapter and with the definition of "real property line" as
contained herein.
C. A noise control officer shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Borough of Florham Park and cooperate with all other public
bodies and agencies to the extent practicable.
(2) Review the actions of the Borough of Florham Park and advise of
the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control.
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter.
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II, when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with § 155-7. (NOTE: Tables I and II are located at the end of this
chapter.)
(5) Cooperate with NCO's of adjacent municipalities in enforcing one
another's municipal noise ordinances.
§ 155-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 155-5
155:218
§ 155-6. Restricted uses and activities.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property as listed in § 155-2A above in
such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within
the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II, except as specified in Subsection B below. (NOTE: Tables I and II
are located at the end of this chapter.)
B. When measuring total sound or residential sound within a multi-use
property or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurement shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling-unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling
unit building. The allowable sound-level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.53
D. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound shall not equal or
exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., impulsive sound
which occurs less than four times in any hour shall not equal or exceed
80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats four or more times in any
hour shall be measured as impulsive sound and shall meet the
requirements shown in Table I.
A. Exceptions.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B below, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
(2) Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in
Subsection B below.
53.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-5 NOISE § 155-6
155:219
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
(1) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment.
(2) Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line, between the hours of of 6:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. on weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can
meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II.54 In addition, commercial
or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment.
(3) Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet
the limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used
in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities.
(4) Motorized snowblowers, snowthrowers, and lawn equipment with
attached snowplows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
The limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply at all times.
(5) An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. The limits
set forth in Tables I and II do not apply at all times.
54.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 155-6
155:220
§ 155-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 155-8. Severability and repealer.
(6) Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner
that it is plainly audible at a residential property line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(7) Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(8) Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly
audible by any person other than the operator.
(9) Sound levels exceeding the limits set forth in Table I and Table II
shall be prohibited between residential units within the same multidwelling
unit building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per
§ 155-5B and C.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:19-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in a
municipal court having jurisdiction to contest such action. (See also
Chapter 1, § 1-16, of Borough Code.)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action or legal remedy therefrom of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law or otherwise invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this
chapter shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 155-6 NOISE § 155-8
155:221
Chapter 159
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor fires — See Ch. 137.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 185.
Soil removal — See Ch. 203.
Sanitation (Board of Health) — See Ch. 265.
§ 159-1. General prohibition. [Amended 8-18-1981 by Ord. No.
16-81]
The presence upon lands within the Borough or the placing thereupon
of brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash, hole or abandoned excavations, unused or abandoned
machinery, machine appliances, equipment or parts or other debris of any
description is hereby declared to be dangerous and detrimental to the
public health, safety, general welfare and real property values within the
Borough and, therefore, is prohibited.
§ 159-2. Removal required. [Amended 8-18-1981 by Ord. No. 16-81]
The owner or tenant of lands lying within the Borough and the person or
persons otherwise responsible are hereby required to remove or cause to
be removed from such lands any of the aforementioned prohibited items or
conditions within 10 days after receipt by such owner, tenant or person of
written notice from the Borough Business Administrator or his designated
agent.
§ 159-3. Notice. [Amended 8-18-1981 by Ord. No. 16-81]
A. Notice to the owner or tenant to cause the removal of the substances
heretofore referred to in §§ 159-1 and 159-2 shall be given by the
Business Administrator or his designated agent and may be served
upon such owner or tenant either by handing the notice to the owner or
tenant or by leaving the notice at his usual place of abode with a person
over 14 years of age or by sending the notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address shown on the tax lists of the Borough
to which tax bills are sent. If service is made by certified mail, the tenday
period within which removal shall be accomplished shall be deemed
to have commenced to run from the date of the return receipt of such
certified mail acquired by the postal authority for delivery of such
notice.
B. Every such notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal as
aforesaid, advise the owner or tenant of the lands to which such notice
refers that failure to accomplish such removal within the time indicated
§ 155-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 159-3
159:222
§ 159-4. Removal by Borough; charges.
Whenever the owner or tenant of lands within the Borough, receiving the
heretofore provided for notice to remove from such lands the substances
heretofore indicated, shall fail or neglect, within the time prescribed in the
notice, to remove the substances, such removal shall be accomplished by or
under the direction of the Director of Public Works. An accurate record of
the cost of such removal to the Borough shall be determined by the Director
of Public Works, who shall certify the cost thereof to the Borough Council,
which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost
as shown thereon to be charged against the land. The amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and
become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 159-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-18-1981 by Ord. No.
16-8155]
Any person who does not comply with § 159-2 or who otherwise violates, on
private or public property, the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
Chapter 163
(RESERVED)
Chapter 166
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION LAND ACQUISITION
§ 166-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a minimum annual appropriation
for open space and recreation land acquisition and associated costs, i.e.,
legal, appraisal, survey and engineering, in order to provide a guaranteed
source of funds to match Green Acres funding.
therein will result in removal by or under the direction of the Business
Administrator or his designated agent; and the cost of such removal
shall be charged to the owner or tenant of such lands and shall be
payable to the Borough within 30 days of certification of charges to the
Borough Council. Unless such charges are paid within 30 days of the
certification, the charges shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands
and be collected as provided for by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14 and enforced by
the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 159-3 (RESERVED) § 166-2
163:223
§ 166-2. Line item appropriation.
A minimum amount of 0.005 on the tax rate shall be reflected as a line item
in the Borough's annual budgets.
§ 166-3. Duration.
The line item budget appropriation shall be maintained for a period of 10
years from the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 167
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCE
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Soil removal — See Ch. 203.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Borough of Florham Park, Morris County, New
Jersey, Public Works Improvement
Standards — See § 208-22A.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 235.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
§ 167-1. Specifications.
All parking lot specifications will be in accordance with the Public Works
Improvement Standards dated 5/75 et seq.
Chapter 171
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Recreation Commissioners — See
Ch. 50.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 72.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
§ 166-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 167-1
167:224
Part 1
Traffic And Conduct In Public Parks
ARTICLE I
Traffic in Public Parks
[Adopted 5-22-1973 as part of Ord. No. 12-73]
§ 171-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
area of the Borough owned or used by the Borough and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
VEHICLE — A motor-powered wheeled conveyance of any kind, exclusive of
vehicles in service of the Borough.
§ 171-2. Compliance with state law required.
No person in a park shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of
the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of
vehicles and with such regulations as are contained in this Code and other
ordinances.
§ 171-3. Police and park employees.
No person in a park shall fail to obey all traffic officers of the Borough Police
Department and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized
and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks
and on the highways, streets and roads immediately adjacent thereto in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 171-4. Traffic signs.
No person in a park shall fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating
speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for
proper control and to safeguard life and property.
§ 171-5. Speed limit.
No person in a park shall ride or drive at a rate of speed exceeding 20 miles
per hour, except upon such roads as the Chief of Police may designate, by
posted signs, for speedier travel.
§ 171-6. Restricted areas.
No person in a park shall drive any vehicle on any area except designated
roads or parking areas or such other areas as may be designated as
temporary parking areas by the Recreation Commission.
§ 171-1 PARKING LOTS § 171-7
167:225
§ 171-7. Parking.
No person in a park shall park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the
posted directions thereat or with the instructions of any attendant who may
be present.
§ 171-8. Enforcement.
§ 171-9. Establishment of regulations.
All regulations establishing speed, directions, stopping, parking and all
other traffic controls shall be established in such areas of the parks of the
Borough as are designated by resolution of the Borough Council.
A. The Police Department and any Borough employee authorized by the
Recreation Commission shall diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The Police Department and any authorized Borough employee shall
have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation
of this section.
§ 171-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 171-9
167:226
ARTICLE II
Conduct in Public Parks
[Adopted 7-16-1974 by Ord. No. 11-74]
§ 171-10. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PARK — Any reservation, playground, playing field or other land located
within the Borough, whether or not owned by the Borough, but open to the
public and used or devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 171-11. Prohibited acts.
No person on municipally owned property, in public parks or on other public
roadways and places related to the above shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or remove any
structures, buildings, signs, posts, fences, sidewalks, tables, benches,
sporting equipment, park property or parts or appurtenances thereof,
whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Dig, remove, damage or cut any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or
plants or in any way otherwise disturb the natural beauty or usefulness
of the area.
C. Throw, discharge, place or dump any substance or refuse or trash of any
kind anywhere on the grounds or in any waters in or contiguous thereto
but rather shall place such object in the proper receptacles where these
are provided.
D. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or
inscription whatever, without prior approval of the Borough Council.
E. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle
laws in regard to equipment and operation of all motor vehicles.
F. Bring or have in possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers or other fireworks or explosives of
flammable material or discharge them or throw them into any such area
from land or roadways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with any
other substance or compound, would be dangerous in any of the
preceding situations.
G. Be loud, boisterous or threatening, abusive or indecent, by deed or
language, be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to cause a breach
of the public peace.
§ 171-10 PARKING LOTS § 171-11
167:227
§ 171-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-16-1988 by Ord. No.
3-88]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
H. Bring or cause to be brought, sell or cause to be sold any alcoholic
beverage for consumption or for free distribution thereon or possess
any alcoholic beverage thereon otherwise than in its original sealed
container. Consumption and distribution may be temporarily allowed by
obtaining a permit approved by the Mayor and Council. Such permit
shall be issued subject to such rules and standards as from time to time
may be established by the Mayor and Council and only when they are
convinced that such activity will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, safety, welfare and
recreation.
I. Fail to comply with park rules and regulations or posted closings
related to ballfields, tennis courts, ice skating areas and any and all
other Borough recreational properties and facilities. [Added
7-21-1998 by Ord. No. 12-98]
§ 171-11 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 171-12
167:228
Part 2
[AdSoppteecdifi3c- 2R6u-l2e0s1 A5nBd yROegrdu.l aNtoio. n1s5-5]
§ 171-13 PARKING LOTS § 171-12
167:229

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 171-13. Definition of terms.
Whenever used in any Borough of Florham Park, Park Rules and
Regulations, the following respective terms, unless otherwise therein
expressly defined, shall mean and include each of the meanings herein
respectively set forth:
BOROUGH, CITY, TOWN, TOWNSHIP, OR VILLAGE — Respectively any
borough, city, town, township, or village within which any portion of said
park system is situated.
BOROUGH OF FLORHAM PARK OR PARKS, PARKWAYS, PARK AREAS,
RECREATION FACILITIES, OR ENVIRONMENTAL AREAS — All the real
property acquired by or under the jurisdiction and care of the Borough of
Florham Park; or which may be hereafter acquired by it or come under its
jurisdiction.
BRIDLE PATH OR EQUESTRIAN TRAIL — Any path maintained for persons
riding on horseback.
OFF ROAD VEHICLES — Any powered vehicle designed for cross-country
travel on or immediately over land, water, sand, snow, ice, marsh,
swampland, or other terrain that would include, but not be limited to, such
vehicles as all terrain vehicles, dirt bikes, snowmobiles, amphibious and air
cushion vehicles; except those vehicles utilized for fire, emergency, or law
enforcement purposes and any vehicle whose use is expressly authorized by
the Commission.
OFFICER — Any Police Officer of the Borough of Florham Park.
OFFICIAL OPENING — The time when gates, entrances, or doors to
facilities are opened to allow entrance to the public or signs indicating an
opening time are posted.
OWNER — Any person, firm, association, co-partnership, or corporation
owning, operating, or having the exclusive use of a vehicle, under a lease or
otherwise, for a period greater than 30 days.
PARKING PLACE — Any part of the drive or space designated as a place for
the standing of vehicles.
PERMIT — Any written license issued by or under the authority of the
Borough, permitting the performance of a specified act or acts.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, company, association, joint
stock association, firm, or co-partnership.
REGULATIONS — Any regulations duly adopted, posted, and published by
the Borough of Florham Park.
SUNSET — Official sunset time as per the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration web site for the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 171-13 PARKING LOTS § 171-13
167:231
SUNRISE — Official sunrise time as per the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration web site for the Borough of Florham Park.
THE BOROUGH — The Borough of Florham Park, the Mayor and Council or
their agents.
VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle or any vehicle propelled by muscular
power.
WALK — Any path maintained for pedestrians.
§ 171-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 171-13
167:232
ARTICLE II
Permits
§ 171-14. Permits.
A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may
be performed in strict accordance with terms and conditions thereof. Any
violation by its holder or his agents or employees of any terms or condition
thereof, shall constitute grounds for its revocation by the Borough, or by
its authorized representative, whose action therein shall be final. In case
of the revocation of any Borough permit, all monies paid for or on account
thereof shall, at the option of the Borough, be forfeited to and be retained
by it; and the holder of such permit, together with his agents and employees
who violated such terms and conditions, shall be jointly and severely liable
to the Borough for all damages and loss suffered by it in excess of the
money so forfeited and retained; but neither such forfeiture and retention
by the Borough of the whole or any part of such monies, nor the recovery
or collection thereby of such damages, or both, shall in any manner relieve
such person or persons from liability to punishment for any violation of any
provision of any Borough Park Rule or Regulation. These Regulations shall
be deemed a part of each permit issued.
§ 171-15. Groups.
No group of 15 or more persons shall use a Borough park or recreation area
for a picnic or outing without first having obtained a permit in advance from
the Borough. Adult supervision of children's groups requiring a permit is
required at all times.
No person shall call or hold any public meeting or give any concert or
entertainment of any kind or erect any structure, stand, tent, or platform,
utilize any loudspeaker, public address system, or amplifier except by the
specific written authority of the Borough, as authorized by permit. In
addition, any athletic event or organized game to be played or conducted on
Borough facilities shall require a permit issued by the Borough noting the
date, hour, and duration. No other organized group or persons other than
the one holding the permit shall use such facilities during the time overed
by the specific authority of the Borough. All permits that are granted must
be produced upon demand.
§ 171-14 PARKING LOTS § 171-15
167:233

ARTICLE III
Prohibited Acts
§ 171-16. Advertising.
No person shall advertise within the Borough park system without the
written authorization from the Borough.
§ 171-17. Solicitation.
No person, business, group, or organization shall solicit for business, alms,
contributions, or for any purpose without written authorization of the
Borough.
§ 171-18. Public demonstrating.
Carrying signs, handing out flyers, picketing or demonstrating on Borough
park property is prohibited without a permit and shall only be conducted in
areas that do not impede the normal operating functions of the public and
the Borough.
§ 171-19. Animals.
§ 171-20. Explosives.
No person shall possess or use any explosives, fireworks or other explosive
pyrotechnics in a Borough park without the written authorization of the
Borough.
§ 171-21. Poisons.
No person shall bring into, or have in, said parks any poison or poisonous
substance, without the written authorization of the Borough.
A. No person without a permit shall cause or permit any animal owned by
him, in his custody or under his control, except a dog in a permitted
area when restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, or
those animals permitted by state statute, to go or be in any park area,
and each such animal so found at large may be seized and handled as
provided by the law or ordinance covering stray animals on highways or
public property then in effect at the place where such stray animal may
be seen.
B. Any person having control, or person that should have control, over an
animal or animals within the Borough park properties shall dispose of
any feces left by the animal(s). Any and all feces shall be removed by
said person whether feces is located a publicly maintained area or close
enough to a publicly maintained area as to cause public annoyance.
Such feces is required to be disposed of in a proper, sanitary manner by
the person having control or person who should be in control of the
animal(s).
§ 171-16 PARKING LOTS § 171-22
167:235
§ 171-22. Fires.
No person shall build, light, or maintain any fire or discard any burning
materials in said parks. Personal charcoal or propane gas grills are not
permitted without a permit.
§ 171-23. Hours of operation.
No person shall be permitted within the Borough's parks, recreation
facilities, or environmental areas after sunset and before sunrise except in
designated areas or as authorized by a specific Borough park permit, or
enter the Borough's parks before its official opening.
§ 171-24. Merchandise sale prohibited.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise or any
other thing, whether corporeal or incorporeal, except pursuant to a permit
issued by the Borough. Charter sports clubs of the Borough are permitted
to conduct their normal fundraising efforts in accordance with their field
permits, these Park rules and regulations, and any other relevant Borough
requirements such as Board of Health matters.
§ 171-25. Alcohol.
§ 171-26. Possession of weapons.
No person shall possess any weapons as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1 unless
a permit to do so within the park has been issued by the Borough. Nothing
in this section shall apply to law enforcement officers possessing their
weapons during the course of normal business.
§ 171-27. Discharge of weapons.
No person shall discharge a weapon within the Borough's parks without the
written authorization of the Borough. The term "weapon" shall include, but
not be limited to, firearms, paint guns, toy cannons, bows, and arrows, air
A. Alcoholic beverages. No person shall possess any unsealed alcoholic
beverage container anywhere within the Borough's parks. No person
shall consume alcoholic beverage within the Borough's parks, unless
granted a special permit as explained below.
B. Special permit. Not withstanding the provisions contained in
Subsection A above of these regulations, a special permit may be issued
by the Borough, or its duly authorized representatives, for the
consumption of alcoholic beverages, which permit shall include terms
and conditions as established by the Borough and shall specify the
duration of said permit. For the purposes of this section, the term
"unsealed" shall mean a container with its original seal broken or a
container such as a glass or a cup.
§ 171-22 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 171-27
167:236
guns, and sling shots. Nothing in this section shall apply to law enforcement
officers discharging their weapons during the course of normal business.
§ 171-28. Urinating and defecating.
No person shall urinate or defecate in a Borough park except in facilities
provided for such use.
§ 171-29. Changing/disrobing in unauthorized areas.
No person shall change in or out of any clothing or bathing attire except in
areas designated or customarily provided for such use.
§ 171-30. Indecent behavior.
No person while in a Borough park shall engage in the act of sexual
intercourse or other sexual, indecent or lewd act, or appear in a state of
nudity.
§ 171-31. Improper conduct.
No person shall engage in any course of conduct which disrupts, interferes
with, is unduly annoying or prevents or obstructs the lawful use or
enjoyment of a Borough park by another.
§ 171-32. Spitting.
No person shall spit within the Borough Park System except into sinks,
containers, or materials customarily provided for such purposes, and any
such spitting that is allowed shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
§ 171-33. Tobacco.
No person shall smoke cigarettes, cigars, or use other tobacco products on
or within Borough parks.
§ 171-34. Camping.
No person shall erect or maintain a tent or shelter and/or camp in any area
except by permit only.
§ 171-35. Restricted areas.
No person shall enter a Borough park facility, lands or portions thereof
that have been designated or posted as "Closed," "Park Closed," "No
Trespassing," "Restricted Area," "Keep Out" or any other verbal or posted
warning or physical barrier.
§ 171-27 PARKING LOTS § 171-35
167:237

ARTICLE IV
Regulated Acts
§ 171-36. Aviation.
No person, except in an emergency, shall launch, land, or operate any
aviation apparatus within the Borough's parks without the written
authorization of the Borough.
§ 171-37. Bathing.
No person shall bathe, wade, or swim in any park waters except at such
times and in such places as the Borough may designate.
§ 171-38. Boating.
No person shall use or operate a boat, kayak, canoe, inflated float, raft,
or other watercraft in any park waters without a permit. Where boating is
provided, life preservers must be worn at all times while in the boat, and
the occupants shall remain seated.
§ 171-39. Skating, skiing, and sledding.
No person shall coast, tube, snowboard, sled or ski except at places
designated by the Borough. No person shall use in-line skates, roller skates,
or skateboards except at places and times designated by the Borough and
use of these items is prohibited in all parking areas. No person shall ice
skate or go upon the ice except at such times and upon such places as
designated by the Borough.
§ 171-40. Models.
No person shall engage in the use of gas- or battery-operated model aviation
devices, model motor vehicles, boats, blimps, or balloons whether radiocontrolled
or not, except at areas designated by the Borough or as
authorized by a specific permit.
§ 171-41. Horses.
No person shall use, ride, or drive a horse except at such times and only in
paths and areas designated by the Borough.
§ 171-42. Metal detectors.
No person shall use a metal detector or similar device and/or dig into the
surface of Borough property without a permit.
§ 171-36 PARKING LOTS § 171-43
167:239
§ 171-43. Rock and wall climbing.
No person shall engage in spelunking, rapelling, scaling of cliffs, walls, and/
or rock faces or any type of mountain or wall climbing on Borough property
without a permit.
§ 171-44. Obeying officers.
Florham Park Police Officers are fully empowered police officers of the
state of New Jersey and are authorized to carry out that responsibility in
accordance with all applicable statutes and rules and regulations and their
directives are to be obeyed at all times.
§ 171-45. Regulation of activities.
All permissible activities may not be listed and the Borough may restrict or
approve any activity not specifically regulated.
§ 171-43 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 171-45
167:240
ARTICLE V
Vehicles
§ 171-46. Motor Vehicle Act and traffic laws.
All the provisions of the New Jersey State Motor Vehicle Act56 and traffic
laws shall apply in the parks and shall be strictly enforced with also such
further restrictions as may be hereinafter stated.
§ 171-47. Vehicles where prohibited.
No person shall ride or drive any type of vehicle within or upon a walk, trail
or any part of the park not designated or customarily used for such purpose
except or unless authorized by a specific permit issued by the Borough.
§ 171-48. Parking.
No owner or driver shall park any vehicle anywhere outside of designated
parking spaces, or leave the vehicle parked anywhere on Borough property
after sunset or before sunrise except at such times and in such places as the
Borough may designate. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil or gas fills, any grass area, fire zone, emergency zone, no parking zone,
or pedestrian walkways, or left after sunset, before sunrise, or present in
any way a safety or traffic hazard, may be removed by towing. The cost of
towing and storage shall be borne by the owner and shall be paid before
regaining possession of the vehicle. Borough parking areas are provided
specifically for the use of Borough visitors. Use of a Borough parking area
for non-park usage shall be by permit only. When appropriate conditions
exist, the Florham Park Police reserve the right to declare "Emergency No
Parking" areas within the Borough parks and duly post those areas with
appropriate signage so as to prohibit parking.
§ 171-49. Off-Road Vehicles.
No person shall drive or operate any off-road vehicle, all-terrain vehicle,
or snowmobile anywhere within the Borough parks except at such times
and places as may be designated by the Borough and/or as authorized by a
specific permit.
§ 171-50. Restricted traffic.
When a road, drive, or parkway shall be restricted as to traffic or closed and
duly marked by signs, road markings, or barricades, it shall be a violation
of this chapter to fail to observe and obey such signs, road markings, or
barricades.
56.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 171-46 PARKING LOTS § 171-50
167:241

ARTICLE VI
Protection of Property
§ 171-51. Damage to property.
No person without a permit shall damage, deface, remove, install, or tamper
with any property or natural features within the Borough's parks.
§ 171-51 PARKING LOTS § 171-51
167:243

ARTICLE VII
Wildlife
§ 171-52. Wildlife.
§ 171-53. Releasing animals.
No person shall release or abandon any dog, cat, fish, fowl or any other
animal, wild or domestic, in a Borough park without a permit.
A. No person without a permit shall kill, wound, harass, trap, hunt,
remove, or have in his/her possession any animal, reptile, bird, or nest
to remove the eggs of young of any of the above.
B. No person shall fish in any of the Borough parks' waters, unless in
possession of the required New Jersey fishing license, except in those
cases or on those occasions where the New Jersey Division of Fish and
Wildlife does not require a fishing license.
C. No person shall feed any animal or waterfowl any food or other
substance except such food or substance expressly permitted by the
Borough.
D. No person shall hunt on any Borough land, excepting those persons
who have been issued a permit by the Borough to do so.
§ 171-52 PARKING LOTS § 171-53
167:245

ARTICLE VIII
Pollution and Refuse
§ 171-54. Pollution of waters.
No person shall, within or without said parks, discharge into the waters of
the Borough or any tributary river, brook, stream, storm sewer, or drain
flowing into said waters any substance that may result in the pollution of
said waters.
§ 171-55. Littering.
No person shall throw, deposit, or leave litter or recyclable material within
the Borough's parks except in designated receptacles provided therefore.
The designated areas may be intended for disposing of personal
consumption amounts of trash. See § 171-56, Dumping, below. Overall,
visitors to the parks are encouraged to follow the motto: "if you carry it in,
you must carry it out."
§ 171-56. Dumping.
No person or company shall dump any material anywhere within or the
Borough's parks without the written authorization of the Borough. This is to
include depositing in any dumpster, waste station, garbage can, or recycling
can any waste that is generated outside of the Borough's parks.
§ 171-54 PARKING LOTS § 171-56
167:247

ARTICLE IX
Repealer
§ 171-57. Repealer.
All regulations or parts thereof and all amendments thereto, heretofore
adopted inconsistent with these amendments are hereby repealed. The
foregoing repeal shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed,
right accruing or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred prior to the time these regulations take effect; but the same may
be enjoined, asserted, enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted as fully and to
the same extent as if these amendments to the regulations have not been
adopted.
§ 171-57 PARKING LOTS § 171-57
167:249

ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 171-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions herein shall, upon conviction
thereof, before a Magistrate or Judge having jurisdiction, pay a penalty as
provided by statute, at the discretion of the Magistrate or Judge. In addition
to any penalties provided thereof, restitution for the cost of labor can be
ordered by the Judge or Magistrate.
§ 171-58 PARKING LOTS § 171-58
167:251

ARTICLE XI
Validity
§ 171-59. Severability.
These Regulations shall take effect after final adoption, and publication
according to the law. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or
regulations thereof shall be adjudged invalid, the remainder of the
regulations shall not thereby be invalidated but shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 171-59 PARKING LOTS § 171-59
167:253

ARTICLE XII
Site-Specific Rules and Regulations
§ 171-60. Specific regulations.
§ 171-61. Section A.
A. In addition to these general park rules and regulations described in
Articles I through XI, Article XII provides for specific rules and
regulations that have been duly adopted and are fully enforceable on a
location and facility basis as detailed in Article XII, Sections A and B.
B. No person shall fail to comply with any site-specific rules that have been
adopted and promulgated by the Borough.
C. No person shall fail to comply with any temporary restrictions that have
been approved by the Borough or its designee to which adequate notice
to the public has been given.
D. Any person who fails to comply with either a site-specific rule or
temporary restriction may be directed to leave the Park System and
may be subject to further penalties as determined by the Borough or
statutes.
E. Sections A and B.
Section Specific Site
A Elm Street Recreation Center -
Turf Field
B Elm Street Recreation Center -
Dog Park
A. The artificial turf field is to be used for the intended sports purposes
only: soccer, football, cheerleading and lacrosse. For the Fall 2014
sports season, this is limited to organized, supervised club and
Recreational Department sports with proper permits and will not be
open to casual, unstructured, unsupervised use or those not obtaining a
permit through the Recreation Department. The entire site may be
closed to vehicle access when not in use.
B. A usage permit must be obtained by the Recreation Department before
an organized sport/activity can take place. As part of the permitting
process through the Recreation Department, club sports must agree to
adhere to and provide opposing teams with a copy of this "Usage
Policies for Artificial Turf Field" document and the attached "FieldTurf
Maintenance and Sample Warranty."57 In addition, each club and
recreational sport must identify a Field Marshal to be present at every
game, practice, or event held at the Artificial Turf Field. The Field
Marshal will be the designated representative for the club or
57.Editor's Note: Said document is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 171-60 PARKING LOTS § 171-61
167:255
recreational sport who will be held responsible for adherence to the
Field Usage Policy, the FieldTurf Maintenance and Sample Warranty,
and, as stated above, will be responsible for keeping all players and
spectators off the grass areas during the Fall 2014 season.
C. If the artificial turf field is deemed closed by the Department of Public
Works, the closure will be communicated to sports club leaders by the
Recreation Department. Please do not hold activities. Field lights will
not be turned on. If a practice or game is canceled by the club or
recreational sport, contact information will be provided to the club or
sport at the time of permitting so that artificial turf lights can be turned
off when not in use.
D. If a sports club or organization has a permit for field use, it has priority
to the field before any other groups or pick-up games.
E. The following footwear is acceptable within the artificial turf field
boundary: sneakers, sandals, flip-flops, boots (without spike heels), and
non-metal cleats. Metal cleats are prohibited.
F. Spectators are to remain outside the enclosed fenced-in area at all
times.
G. The following items are representative of the items prohibited inside
the artificial turf field boundary and include: food; liquids other than
water; lawn chairs of any kind; collapsible tents; gasoline; chewing
gum; sunflower seeds; tobacco products; alcohol; matches; lighters;
glass; fireworks; driving stakes; golf tees; dogs; animal waste; tape;
javelins; golf clubs; umbrellas; heating and cooking equipment; and any
sharp objects that can cause damage to the artificial turf field, players,
coaches, spectators, and ground crews. The artificial turf field
boundary should be kept free of debris, leaves, paper, bodily fluids, and
windblown material.
H. While only water is permissible on the artificial turf field, if liquids/
bodily fluids other than water are accidentally spilled on the artificial
turf field, the area should be cleaned with water as soon as possible to
avoid bugs being attracted to the area or apparel being stained.
I. Mud and dirt should be cleaned from cleats before and after using the
artificial turf field.
J. Training devices, such as sleds and tackling dummies, are NOT allowed
within the artificial turf field boundary.
K. Coaches and players should not attempt to do the following to the
artificial turf field or the infill: clean, drag, sweep, groom, aerate, paint,
top dress, bleach, blow leaves, remove animal waste, or remove snow or
water.
L. No driving, biking, sledding, roller blading, roller skating, golfing, or
skateboarding within the artificial turf field boundary.
§ 171-61 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 171-61
167:256
M. No disposing of ice chest or water coolers onto the artificial turf field.
N. Open flames of any kind are prohibited.
O. Any equipment used on the field must be lifted and carried for
placement. Do not drag. Protect the turf surface from sharp or pointed
edges of objects or equipment placed on the field. When goals or other
equipment are moved, they should be carried or moved on wheels.
Dragging game or practice goals damages the turf surface.
P. Do not bring portable benches, goals, tents, canopies, etc., onto the
artificial turf field. Do not stake anything into the ground on the
artificial turf field. Only approved goals and field equipment may be
used.
Q. Spitting on the artificial turf field is prohibited.
R. Both home and visiting teams are responsible for leaving the artificial
turf field as clean as it was found. When teams are done, participants
must remove anything left by players, coaches, officials, or spectators,
such as trash, athletic tape, athletic equipment, apparel, bottles, mouth
guards, etc.
S. Please notify Florham Park Police Department and Recreation
Department immediately if damage, burns, singe marks, nonpermitted
painting, vandalism, graffiti, or bodily fluids are discovered on the
artificial turf field.
T. If you hear or see lightning or thunder, or if the warning siren blows,
immediately suspend your activities. Instruct everyone to go to a safe
place, such as a sturdy building or car. Do not resume your activity until
30 minutes after thunder or lightning was last seen or heard.
U. Children should be supervised by adults at all times.
V. According to Ordinance No. 12-1,58 leashed dogs may be brought onto
Florham Park playing fields and open recreational areas. Owners must
curb, control, and clean up after their dogs. Dogs may not run at large.
However, dogs are prohibited within the gated boundaries of the
artificial turf field.
W. Please note that according to Ordinance No. 11-74, alcohol may not be
consumed or distributed on Florham Park playing fields or open
recreational areas.
X. The Field Goals on both the Artificial Turf Field and adjacent Multipurpose
Grass Field are to be used for their intended purpose only:
kicking field goals through them. Any other purpose or use, such as
climbing, using for exercise pull-ups, attaching ropes, etc., is strictly
prohibited. The same applies to any/all backstops, fencing, netting,
scoreboards, lighting towers, and the press box/elevated bleachers at
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Dogs.
§ 171-61 PARKING LOTS § 171-61
167:257
§ 171-62. Section B.
The following is a summary of the site-specific rules and regulations
enforceable under Article XII, Section B for the Elm Street Recreation
Center - Off Leash Area.
the entire Emmett Field Park complex [NOTE: Edit made August 18,
2014, following additional input from Borough Staff].
Y. The above policies may be changed at any time.
A. Hours of operation: 9:00 a.m. to sunset.
B. Maximum of three dogs per adult.
C. Current license tag must be visible on dog collar.
D. Dogs are allowed off-leash in fenced-in area only. All regulations
regarding dogs in a county park apply outside the leash area.
E. Adults must maintain control over their dog(s) at all times and must
immediately remove threatening or aggressive dogs. No mounting
allowed.
F. Dogs must not be left unattended.
G. Fill holes and stop dog from digging.
H. Dog feces must be picked up and disposed of in appropriate container.
I. Children under 12 not permitted. Children between 12 and 17 must be
under adult supervision at all times.
J. No food for dogs or people in off-leash area.
K. Only one dog in entry gate at one time. (Keep gate closed at all times)
L. No dogs under six months old allowed in off-leash area.
M. No dogs in heat allowed in off-leash area.
N. No bicycles allowed inside off-leash area.
O. All bites to people or dogs must be reported to the Florham Park Police
Department at 973-822-2200.
P. All Borough park rules and regulations, as posted in directories, as well
as municipal ordinances shall apply.
§ 171-61 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 171-62
167:258
Chapter 175
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 72.
Firearms — See Ch. 122.
Loitering — See Ch. 150.
Noies — See Ch. 155.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
§ 175-1. Possession of burglary tools and weapons.
No person shall conduct himself in or about the Borough having concealed
upon him any picklock, key, crow, jack, bit or other implement with an
intent to break or enter into any building or shall have upon him any pistol,
hanger, cutlass, bludgeon or other offensive or dangerous weapon, nor shall
any person be apprehended having upon him, whether concealed or not,
any of the foregoing articles or things with the intent of committing any
unlawful act, nor shall any person be found in or near any dwelling, house,
warehouse, stable, barn, coachhouse, garage, smokehouse or any place of
public resort or assemblage for business, worship or amusement or other
lawful purpose with the intent to steal any goods or chattels, provided that
this section shall not apply to law officers and other persons duly authorized
under certain statutes of this state to carry proper weapons of defense.
Possession of any of the foregoing articles on a public thoroughfare shall be
prima facie evidence of such intent. (NOTE: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:5-5.)
§ 175-2. Disorderly conduct.
No person, whether owner, tenant, occupant or guest, shall suffer or take
part in any drunken, riotous or other disorderly conduct that shall endanger
or cause disturbance or annoyance to the comfort, repose, peace or safety
of any other inhabitants of this Borough. (NOTE: See also 2C:33-2.)
§ 175-3. Disorderly houses; houses of ill fame.
No person shall maintain or cause or permit to be maintained a disorderly
house or house of ill fame in any building or structure or on any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him; nor shall any person permit any
building or other structure or any premises owned or occupied or controlled
by him to be frequented or used by unreasonably noisy, riotous or disorderly
persons or by prostitutes or other persons violating the law. See also
Borough Code § 250-27Q. (NOTE: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12, 2C:34-1 and
2C:37-3.)
§ 175-4. (Reserved)59
59.Editor’s Note: Former § 175-4, Drunkenness, was repealed 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21.
§ 171-62 PARKING LOTS § 175-5
167:259
§ 175-5. Fighting; disturbing the peace.
No person shall willfully make or cause to be made or continue any
disturbance which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the Borough; nor
shall any person willfully engage in any fight, assault, brawl, battery or
altercation; nor shall any person participate in or incite by overt act any
disturbance or riot or any unruly, boisterous, unreasonably noisy, unlawful
or disorderly assemblage constituting a breach or disturbance of the peace.
(NOTE: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.)
§ 175-6. Throwing objects.
No person shall place or throw or suffer or permit the depositing of any
stone, sticks, glass, snow or ice or any hard, dangerous or offensive
substance upon any street, avenue, road, highway or other public
thoroughfare; nor shall any person throw any such object or substance at,
upon or against any person, vehicle of transportation, building or other
structure.
§ 175-7. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by
underage persons.
No person who is under the legal age for consuming alcoholic beverages
shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages on private property within the
Borough under circumstances where that person's parent or guardian is not
present.(NOTE: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:33-17.)
§ 175-8. Indecent exposure; indecent acts.
No person shall intentionally appear on any street, avenue, road, highway or
other public place in a state of nudity or make any indecent exposure of his
person or commit or cause to be committed or participate in the commission
of any lewd or indecent act or behavior. See also Borough Code § 250-27Q.
(NOTE: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:14-4.)
§ 175-9. Soliciting lewd acts.
No person shall, by word, act, sign or other device, invite, solicit or aid
or abet in inviting or soliciting unlawful sexual intercourse or any other
unlawful, lewd, indecent or lascivious act in any public place or in any place
or manner which could be observed by other inhabitants of this Borough
from outside the property upon which such activity is conducted. (NOTE:
See also N.J.S.A. 2C:14-4.)
§ 175-10. Obscene graffiti.
No person shall write or cause to be written any lewd, indecent or obscene
word or mark whatsoever or draw or cause to be drawn any lewd, indecent
or obscene figure upon any house, building, wall, fence or other place in the
Borough.
§ 175-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 175-11
167:260
§ 175-11. Interference with persons or vehicles.
No person shall willfully obstruct, molest, hinder, annoy, frighten, threaten,
insult or interfere with any other person lawfully upon any public
thoroughfare or in any public place or in any automobile, bus or other public
or private conveyance lawfully upon any public thoroughfare. (NOTE: See
also N.J.S.A. 2C:33-7.)
§ 175-12. Interference with municipal agencies and officers.
No person shall interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct the proceedings,
functions or deliberations of the Mayor and Council, the Board of Health
or any other official body of the Borough; nor shall any person molest,
obstruct, hinder or interfere with any Borough officer or official engaged
in the performance of his duty or knowingly resist or oppose any person
authorized by law to make arrests or to serve any writ, bill, order or process
when the person so authorized is acting in the performance of his duty.
(NOTE: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:29-1.)
§ 175-13. Destruction of property.
No person shall maliciously deface, destroy, damage or injure property of
another. (NOTE: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:17-3.)
§ 175-14. Intentional operation of motor vehicles on unpaved
surfaces and lawns of municipal and school property.
No person shall intentionally operate a motor vehicle on any unpaved
surfaces or lawns located upon any municipal or public school property
within the Borough.
§ 175-15. Disturbing schools.
No person shall disturb the exercises of any school or molest or give
annoyance to children attending such school or any teacher therein.
§ 175-16. Destruction or removal of official signs and markings;
violation of highway rules.
No person shall:
§ 175-17. Obstruction of or interference with the use of handicap
parking or fire zones.
A. Mutilate or remove any notice or damage, destroy or remove any
warning sign or signal or remove any barricade placed or posted on any
highway in connection with or relating to the closing of any road.
B. Drive any vehicle over or upon the closed portion of any highway.
C. Violate any rule or regulation for the use of any highway.
§ 175-11 PARKING LOTS § 175-17
167:261
Chapter 176
PUBLIC UTILITY POLES AND FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
§ 176-0. Applicability. [Added 6-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12]
References in this chapter to “telephone or other telecommunications
services” shall not be applicable to wireless telecommunications antennas.
§ 176-1. Notification.
A. No person shall obstruct or otherwise interfere with the appropriate
use of handicap parking areas or fire zones. This includes, though is not
limited to, the placing or maintaining of any blockage, barriers or
physical obstructions in said areas or the placing of or failure to remove
ice or snow in these areas thus interfering with their designated use.
The violation includes not only the person creating the impediment or
interference but also the property owner or tenant who suffers the
interference or impediment to the use to continue.
B. In addition to the penalties provided in § 1-16 of Chapter 1 of the Code,
any violator of this section shall be liable for any costs incurred by the
Borough in removing or abating the interference or impediment.
A. Before a public utility places, replaces or removes a pole or
underground facility located on or below a public right-of-way, which
pole or underground facility is used for the supplying and distribution of
electricity for light, heat or power, natural gas or other petroleum
product, water, or telephone or other telecommunications service
located in the municipality, the public utility shall notify the Borough
Engineer's office, either in writing and/or telephonically, not less than
24 hours before undertaking any excavation related to the placement,
replacement or removal of the utility pole or underground facility. This
section will only apply when the placement, replacement or removal of
the utility pole involves excavation of the public right-of-way.
B. The twenty-four-hour prior notice requirement of this chapter will not
apply when the placement, replacement or removal of the utility pole or
underground facility must be completed on an emergency basis in less
than 24 hours to protect the public from imminent threat of bodily
injury, death, or property damage. In the event the placement,
replacement or removal of the utility pole or underground facility must
be completed on an emergency basis, the public utility shall notify the
Borough Engineer's office, either in writing and/or telephonically, as
soon as reasonably possible, but in no event shall such notice be more
§ 175-17 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 176-1
167:262
§ 176-2. Removal and restoration.
After completing the work specified in § 176-1 of this chapter, the public
utility shall remove from such right-of-way any pole no longer in use as
well as any other debris created by the work specified in § 176-1. The
public utility shall make all reasonable efforts to comply with § 176-2 of this
chapter if responding to an emergency condition.
§ 176-3. Underground utility installation. [Added 12-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-23]
than 24 hours after undertaking any excavation related to the
placement, replacement or removal of the utility pole or underground
facility.
C. For the purposes of this section, "underground facility" shall mean one
or more underground pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures
used for the supplying and distribution of electricity for light, heat or
power, natural gas or other petroleum product, water, or telephone or
other telecommunications service.
A. To the fullest extent possible, all new or rerouted electrical, telephone,
cable and/or similar building service utilities shall be installed
underground from a utility pole within the public right-of-way located
on the same side of street onto the property in question and to the
building it will service. All work shall comply with the Borough Code
and the appropriate codes, utility company standards and specifications
adopted and in effect at the time of their installation. It is also the
Borough’s desire to limit the number of underground conduits serving
the property in question. Therefore, every effort shall be made by the
owner or his agent to coordinate the installation of multiple
underground utilities, such as electrical, telephone, cable and/or
similar systems, by utilizing one utility pole servicing the property in
question and by combining certain utilities into one conduit as
permitted by applicable codes and utility company standards. Upon
completion of the underground utility installation, as-built plans, in
scale and in a manner acceptable to the Borough, indicating the
location of the utilities shall be submitted to the Borough for inclusion
with the appropriate permitting file.
B. It shall be the owner’s, applicant’s and/or agent’s responsibility to
coordinate the installation with the appropriate utility as well as
securing any easements, if necessary, for the timely installation. It shall
be the responsibility of the owner to obtain and pay for any permits
necessary for the proper installation of the work in question. In
addition, it shall be the owner’s responsibility to ensure that the
required inspections are conducted to ensure compliance with the
appropriate codes, standards and specifications.
§ 176-1 PARKING LOTS § 176-4
167:263
§ 176-4. Underground utility installation appeals. [Added
12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
§ 176-5. Temporary or emergency installations. [Added 12-17-2015
by Ord. No. 15-23]
A. All applications for the installation of new electrical, telephone, cable
and similar building utility services shall, to the fullest extent possible,
comply with these requirements. Where the proposed installation is
technically infeasible, or creates “undue hardship,” or is not practical
due to such conditions as, but not limited to: potential flood hazard,
unstable or expansive soils, etc., an owner, applicant and/or agent may
appeal the requirement to the appropriate authority having jurisdiction.
Notwithstanding the requirements contained mandating the
underground installation of new electrical, telephone, cable and similar
services, an owner, applicant and/or agent aggrieved by these
requirements may make an initial appeal to the Borough Engineer,
Borough Construction Official and/or the Director of Community
Services for relief. After consultation and review, their recommendation
shall be made to the Borough Administrator, who shall make a final
determination as to whether relief from the requirements of a
mandatory underground installation is warranted.
B. After careful review, should a request for relief be denied by the
Borough Administrator, the owner, applicant and/or agent may request
relief by filing for a variance under the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
A. Where, in the opinion of the Construction Official, after consultation
with the Borough Engineer and the Director of Community Services,
the installation of an emergency, temporary, aboveground electrical,
telephone, cable and/or similar building utility services is/are
warranted, approval shall be given for the installation of such services
on a temporary basis commensurate with the time necessary for the
prompt repair and/or installation of new or existing underground
services. In no case shall an emergency, temporary, aboveground
service be allowed to remain for more than 60 days. A permit shall be
required for the installation of any temporary, aboveground services.
B. The requirements for an underground service shall not apply in the
following cases:
(1) A temporary electrical service installed in connection with a validly
issued construction permit. The temporary electrical service shall
only be allowed during the time the construction permit is open and
valid.
(2) The scheduled repair, replacement or upgrade of an existing
aboveground service shall be permitted to remain and be restored
in the same location. Note: If the building service location is
changed, a new underground building service shall be required.
§ 176-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 176-5
167:264
§ 176-6. Exemptions. [Added 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
This chapter shall not apply to the following facilities:
Chapter 179
SOLICITATION, CANVASSING AND SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-16.
Garage sales — See Ch. 140.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
§ 179-1. Title; purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the "Solicitation Ordinance of the Borough
of Florham Park." Its purpose is to promote the welfare of the Borough
residents, to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and dishonest business
practices, and to protect residents, peddlers and solicitors during the
course of activities covered by the permit.
§ 179-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
(3) For emergency work, as per Subsection B(2) above, the
reattachment of an existing electrical building service damaged
due to downed wires or similar conditions shall be allowed to be
reattached and/or restored in the same location. Note: If the
service location is changed, a new underground service shall be
required.
A. Electric utility substations, pad-mounted transformers and switching
facilities not located on the public right-of-way where site screening is
or will be provided in accordance with an approved site plan;
B. Electric transmission systems (including poles and wires) of a voltage of
more than 35,000 volts, and facilities where the utility providing
electrical energy provides, at its own expense, an underground
streetlighting circuit including all conductors and conduit to a point on
the poles at least 20 feet above ground level to serve utility-owned
street and pedestrian lighting fixtures mounted on poles;
C. Ornamental streetlighting standards;
D. Telephone pedestals and other equivalent communication facilities;
E. Police and fire sirens, or any similar Borough equipment, including
traffic control equipment.
§ 176-5 PARKING LOTS § 179-2
167:265
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic,
political, religious, not-for-profit or charitable group or association.
Charitable organizations include but are not limited to the following
organizations: fire departments, first-aid squads and religious
organizations.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE — Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic, political, religious, or eleemosynary purpose.
DISTRIBUTE — The handing out, leaving, giving out or placing of any item,
printed matter or object at any place or location within the Borough.
MERCHANDISE — In either marketable or sample form, including but not
limited to magazines, periodicals, books, orders or contracts for services,
goods or products and advertisements, opinion surveys or polls in any form.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — Includes a peddler or solicitor who transports
prepared food, foodstuffs to be prepared or cooked prior to sale and/or
beverages for sale in the Borough by vehicle or pushcart, such food or
beverage to be sold to individual patrons while said vehicle is stopped or
parked. Mobile vendors of frozen products only, such as ice cream, frozen
ices or frozen confectionary products, are specifically excluded from the
definition of "mobile food vendor."
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on
the streets and roads or from house to house carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling and
delivering them to customers. The word "peddler" shall include the words
"hawker," "huckster" and "vendor."
PERSON — Includes any natural person, proprietorship, corporation,
partnership, group, association and organizations.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Any person who goes from place to place
by traveling on the streets and roads or from house to house taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for
services to be furnished or performed in the future, including orders for
improvements to real property, whether or not such person has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the object to be sold and whether or not he
is collecting advance payments on such sales. The word "solicitor" shall
include the word "canvasser," provided that this definition shall not include
wholesalesmen calling on retail merchants. It also is deemed to be one
who is not in the business of selling goods, but one who makes surveys for
research purposes, analysis, opinion polls, rating data and any such similar
work, which, by nature, involves a door-to-door or place-to-place activity,
and shall include persons going from door to door or place to place or being
in or on any public or quasi-public areas of the Borough for the purpose of
seeking contributions, donations or alms for any person or organization.
§ 179-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 179-3
167:266
§ 179-3. Solicitation and canvassing prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in activities as a solicitor or
canvasser or to sell or distribute in any public or quasi-public place or door
to door or place to place within the Borough, except as otherwise provided
for under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 179-4. Application for permit; charitable organizations;
limitations; fee.
A. Any person desiring to peddle, canvass, solicit or distribute in any
public or quasi-public place or to call door to door, soliciting
information or contributions or selling or causing to be sold or taking
orders for the present or future delivery of goods, services or
merchandise, shall first make application for a permit on forms
provided by the Borough and provide the following information to the
Borough Clerk:
(1) Name, address, social security number and state automobile
driver's license number.
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the employer,
company or organization represented.
(3) A brief statement of the nature of the business to be conducted or
the purpose or cause for which the solicitation, canvass, sale or
distribution is being made.
(4) The name, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers of the
organization or employers.
(5) Proof that the applicant is a duly authorized agent or employee of
the sponsoring entity.
(6) A written communication or resolution of the sponsoring entity
acknowledging the purpose for which this application is made.
(7) The date and times of the intended solicitation, canvass, sale or
distribution.
(8) A geographic plan or description of the solicitation area.
(9) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal
ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
(10) A list of any other municipalities in New Jersey in which the
applicant has previously canvassed, solicited or peddled and the
month(s) or year(s) in which that activity occurred. If more than
five municipalities are involved, then the applicant shall be
required to list only the five municipalities in which such activity
§ 179-3 PARKING LOTS § 179-4
167:267
was most recently conducted, providing the dates as requested
above.
(11) A description including the vehicle ID number and license plate
number for any vehicle to be used by the applicant or the
sponsoring entity for solicitation, canvassing, selling or distribution
activities in the Borough.
(12) The place where the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale is
manufactured or produced, the place where such merchandise is
located at the time such application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery.
(13) A photograph of the applicant taken 60 days immediately prior to
the date of the application, which photograph shall clearly show the
head and shoulders of the applicant and shall measure two inches
by two inches. In the alternative, the applicant may request the
Police Department to take such photographs and pay an additional
fee of $5.
(14) Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with
the information required by this § 179-4 supplied in detail as to
each partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached
individual statements containing all of the information required by
this section relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in
the licensed activity and shall be signed by said employee or agent.
B. Charitable organizations.
(1) Any charitable organization, as defined in § 179-2 above, desiring
to solicit, or have solicited in its name, contributions or financial
assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of
literature or merchandise within the Borough for a charitable
purpose shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
requiring the application for and obtaining of permits for such
activity. Any such charitable organization exempt from the
requirements of this chapter by this section shall nevertheless
provide to the Chief of Police prior to the commencement of its
solicitation activities the following information:
(a) The names, addresses, social security numbers and state
automobile driver's license numbers of all agents, employees
or representatives who are soliciting, canvassing, selling or
distributing within the Borough.
(b) The purpose or cause for which the solicitation, canvass, sale
or distribution is being made.
(c) The date and times of the intended solicitation, canvass, sale or
distribution.
(d) A geographic plan or description of the solicitation area.
§ 179-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 179-4
167:268
§ 179-5. Investigation of applicant; issuance of permits; badges.
(2) Nothing herein, however, should be construed to alter the exempt
status under this chapter of any such charitable organizations from
the requirements to obtain a permit.
C. Limitations.
(1) No more than a total of 10 yearly permits shall be issued, and no
more than one per person.
(2) No more than five yearly permits shall be issued to mobile food
vendors.
(3) Peddlers and solicitors who are already licensed by the Borough
shall have 10 days prior to the expiration date of the licenses to
renew the same at the required fee. This right to renew shall not be
assigned or transferred and shall be forfeited if not reviewed within
the ten-day period prior to expiration.
D. Permit fees shall be established annually by resolution of the Council.
A. Investigation of applicant.
(1) Upon receipt of an application submitted in accordance with
§ 179-4, the original shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who
shall cause to be made such investigation of the applicant's
background as deemed necessary for the protection of the public
welfare. As part of such investigation, the Chief of Police may
conduct a criminal history background check.
(2) If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his
reasons for the same and return the application to the Borough
Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is
disapproved.
(3) Any disapproval by the Chief of Police shall be based upon one or
more of the following findings with respect to the applicant:
(a) Conviction of a crime relating adversely to the occupation of
canvassing or soliciting. In such event, the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-1 shall be complied with and set forth in a
written explanation provided to the applicant based upon
consideration of the following factors or any other factors:
[1] The nature and duties of the business for which a license is
sought;
[2] The nature and seriousness of the crime;
[3] Circumstances under which the crime occurred;
§ 179-4 PARKING LOTS § 179-5
167:269
[4] The date of the crime;
[5] The age of the person when the crime was committed;
[6] Whether the crime was an isolated or repeated incident;
[7] Social conditions which may have contributed to the
crime; and
[8] Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or in the community, counseling or psychiatric
treatment received, acquisition of additional academic or
vocational schooling, successful participation in
correctional work-release programs, or the
recommendation of persons who have or have had the
applicant under their supervision.
(b) Prior violation of a peddling or solicitation ordinance.
(c) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(d) Record of breaches of soliciting contracts.
(e) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the permit.
(f) Concrete evidence of bad moral character.
(4) If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall endorse the approval on the application and return
the application to the Borough Clerk, who shall, upon payment of
the prescribed permit fee, execute and deliver to the applicant his
permit. The Clerk shall keep a record of all permits issued and all
complaints received, if any, concerning each permit.
B. The permit issued hereunder shall contain the signature of the issuing
officer and shall show:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and the sponsoring
company or association.
(2) The class of permit issued.
(3) The kind of merchandise or services to be sold or distributed
thereunder.
(4) The date of issue.
(5) The length of time the permit shall be operative.
(6) The license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in the peddling or soliciting activity licensed.
§ 179-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 179-5
167:270
§ 179-6. Exemptions.
Persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter are:
§ 179-7. Conditions of approval.
All persons who receive approval and a permit to solicit within the Borough
shall conform to the following conditions and regulations:
C. The Police Chief shall issue to each successful applicant at the time of
the delivery of his permit a badge which shall display a photograph of
the applicant and show the nature of the permit in letters and figures
easily discernible. Such badge must be worn constantly by the
successful applicant in such a manner as to be readily visible when
engaged in the activities herein. Upon issuance of said permit and
badge, the applicant shall pay to the Police Chief the sum of $5 as a
deposit for each badge, refundable to said applicant upon return to the
Police Chief. If the licensee fails to return the badge to the Police Chief
within 14 days after the expiration date indicated on the badge, the
licensee shall forfeit the deposit.
D. Permit fees shall be established annually by resolution of the Mayor and
Council.
A. Any person, not a canvasser, solicitor or peddler, engaged in the
delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or things in the regular course of
business to the premises of persons who had previously ordered the
same or were entitled to receiving the same by reason of an agreement
and/or purchase.
B. Any public utility or its employees, which public utility is subject to
regulations by the State Board of Public Utilities.
C. The agent of any governmental unit while in the discharge of its duties
or obligations, provided that such person shall display the identification
badge or card issued by his employer.
D. Any person honorably discharged from the military service of the
United States possessing a peddler's license in conformity with N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 through 45:24-10.
E. Candidates to national, state and local elective office and properly
identified representatives of authorized municipal, county or state
political parties.
F. Adults engaged in dropping off newspapers to carriers.
A. They shall wear the badge so as to be readily visible, and carry with
them at all times an original or copy of the permit issued by the Chief of
Police.
B. They shall solicit only in the approved area.
§ 179-5 PARKING LOTS § 179-7
167:271
C. They shall solicit only during the hours provided for on the permit. In no
event shall any such activity occur prior to 9:00 a.m. or subsequent to
9:00 p.m.
D. They shall wear day-glow/night-glow safety vests supplied by the Chief
of Police if the solicitation is to take place during dusk or after and/or
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.
E. After gaining entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, they
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
F. Upon going onto any premises in the Borough, they shall first examine
any notice, as described below, which may be attached to said property,
and be governed by the statement contained on any such notice by
immediately and peacefully departing from the premises. It is hereby
declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person
to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such a residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting
as herein defined in defiance of any notice, as defined below. Every
person desiring to secure the protection provided by this Subsection F
shall notify the Borough of his or her desire to be placed on the
nonsolicitation list maintained by the Borough Clerk and/or exhibit
upon or near the main entrance door to his or her residence a notice
indicating the words "no solicitors" or "no soliciting." The letters shall
be at least one inch in height, and the notice shall be at least three
inches by six inches in size.
G. Minor children may solicit only during daylight hours and must always
be in view of an accompanying adult over the age of 21 years of age.
Minor children may not enter the premises being solicited.
H. When parked on a time-regulated public street, a peddler or solicitor
must obey all existing parking ordinances.
I. Vehicles moved or parked on public streets in connection with a
peddler's or solicitor's operation must comply with all state and motor
vehicle laws.
J. No signs are to be erected or displayed without the approval of the
Zoning Code Official, except for signs on vehicles that stipulate prices
on food offered.
K. Mobile food vendors must provide for the disposal of recycling cans
and/or bottles. Mobile food vendors are not to use public receptacles for
garbage attributable to that peddler's operation.
L. Peddlers and solicitors are prohibited from serving drivers or
passengers of vehicles and are only allowed to serve pedestrian
customers.
§ 179-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 179-7
167:272
§ 179-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the terms of this chapter, whether as an individual,
principal or agent, employer or employee of another, shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
§ 179-9. Records.
The Police Chief shall maintain a record of all permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter and shall record therein all convictions for
violations of this chapter and other pertinent circumstances and incidents
reported to the Chief of Police.
§ 179-10. Revocation of permits; notice of hearing.
M. Peddlers and solicitors are prohibited from the use of temporary public
utility hookups without prior approval of the Construction Code Official.
N. No peddler or solicitor, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out,
blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loudspeaking
radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public or private places in the Borough to call
attention to his business or to his merchandise.
O. Peddlers and solicitors shall not stop or park any vehicle on privately
owned property for the purpose of conducting a sale without having
first filed, with the licensing authority, a written authorization for the
same from the property owner. No peddler or solicitor shall conduct or
attempt to conduct his business on any residence or on any privately
owned property on which is posted a sign expressly prohibiting such
activity.
P. A peddler or solicitor must not inhibit pedestrian traffic and must have
at least eight feet between the vehicle and the curbline for pedestrian
traffic.
Q. Peddlers or solicitors shall not stop or park any vehicle in such a
manner as to block any advertisement, display or entrance to an
existing store.
R. Peddlers and solicitors shall not stop or park any vehicle in an alleyway
or walkway and shall not stop or park any vehicle in such a manner as to
block entrance to said alleyways or walkways.
S. Peddlers or solicitors shall not park any vehicle in such a manner as to
block any municipal sign, public receptacle for garbage, public bench
or other public amenity.
T. Peddlers and solicitors must have their intended location approved by
the Police Department prior to setting up operations.
§ 179-7 PARKING LOTS § 179-10
167:273
§ 179-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Borough in the denial of an
application for a permit as provided in § 179-5 of this chapter or in the
decision with reference to the revocation of a permit as provided in § 179-10
of this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the Borough Council of
the Borough of Florham Park. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with
the Borough Clerk, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of
has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Borough Council shall set
a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in § 179-10
of this chapter for notice for hearing or revocation. The decision and order
of the Borough Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. In
accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2, if the denial of an application or the
revocation of a permit is upheld based upon the grounds set forth in
§ 179-5A(3) or 179-10A(4) of this chapter, the applicant shall be provided
with a written explanation based upon consideration of the factors
enumerated in § 179-5A(3).
§ 179-12. Nonsolicitation list.
A. Permits issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Borough after
reasonable notice and hearing, if requested, for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
permitted activity.
(3) Violation of any of the provisions contained in this Chapter 179
governing peddling and soliciting.
(4) Conviction of any crime or offense relating adversely to the
occupation of peddling or soliciting as determined according to the
procedure and based upon the considerations set forth in
§ 179-5A(3) of this chapter.
(5) Conducting the business of permitted activity, whether by the
applicant himself or his agents or employees, in any unlawful
manner or in any manner that constitutes a breach of the peace or
a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
B. Notice of hearing for a revocation of a license shall be given in writing
setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the permittee or
mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address given by the
permittee in making application under § 179-4 herein, at least five days
prior to the date set for said hearing.
§ 179-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 179-12
167:274
§ 179-13. Charitable clothing bins. [Added 5-19-2009 by Ord. No.
09-7]
A. The Borough Clerk shall collect, prepare and maintain a list of
addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has
notified the Borough that he or she does not wish for any solicitor or
canvasser to enter upon his or her property for solicitation or
canvassing purposes. To be included on this nonsolicitation list
residents must complete a form which will be made available through
the Clerk's office and submit the completed form to the Borough Clerk.
This nonsolicitation list will be updated on a quarterly basis and
provided by the Borough to all licensees. No solicitor or canvasser shall
enter upon any private property that is included upon the
nonsolicitation list.
B. Violators of this section will be subject to fine and/or suspension or
revocation of the license granted under this chapter.
A. No person shall place, use or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes within the Borough of Florham Park unless all of
the following requirements are met:
(1) The person shall apply for and obtain a permit from the Property
Maintenance Officer. The application for the permit shall include,
along with the required fee set forth in this section:
(a) The location, as precisely as possible, where the bin will be
situated.
(b) The manner in which the person, entity or organization
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin will be used, sold or disbursed and the method by which the
proceeds collected will be allocated or spent.
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin.
(d) Written consent of the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
(2) All persons who have obtained a permit pursuant to Subsection A
above and wish to renew said permit shall submit, along with the
required fee set forth in this section, an application for renewal
prior to the expiration of the permit, which such renewal
application shall include the following information:
(a) The location where the bin is currently situated and, if the
person intends to move it, the new location where the bin will
be situated and written consent of the property owner to place
the bin on his property.
§ 179-12 PARKING LOTS § 179-13
167:275
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold or disbursed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates he may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal.
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any
entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin and of any entities which may
do so during the period covered by the renewal.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, no donation
clothing bin shall be placed, used or employed in a location that is
considered by the Property Maintenance Officer to cause a safety
hazard. Placement that will be considered to pose a safety hazard
includes, but is not limited to, placement within 100 yards of any place
which stores large amounts of or sells fuel or other flammable liquids or
gases.
C. Permit fee and duration.
(1) The application fee, which must be submitted with the application
under Subsection A(1) above, shall be $25.
(2) The fee for a renewal of the permit, which must be submitted with
the application under Subsection A(2) above, shall be $25.
(3) All permits and renewals obtained shall be in effect for one year
and shall expire on December 31 of the year of the permit and
renewals.
D. Notices required. The following information shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) The permit number and the date of expiration of that permit;
(2) The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or donations collected from the bin;
(3) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and the
telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share in the profit from any clothing or donations collected via
the bin;
(4) In cases where an entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, the notice shall also state that the clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, the proceeds, or both, may be
shared by or given directly to an entity other than the person who
owns the bin, which such entity shall be identified; and
§ 179-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 179-13
167:276
(5) A statement indicating the manner in which the person, entity or
organization anticipates any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin will be used, sold or disbursed and the method by which
the proceeds collected will be allocated or spent.
E. Complaints and investigation.
(1) The Property Maintenance Officer, upon receipt of any complaint
concerning a donation clothing bin, shall request that the Police
Department perform an investigation within 30 days of receipt of
the complaint.
(2) Any person who places a clothing bin in violation of this section or
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 shall be given a warning stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Property
Maintenance Officer is not requested within 45 days, then the bin
will be seized and removed at the expense of the person who placed
the bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin
shall be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. This notice
shall be placed on the donation clothing bin and forwarded to the
last known address, according to the Borough's records, of the
person who placed the bin at the location.
(3) If the person who placed the bin does not rectify the violation or
request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the warning, then
the Borough shall remove the bin or have it removed at the expense
of the person who placed the bin and shall sell at public auction or
otherwise dispose of the clothing or donations. All proceeds from
the sale of the donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Borough.
F. Additional fines and penalties. In addition to the remedies set forth in
Subsection E above, any person who violates this section or N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq., as amended and/or supplemented, which results in
the seizure of the donation clothing bin, shall be subject to the
following:
(1) A penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Borough shall
bring this action in Municipal Court or Superior Court in a
summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999,
P.L. 1999, c.274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). Penalty monies
collected shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough.
(2) Ineligibility to place, use or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes. A person who is deemed ineligible may apply
to the Property Maintenance Officer to have his eligibility restored.
The Property Maintenance Officer may restore the eligibility of a
person who:
(a) Acted within the public interest; and
§ 179-13 PARKING LOTS § 179-13
167:277
Chapter 184
POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and recreation facilities — See
Ch. 77.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 80.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 184-1. License required.
No person shall maintain, operate, conduct or pursue the business or
occupation of keeping any public room or place wherein the games
commonly known as "pool" or "billiards" are played without having first
obtained a license therefor as provided in this chapter.
§ 184-2. Application.
An application for a license under this chapter shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk on forms supplied by the municipality, which forms shall
require the following information:
§ 184-3. Fees.
(b) Demonstrates that he has made a good-faith effort to comply
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and this
section and had no fraudulent intentions.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
(1) In the case of a partnership, it shall state the names and addresses
of all partners.
(2) In the case of a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses
of the officers, directors and all stockholders presently holding
stock and all who for six months prior to the making of the
application have been officers, directors or stockholders.
(3) In the case of clubs or associations, it shall state the names and
addresses of all officers.
B. Whether or not the person named in the application has ever been
convicted of a violation of any federal, state or municipal law.
C. The location of the premises to be licensed.
D. The number of pool tables and billiard tables to be located upon the
premises to be licensed.
§ 179-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 184-3
184:278
§ 184-4. Contents of license; transferability.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall bear the date of issue, the name
of the licensee, the purpose for which issued and the location of the room
or building wherein the licensee is authorized to carry on and conduct any
such business. Such license shall not be transferable by the holder to any
other person, but such license may be transferred by the holder to another
address, provided that the licensee shall make written aplication for such
transfer to the Borough Clerk and such transfer is approved by resolution
of the Borough Council.
§ 184-5. Issuance; term.
All licenses provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Borough Clerk
only after a resolution by the Borough Council shall have been adopted
approving the application and only after the payment of the license fee
provided for in this chapter. All such licenses shall be valid from March 1
of the year in which the license is issued until the last day of February next
after the same is issued, unless sooner revoked.
§ 184-6. Suspension or revocation.
A. The annual fees to be paid for a license under this chapter are hereby
fixed as follows:
(1) For the first pool or billiard table located upon the premises to be
licensed: $25.
(2) For each additional pool or billiard table located upon the premises
to be licensed: $5.
B. In the event that any license issued under this chapter is suspended or
revoked, the licensee shall not be entitled to the return of any portion of
the license fee.
A. The Borough Council may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee
under this chapter on any one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Violation upon the premises by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives of any of the laws of the state.
(2) Violation upon the premises by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives of any provisions of this Code or
other ordinance.
(3) Fraudulent conduct by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives relating to the application for or
issuance of such license or the false statement of a material fact or
the failure to disclose a fact concerning the applicant at the time of
filing the application if such fact would have constituted just cause
for refusing to issue such license.
§ 184-3 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 184-6
184:279
§ 184-7. Unsafe or hazardous premises.
Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe by the written report
of the Building Inspector or a fire hazard by the written report of the Fire
Chief shall be deemed to be ineligible for a license.
§ 184-8. Location.
No license shall be issued for the operation of any pool or billiard room
which is located within 200 feet of any school, church or publicly owned
building.
§ 184-9. Hours of operation. [Amended 8-16-1988 by Ord. No.
17-88]
Poolrooms and billiard parlors are allowed to operate only between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., with the establishments being closed the
remaining hours of the day and the public not being served.
§ 184-10. Minors.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to or permitted
to play pool or billiards in any licensed premises or to frequent or lounge
or congregate or gather in such room or place unless accompanied by his
parent or guardian.
§ 184-11. Card playing.
In no event shall card playing be permitted on premises licensed under this
chapter, even if such card playing is for social purposes.
§ 184-12. Lighting and arrangement
All premises in which the games of pool or billiards are played shall be
on the street floor of any building and shall be so arranged and shall be
so lighted that a full view of the interior may be had from the public
thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the public is admitted, at all
hours.
(4) Permitting or suffering any activity upon the licensed premises
which is or may be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare
or morals.
B. In all such cases, written notice of the charge and the time and place of
hearing thereon shall be served on the licensee, either in person or by
certified or registered mail addressed to the licensed premises. No
revocation or suspension shall occur unless the licensee shall have been
afforded an opportunity to be heard in his defense.
§ 184-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 184-13
184:280
§ 184-13. Items to be posted.
There shall be conspicuously posted and displayed in any premises licensed
under this chapter:
§ 184-14. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any religious, charitable, benevolent or
nonprofit association or corporation which operates or maintains any pool
or billiard table solely for the recreation and amusement of its members,
provided that such organization is bona fide in character and is not intended
as a means or device for evading the terms and provisions of this chapter,
nor shall this chapter apply to the keeping of any pool or billiard table in
private residences.
Chapter 188
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
§ 188-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Florham Park," and may be referred to in this chapter in the
short form as "this code."
§ 188-2. Purpose.
A. The license issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. A copy of this chapter, which shall be supplied to the licensee by the
Borough Clerk.
C. Not less than one sign conspicuously posted giving notice that no
person under the age of 18 years is permitted upon the licensed
premises unless accompanied by his parent or guardian.
A. Purpose. The purposes of this code are to protect and preserve the
public health, safety and welfare in all existing structures and to
prevent deterioration and blight of buildings and neighborhoods by
establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential
premises and related open lands; to establish minimum standards
governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and
conditions essential to making the aforesaid facilities fit for human
§ 184-13 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-2
184:281
§ 188-3. Compliance required; construal of provisions.
§ 188-4. Applicability.
habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties
upon owners and operators and distinct and separate responsibilities
and duties upon occupants; to require the regulation of dwellings; to
authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential
and nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the violations of this
code; to provide for the right of access across adjoining premises to
permit repairs; and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of
premises hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public
interest. It is intended that this code be liberally construed to the
benefit of the Borough, its taxpayers and residents and to effectuate the
purposes as stated herein.
B. Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare in so far as they are
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level
of health and safety as required herein.
A. Every residential and nonresidential building and the premises on
which it is situated in the Borough used or intended to be used for
assembly, dwelling, institutional, educational, fraternal, religious or
recreational uses, commercial, business or industrial occupancy or
other uses, and related open lands, shall comply with the provisions of
this code, whether or not such building shall have been constructed,
altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code and
irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for
the use or occupancy of the building or for the installation or repair of
equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this code.
B. This code establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued
occupancy and use of all such buildings and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration
or use of the building, equipment or facilities contained therein, nor
shall this code operate to eliminate a property owner's right to continue
a valid preexisting nonconforming use or structure under Chapter 250
of the Borough Code.60
A. All provisions of this code not referring specifically to residential
dwellings or multifamily residential facilities shall apply generally as
appropriate to nonresidential buildings.
B. General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting
or relating to structures and premises. Where, in a specific case,
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 188-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-4
184:282
§ 188-5. Higher standards to prevail.
different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.
C. Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in
good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any
occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary
while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this
code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of
fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures.
Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's
designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings,
structures and premises.
D. Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
the procedures and provisions of the Uniform Construction Code of the
State of New Jersey.
E. Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or
agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is
dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
F. Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code
shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed
in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
G. Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory
for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings by
state or federal authorities when such buildings or structures are
judged by the Code Official to be safe and in the public interest of
health, safety and welfare.
H. Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure
or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the Property
Maintenance Code Official in consultation with and approval by the
Construction Official.
A. In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinances of the Borough or under the
codes, regulations or laws of the State of New Jersey, then the
standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this
§ 188-4 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-5
184:283
§ 188-6. Issuance of licenses and permits upon compliance.
After the date of enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be issued
upon compliance with this code as well as compliance with the ordinances
under which such licenses and permits are granted.
§ 188-7. Compliance with other provisions.
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this code
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of
the Borough applicable to any building, structure or premises, nor shall any
provision here relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with
any such other provision nor any official of the Borough from enforcing any
such other provision.
§ 188-8. Department of Property Maintenance Inspection.
§ 188-9. Enforcing officer.
code impose a lower standard than any other ordinances of the Borough
or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard
contained in any such other ordinance, code, regulation or law shall
prevail.
B. Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
A. General. The Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is hereby
created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as
the "Property Maintenance Code Official."
B. Appointment. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall report to
the Construction Official and be appointed by the Borough Council.
A. Property Maintenance Code Official. The Property Maintenance Code
Official is hereby designated to serve as the enforcing officer
hereunder, and all inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings
on violations of the provisions of this code, unless expressly stated to
the contrary, shall be under his direction and supervision. The Borough
Council in conjunction with the Construction Official may appoint or
designate such other public officials or employees of the Borough to
perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this code,
including the making of inspections and holding of hearings.
B. Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the Borough Council and
Construction Official, the Property Maintenance Code Official may
request the authority to appoint a Deputy Property Maintenance Code
Official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other
employees as necessary for the effective enforcement of this chapter.
§ 188-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-10
184:284
§ 188-10. Duties and powers of Property Maintenance Code Official.
§ 188-11. Approval.
A. General. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall enforce the
provisions of this code.
B. Rule-making authority. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall
have authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and
general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to
interpret and implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent
thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local
climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of
waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically
provided for in this code, or of violating accepted engineering methods
involving public safety.
A. Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this code, the Property Maintenance Code
Official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual
cases, provided that the Property Maintenance Code Official shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and
purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health,
life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
B. Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this
code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
code, provided that any such alternative has been reviewed and
approved by the Construction Official. An alternative material or
method of construction shall be approved where the Construction
Official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with
the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method
or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of
that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety.
C. Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance
with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method
does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Property
Maintenance Code Official shall have the authority to require tests to be
made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.
D. Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted
test methods, the Construction Official shall be permitted to approve
appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
§ 188-10 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-11
184:285
§ 188-12. Inspections.
E. Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Construction
Official for the period required for retention of public records.
F. Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper
working condition and approved.
G. Liability. The Property Maintenance Code Official, officer, deputies or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting in
good faith and without malice on behalf of the Borough of Florham
Park, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons
or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge
of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee
because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful
discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be
defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The Property Maintenance Code
Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit
or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
code; and any officer of the Department of Property Maintenance
Inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of
any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection
therewith.
A. The Property Maintenance Code Official or his designee shall make all
of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by
approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall
be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agency or by the responsible individual. The Property Maintenance
Code Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to
the approval of the appointing authority.
B. All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to
inspections with reasonable cause and upon reasonable notice, from
time to time, by the enforcing officer of the Borough. At the time of such
inspections, all rooms in the building and all parts of the premises must
be available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner,
operator and occupants are required to provide the necessary
arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such inspections shall be
made between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., unless one of the following
conditions exists:
(1) The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspections.
§ 188-11 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-12
184:286
(2) There is reason to believe that the violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be apprehended and proven by
inspections during other than the prescribed hours and which
require immediate inspection after being reported, e.g., failure to
supply heat.
C. Right of entry. The Property Maintenance Code Official or his designee
is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to
inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches
and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the Property
Maintenance Code Official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided
by law.
D. Where entry by inspectors is refused.
(1) Penalties. Where the Property Maintenance Code Official or his
agent is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or
prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this
code and subject to the penalties under Borough Code § 1-16.
(2) Search warrant or access warrant.
(a) The Property Maintenance Code Official may, upon affidavit,
apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Florham Park for a search warrant, setting forth factually the
actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of the code may
exist on the premises, including one or more of the following:
[1] Upon receipt of a complaint;
[2] That observation of the external condition of the premises
and its public area has resulted in the belief that violations
of the code exist;
[3] Circumstances such as age of building, type of building,
particular use of premises or other factors which render
systematic inspections of such buildings necessary in the
interest of public health and safety.
(b) If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Florham
Park is satisfied as to the matter set forth in said affidavit, he
shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to an inspection of that part of the premises on which
the nuisance or violation may or is suspected to exist.
E. Identification. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall carry
proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this code. Inspectors shall be supplied
with official identification and, upon request, shall exhibit such
identification when entering any premises or dwelling unit or building
§ 188-12 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-12
184:287
§ 188-13. Notice of violation; orders; procedures for abatement.
subject to this code. Inspectors shall conduct themselves so as to avoid
intentional embarrassment or inconvenience to occupants.
F. Notices and orders. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall issue
all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
G. Department records. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall
keep official records of all business and activities of the department
specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained
in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such
records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by
other regulations.
A. Notice to person responsible. Except as provided in Subsection L,
whenever the Property Maintenance Code Official determines that
there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed
in this section to the person responsible for the violation as specified in
this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with
this section.
B. Form. All such notices under this section shall be in accordance with all
of the following:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued;
(4) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this code;
(5) Inform the property owner of the right to appeal; and
(6) Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
Subsection I.
C. Contents of notice. The notice shall specify the violation or violations
committed, what must be done to correct the same, a reasonable period
of time, not to exceed 30 days, to correct or abate the violation, the
right of the person served to request a hearing and that the notice shall
become an order of the Property Maintenance Code Official in 10 days
after service unless a hearing is requested pursuant to Subsection E.
D. Service of notice. Notice may be served personally or by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, and, that failing, by regular
mail addressed to the last known address of the person to be served. In
the case of an occupant, notice may be posted upon the door of his
§ 188-12 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-13
184:288
dwelling unit or building where service cannot otherwise be effected.
When the owner is not on the premises, the last known address shall be
the address of the owner as shown in the office of the Tax Collector. If
the last known address is not known, the notice may be posted on the
outside front entrance of the building. The Property Maintenance Code
Official shall provide notice to any owner, operator or occupant of any
violation at another address, provided that such other address is filed
with the Property Maintenance Code Official personally or by certified
mail. Service upon an owner, operator or occupant may also be attained
by service of any notice upon a member of a family of the owner,
operator or occupant, if the same normally resides with the owner,
operator or occupant and is at least 14 years old. Date of service of the
notice by mail shall be the day following the day of mailing to addresses
within the Borough and the fourth day after the day of mailing to
addresses outside the Borough. Should the day of service fall upon a
Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the day
of service shall be the next regular delivery day. Notwithstanding any
other provisions herein contained, where the owner, operator, lessor or
occupant cannot be found at an address previously given, the owner,
operator, lessor or occupant affected thereby may be served by posting
notice upon the premises in a conspicuous place as near as possible to
the front entrance thereof.
E. Notice to become an order unless hearing requested. Within 10 days of
the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute a final order.
F. Extension of time. The Property Maintenance Code Official may extend
the time for correction or abatement of the violations for an additional
period of time not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital
improvement or renovations are involved, in which instance the time for
completion may be extended for a period not to exceed 90 days beyond
the expiration date of the original notice. A bond may be required by the
Construction Official prior to granting a time extension or building
permit.
G. Summary abatement in emergency; notice and hearing not required.
Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a
nature as to constitute a real and immediate threat to the health and
safety of buildings, occupants or users unless abated without delay, the
Property Maintenance Code Official shall either request the Borough
Administrator and/or the Director of Community Services and/or the
Construction Official to abate the violation or condition immediately or
order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation or
condition within a period of time not to exceed three days, and, upon
failure to do so, the Borough Administrator and/or the Director of
Community Services and/or the Construction Official shall abate the
condition immediately thereafter (see also Borough Code Chapter 9461).
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 94, Buildings, Unfit.
§ 188-13 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-13
184:289
H. Cost of the abatement; remedies. Where abatement of violations or
conditions, or corrections of a defect, in the premises, not conforming
to municipal ordinances or state laws applicable thereto, requires
expenditure of Borough moneys, the following procedures may be
implemented:
(1) The Borough Administrator shall present a report of work proposed
to be done to accomplish the foregoing to the Mayor and Council,
with an estimate of the cost thereof, along with a summary of the
procedure undertaken by the Property Maintenance Code Official
to secure compliance, including notices served upon the owners,
operators, lessors or agents, as the case may be, hearings and
orders of the Zoning Official or Construction Official with reference
thereto.
(2) The Mayor and Council may thereupon, by resolution, authorize the
abatement of the nuisance, correction of the defect or work
necessary to place the premises in proper condition and in
compliance with ordinances of the Borough and laws of the state.
(3) The Borough Administrator may thereafter proceed to have the
work performed in accordance with said resolution and shall, upon
completion thereof, submit a report of the moneys expended and
costs to the Mayor and Council.
(4) After review of the same, the Mayor and Council may approve said
expenses and costs, whereupon the same shall become a lien
against said premises, collectible as provided by law.
(5) A copy of the resolution approving said expenses and costs shall be
certified by the Mayor and Council and filed with the Tax Collector
of the Borough, who shall be responsible for the collection thereof,
and a copy of this report and resolution shall be sent by certified
mail to the owner.
(6) Notwithstanding the procedure set forth above, the Borough shall
have the right to all other remedies available under the law to
recover the costs of abatement.
I. Referral of violations. Any violation of any other ordinance or municipal,
county or state law, other than this code, discovered by the Property
Maintenance Code Official shall be referred by him to the official
agency responsible for the enforcement of such other ordinance.
J. Extension of time where dispossess action undertaken. Where there
exists a violation of occupancy standards hereunder, an owner or
operator, upon receipt of a notice of violation, if unable to eliminate the
violation by peaceable means within the period of time specified in said
notice, shall commence within such period legal action to dispossess,
evict or eject the occupants who cause the violation. No further action
hereunder shall then be taken against the owner or operator so long as
§ 188-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-13
184:290
§ 188-14. Transfer of ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who
has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has
been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such
dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance
order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner
shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy
of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code Official
and shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and notarized statement from
the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt
of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs
required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
§ 188-15. Violations and penalties.
the action aforesaid is pending in the court and is prosecuted
expeditiously and in good faith.
K. Where notice and hearing not required prior to court proceedings.
(1) Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsections A through D,
second violations of this code, as set forth in Subsection K(2) below,
may be prosecuted without notice by the filing of a complaint by the
Property Maintenance Code Official in the Municipal Court.
(2) Where the Property Maintenance Code Official, after hearing, shall
determine that there was a violation and a notice was served upon
the owner, operator or occupant, whether or not said violation was
abated prior to the issuance of an order, if thereafter within the
space of one year there shall be a second violation by the same
owner, operator or occupant of the same provision of this code
discovered on the same premises, the offender may be prosecuted
on the second violation without the Property Maintenance Code
Official having first given notice and the opportunity to be heard to
the person responsible for said violation. For this second violation
and any subsequent violation occurring within the one-year time
period, the Property Maintenance Code Official, without notice to
the responsible party, shall file a complaint with the Municipal
Court and pursue the prosecution of the same.
L. Effect of notice on owner. For the purposes of enforcement of this code,
the service of notice on an owner, whether or not the owner is also the
operator, shall constitute notice of violations set forth therein until said
violations are abated in conformity with this code and the other
applicable ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict
with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. A violation of
§ 188-13 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-15
184:291
§ 188-16. Unsafe structures and equipment.
any section or subsection of this code shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of the Borough Code.
B. Each violation of a section or subsection of this code shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or
subsection of any order issued pursuant to this code. Each day's failure
to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a
separate violation.
C. Where an owner, operator or occupant has been convicted of a violation
of this code and, within 12 months thereafter, has been found by the
Judge of the Municipal Court to be guilty of a second violation, the
Court may sentence the offender, in addition to or in lieu of the fine set
forth in Subsection A, to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
to exceed 90 days.
D. Where the defendant is other than a natural person or persons,
Subsections B and C shall also apply to any agent, superintendent,
officer, member or partner who shall, alone or with others, have charge,
care or control of the premises.
E. In the event of an imposition of a fine or penalty by the Municipal Court
or any other court of competent jurisdiction against the owner, operator
or lessor of any building or structure in the Borough for violation of any
Borough ordinance or any state law applicable to the Borough, said fine
or penalty shall be collectible as a lien against the premises.
A. General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Property
Maintenance Code Official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found
unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.
B. Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to
protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such
structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible.
C. Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or
within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such
equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or
occupants of the premises or structure.
D. Structure unfit for occupancy. A structure is unfit for occupancy
whenever the Property Maintenance Code Official finds that such
structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the
§ 188-15 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-16
184:292
structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin
or rat or other undomesticated animal infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because
the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of
the structure or to the public.
E. Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in
part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or
was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
F. Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for
occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the Property
Maintenance Code Official is authorized to post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as
not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up
the premises within the time specified in the order, the Property
Maintenance Code Official shall cause the premises to be closed and
secured through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be
a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal
resource.
G. Notice. Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice
and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment in accordance with § 188-13. If the notice
pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned
equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in § 188-13B.
H. Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the Property
Maintenance Code Official shall post on the premises or on defective
equipment a placard bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of
the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the
equipment or removing the placard.
I. Placard removal. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall remove
the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which
the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation
placard without the approval of the Property Maintenance Code Official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
J. Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and
placarded by the Property Maintenance Code Official shall be vacated
as ordered. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall
operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible
for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or
§ 188-16 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-16
184:293
§ 188-17. Emergency measures.
§ 188-18. Demolition.
operate placarded equipment, shall be liable for the penalties provided
by this code.
A. Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Property Maintenance
Code Official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a
building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or
part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of
the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the
building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes,
gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment,
the Property Maintenance Code Official is hereby authorized and
empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises
forthwith. The Property Maintenance Code Official shall cause to be
posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows:
"This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by
the Property Maintenance Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any
person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the
structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.
B. Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code,
whenever, in the opinion of the Property Maintenance Code Official,
there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Code Official
shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of
openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the
legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause
such other action to be taken as the Property Maintenance Code Official
deems necessary to meet such emergency.
C. Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the Property
Maintenance Code Official shall temporarily close structures and close,
or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets,
public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the
same from being utilized.
D. Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Property
Maintenance Code Official shall employ the necessary labor and
materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
A. General. The Property Maintenance Code Official after consultation
with and approval by the Construction Official shall order the owner of
any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the Code
Official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair
as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the
structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure
§ 188-16 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-18
184:294
§ 188-19. Provisions to be in addition to state regulations.
This code supplements and should be read in conjunction with the
Regulations for the Construction and Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple
Dwellings adopted and promulgated by the State of New Jersey on July 19,
1968, and now in effect, together with any revisions or amendments since
that date. This code adopts in full the provisions of the New Jersey State
Housing Code (1980), together with any revisions or amendments.
§ 188-20. Terms generally.
is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and
sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where
there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a
period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.
B. Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with § 188-13.
C. Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official shall
cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be
a lien upon such real estate.
D. Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished
and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said
contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition
and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted,
for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If
such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so
state.
A. Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
B. Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular.
C. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, or the
adopted versions of the International Building Code or International
Mechanical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them
as stated in those codes.
§ 188-18 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-20
184:295
§ 188-21. Definitions and word usage.
D. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.
E. Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises,"
"building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" "housekeeping unit" or
"story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
A. The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this code,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context or where otherwise
established by law:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate use or building customarily
incidental to the primary use, and located on the same lot with the main
use or building.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The department, branch or agency
of this municipality which is authorized by the adopting ordinance to
administer the provisions of this code.
APPROVED — Approved by the Property Maintenance Code Official.
BASEMENT — The portion of the building that is partly or completely
below grade.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more toilets,
lavatories and bathtubs or showers or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BEDROOM — Any room or space used or intended to be used for
sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
BUILDING — Any structure or part thereof, whether used for human
habitation or otherwise, and includes any accessory structure and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
CENTRAL HEATING — A heating system in a fire-resistant enclosed
space or spaces, separate and apart from the area to be heated, which
system is permanently affixed on a fireproof base in accordance with
the building code and all other applicable codes of the Borough of
Florham Park. Direct electric and/or gas heating systems without the
use of a boiler, serving all dwelling units in a structure, are exempt from
the above definition.
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
COMMENCEMENT OF WORK — Any activity by the contractor, owner,
or agent/operator of either, that begins the process of construction,
demolition or excavation, which includes, but is not limited to, the use
and storage of machinery and supplies on the subject site covered by a
§ 188-20 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-21
184:296
properly issued construction permit from the Borough of Florham Park
Construction Official.[Added 12-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-15]
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — Any group of persons jointly owning
a multifamily residential building or buildings and/or charged with the
responsibility of providing services or maintenance for said buildings.
(See the definition of "owner.")
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL OR ZONING OFFICIAL — The
Construction Official, Zoning Official or Deputy Construction Official
of the Borough of Florham Park or such other official as may be
designated by said Construction Official with the concurrence of the
Mayor and Borough Council.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — The real property identified in a construction
or demolition permit issued by the Borough of Florham Park
Construction Official or, in the event no such permits have been issued,
the property identified on the Tax Map of the Borough of Florham
Park where demolition, excavation or construction is occurring.[Added
12-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-15]
CONTRACTOR — The person or entity identified on the construction
permit issued by the Borough of Florham Park Construction Official as
the contractor of record for the subject project.[Added 12-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-15]
DWELLING — Any structure or building designed for or occupied
exclusively for residential use including customary accessory buildings.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of
the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on
or above a said lot or lots.
EXCAVATION — The digging and/or removal of soil or other material
forming the surface grade of a construction site so as to leave a hole
and/or cavity in the surface grade.[Added 12-12-2013 by Ord. No.
13-15]
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or yard or any part
thereof, or any building or any part thereof, which may be lawfully
viewed by the public from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, parking lot or
from any adjoining or neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a building which
are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside
of any building erected thereon.
§ 188-21 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-21
184:297
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on
adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
and vermin and other undomesticated animals by elimination of their
harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible material that
may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping;
or by other approved means of pest elimination.
FAMILY — One person, doing his own cooking and living upon the
premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a collective body of
persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises
as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon
birth, marriage or other domestic bond as distinguished from a group
occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the Borough of Florham Park.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or part thereof accessory to a main
building and providing for the storage of less than four automobiles,
and in which no occupation or business is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR STORAGE — A building or part thereof, other
than a private garage, for the storage of motor vehicles and in which
service station activities may be carried on.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GUARD — A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that
minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower
level.
HABITABLE ROOMS — Rooms used or designed for use by one or more
persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, serving and storage
pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, heater or boiler rooms, utility
rooms and other rooms or spaces that have less than 50 square feet of
net floor area.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility
spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition which could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
§ 188-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-21
184:298
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or
premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests and/or undomesticated
animals.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which cannot be driven
upon the public streets for reasons including but not limited to being
unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair or incapable of
being moved under its own power.
KITCHEN — Any room or part of a room used for cooking or the
preparation of food using a permanently installed cooking device.
LABELED — Devices, equipment, appliances or materials to which
have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of
a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other
organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose
label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally
recognized standards.
LAVATORY — A wash bowl or basin with running water and drain
connected appropriately.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide or offer possession
or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building,
premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of
record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or
license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract
for the sale of land.
LOCAL HEALTH AGENCY — Any county, regional, municipal or other
governmental agency organized for the purpose of providing health
services, administered by a full-time health officer and conducting a
public health program pursuant to law.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — As defined in the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
NUISANCE —
Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of New
Jersey or the ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park.
(1)
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a
building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes but is not limited
to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, refrigerators,
motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures,
building materials, trash, debris or vegetation such as poison ivy,
oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive children.
(2)
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where such conditions
exist.
(3)
§ 188-21 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-21
184:299
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT —
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have charge, care or
control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner
or as fiduciary, including but not limited to administrator, condominium
association, guardian of the estate, receiver, trustee or as mortgagee
in possession, regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any
person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of
any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with
the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the
premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interest of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PLUMBING — All of the following supplies, facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch
basins, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines, water pipes and lines utilized
in conjunction with air-conditioning equipment.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way,
including any structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except
body wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market
Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession
of a space within a building.
(1)
Any person living in or having possession or control of any
dwelling, premises or structure.
(2)
§ 188-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-21
184:300
and industrial wastes. (See also the definitions of "garbage" and
"rubbish.")
REGISTERED MAIL — Registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested.
ROOM — A space in an enclosed building, or space set apart by a
partition or partitions, or any space in a building used or intended to
be used as a bedroom, dining room, living room, kitchen, sewing room,
library, computer room, den, music room, dressing room, enclosed
sleeping porch, sunroom, party room, recreation room, family room,
attic, breakfast room, study, storage room, home office or for similar
uses.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with
or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or twofamily
dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or
living, but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar
materials.
SEWAGE — Waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory, dish
washing or installed clothes-washing machine, or the water-carried
waste from any other fixture or equipment or machinery.
SLEEPING UNIT — A room or space in which people sleep, which
can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either
sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces
that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE — An offense in which the prosecution in
a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of
its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which
was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally
required to do.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected which requires
location above, below or on the ground or attached to something having
location above, below or on the ground, including signs and billboards,
fences or walls used as fences.
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not
the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a
unit.
TOILET ROOM — A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
§ 188-21 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-21
184:301
§ 188-22. General requirements.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed
or intended or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied
or maintained.
UTILITIES — Includes electric, gas or oil, water and sewerage, cable
and telephone services.
VENTILATION — The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any
space.
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD — All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway or other open space
constituting the remaining part of the same premises with a building.
An open space on the same lot with a structure.
B. Whenever the words "accessory structure," "building," "dwelling,"
"dwelling unit," "habitable room," "premises," "room" or "structure" are
used in this code, they shall be construed, unless expressly stated to the
contrary, to include the plurals of these words and as if they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof." The word "shall" shall be
applied retroactively as well as prospectively.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of
structures, equipment and exterior property.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures
and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as
otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owneroccupant
or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in
a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean,
sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit,
housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.
C. Contract not to alter responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this code, the respective obligations and responsibilities of
the owner and operator on one hand and the occupant on the other
shall not be altered or affected by an agreement or contract by and
between any of the aforesaid or between them and the other parties.
D. Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
§ 188-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-23
184:302
§ 188-23. Maintenance of residential and nonresidential property.
The duties and responsibilities of owners and operators are as follows:
A. The duties of the owner and operator as herein stated are coextensive
with provisions of Chapters 142, 159, 163, 199, 208, 244, 250 and 265
of the Code of the Borough of Florham Park, and the State Housing
Code.
B. Hazards and unsanitary conditions. The grounds related to buildings
shall be kept free of hazards and nuisances, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) Refuse, brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris, slippery conditions and
excretion of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways,
parking lots and parking areas.
(2) All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as
all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or
shrubs; provided, however, that this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent
having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service
of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in
accordance with § 188-15 and as prescribed by the authority
having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or
contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter
upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the
owner or agent responsible for the property.
(3) Natural growth such as dead and dying trees and limbs or other
natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating
conditions or storm damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the
vicinity thereof. (Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to
prevent such conditions.) (See also Borough Code Chapter 159.62)
(4) Overhanging objects such as tree limbs, branches and
accumulations of ice and snow which, by reason of their location
above ground level, constitute a danger of falling on persons in the
vicinity thereof.
(5) Ground surface hazards such as holes, excavations, breaks,
projections, obstructions, icy conditions, uncleared snow on paths,
walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of
the premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the
premises. Upon discovery such hazards should be properly marked
and protected until the hazard is eliminated. All such holes and
excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 159, Nuisances.
§ 188-23 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-23
184:303
to original specification and other conditions removed where
necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions within 30
days of their discovery. Adequate gutters and surface water runoff
systems shall be provided and maintained to eliminate recurrent or
excessive accumulation of stormwater.
(6) Accumulations of snow and ice on driveways, walks and parking
areas shall be promptly removed, or in no case later than 48 hours
after the cessation of the respective storm. The Borough may,
however, after fair notice, remove snow, ice or sleet from interior
and exterior drives, parking areas and walkways, with the cost to
be paid or assessed against the owner. The time requirement for
snow, ice and sleet removal may be modified by executive order of
the Mayor and Council. Single-family owner-occupied residential
properties shall be exempted from the requirement for removal of
snow and ice from interior driveways, walkways and parking areas.
(7) Sidewalks, driveways and parking areas. All sidewalks, walkways,
stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas, including those
in a public easement, shall be kept in a proper state of repair and
maintained so as to be free from hazardous conditions, displaced
cracks, holes or other defects hazardous to the safety and welfare
of those using said areas.
(8) Maintenance of sites under construction; securing the construction
site. [Added 12-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-15]
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the contractor working at any
construction site or the owner of a construction site or the
agent/operator of either to secure the construction site with a
barrier of sufficient loading capacity to prevent and/or limit
access to the subject site. The barrier shall be a minimum of six
feet tall and installed around the entire perimeter of the
construction site, or in another manner and/or location as the
Construction Official or Code Official, in the reasonable
exercise of his discretion, may determine is necessary so as to
protect the health and safety of the public. The perimeter
barrier shall be installed prior to the commencement of work
as defined and remain installed on the construction site until a
certificate of occupancy is issued or until the Construction
Official or Code Official determines the construction site no
longer requires the barrier.
(b) In addition, the Construction Official or Code Official shall have
the authority to require that the barrier described herein be
installed by the contractor or owner or agent of such lesser
portion of a given construction site than the entire perimeter,
as he shall determine based upon the extent of the demolition,
excavation and/or construction.
§ 188-23 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-23
184:304
(c) The installation and acceptance of the required barrier by the
Borough Construction Official or Code Official shall be
considered a “prior approval,” and failure to fully comply will
constitute a valid reason for the issuance of a stop-work order
under the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
administered by the Borough Construction Official.
(d) Specific requirements. [Added 12-12-2019 by Ord. No.
19-18]
[1] Inactive construction sites shall comply with the
requirements of the Property Maintenance Code,
specifically § 188-23.
[a] All construction sites (i.e., large additions, new homes,
in-ground pools, home demolitions and large
excavations) shall be enclosed by a six-foot temporary
fence as directed by the Construction Official.
[b] Temporary construction fences shall not be removed
until inspected and directed by the Construction
Official.
[c] Construction activities shall progress in a reasonable
manner not extending beyond the parameters as set
forth in the UCC. If, for any reason, construction
activities cease for more than six months, the
Construction Official may revoke the permit under
UCC guidelines.
[2] No construction site shall be used for the staging or
storage of construction equipment, commercially
registered vehicles, heavy equipment, storage containers,
trailers, materials, dirt or debris, except:
[a] Trailers, heavy equipment, construction equipment,
and storage containers directly and actively used in
furtherance of the construction activities occurring on
a particular construction site may remain at the site
for no more than 10 days after the completion of such
activities.
[b] One commercially registered vehicle not exceeding a
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds
shall be permitted to be stored, parked or remain
overnight on the exterior premises of any construction
site within a residential zone.
[c] Topsoil and fill necessary for backfill and final grade
and nonhazardous materials, dirt and debris resulting
from or used for the construction activities occurring
on the site may remain at the site until needed,
§ 188-23 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-23
184:305
provided that, to the fullest extent possible, the same
shall be properly stored and organized so as not to
pose a danger to the public or be kept in an unsightly
condition.
[3] Temporary portable toilets.
[a] Portable toilets are required on all job sites without a
permanent toilet.
[b] Portable toilets shall be placed within the temporary
fencing when possible.
[c] When temporary fencing is removed or not present,
portable toilets shall be placed as close to the home or
project as possible.
[d] At no time shall portable toilets be placed at or on the
curb of the property.
[e] All portable toilets shall be cleaned and sanitized at
least once a week.
[f] Regular cleaning as necessary to support specific job
sites.
[g] Portable toilets shall be removed within five days of
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval.
[4] Dumpsters and garbage containers.
[a] All dumpsters and garbage containers shall be placed
within the confines of the temporary construction
fence.
[b] All dumpsters and garbage containers shall be
emptied within two days of capacity.
[c] All dumpsters and garbage containers shall be
maintained along with areas surrounding such.
C. Landscaping. All premises shall be kept landscaped pursuant to site
plan requirements (commercial property), and lawns, hedges and
bushes shall be kept trimmed to keep them from becoming overgrown
and unsightly where exposed to public view and from constituting a
blighting factor depreciating adjoining property and impairing the
character of the neighborhood. Lawns shall be considered overgrown
and unsightly when the grass exceeds six inches in height.
D. Sidewalks damaged by roots of a Borough-owned or -supplied tree must
be repaired within 30 days of notification by the Property Maintenance
Code Official.
§ 188-23 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-23
184:306
§ 188-24. Maintenance of residential and nonresidential structures.
The duties and responsibilities of owners and operators are as follows:
E. Vacant land. Vacant land zoned or used for residential, commercial or
industrial use is subject to the provisions of this chapter as well as those
of Chapter 159 of the Code of the Borough of Florham Park relating to
the removal of refuse, garbage and weeds. The Property Maintenance
Code Official is hereby authorized and directed, in addition to the
Director of Public Works, to initiate and receive complaints with respect
to such conditions, as they affect the value and character of building
development in the Borough.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a
clean and sanitary condition.
B. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Exception:
Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
C. Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found,
they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will
not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent
reinfestation.
D. Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other
gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.
E. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in
good repair.
F. Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored
on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved
spray booth. Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo
major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
G. Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on
any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving
§ 188-23 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-24
184:307
§ 188-25. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.
Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas and their enclosures, if any, shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.
§ 188-26. Exterior structure.
or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said
surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
H. Every building and accessory structure and every part thereof shall be
kept structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid
deterioration, safety, health or fire hazards.
I. Painting and other protective coating. All exposed surfaces susceptible
to decay shall be kept at all times painted or otherwise provided with a
protective coating sufficient to prevent deterioration and maintain a
proper appearance.
J. Signs. All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as an
existing nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair; and
printed matter, pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be
completely maintained or, when no longer in use, completely removed.
(See also Borough Code Chapter 199.63) Contractor signs may be
displayed during the course of a job but must conform to the Borough
Sign Code and be removed when the job is completed.
A. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.
B. Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to
doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or
treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and
surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those
between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors
and skylights shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight. All
metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit
such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation
stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
C. Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or
road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 199, Signs.
§ 188-24 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-26
184:308
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with
a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
D. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed dead and live loads.
E. Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so
as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
F. Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
G. Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not
have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
H. Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim,
wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
I. Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions, including but not limited
to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts, shall be maintained in good repair and be properly
anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements
and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
J. Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck,
porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
K. Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound,
and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
L. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
§ 188-26 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-26
184:309
M. Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
N. Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and
holes.
O. Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware.
P. Insect screens. From May 1 to November 1, every door, window and
other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25
mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition. Exception: Screens shall not
be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insectrepellent
fans, are employed.
Q. Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units
and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of
egress doors shall be in accordance with § 188-29C.
R. Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water, and
every basement hatchway that provides access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be
equipped with devices that secure units from unauthorized entry.
S. Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is
openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other
approved protection against the entry of rodents.
T. Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units,
room units or housekeeping units that are rented, leased or let shall be
provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants
and property within.
U. Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which
egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or
effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than one inch (25 mm).
Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's
specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of
this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable
deadbolt lock.
§ 188-26 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-26
184:310
§ 188-27. Maintenance of exterior for nonresidential premises.
The duties and responsibilities of owners and operators are as follows:
§ 188-28. Sight triangles (residential and nonresidential).
On a lot within the triangular area (clear zone) determined as provided in
this section, no wall, fence, structure or other object shall be erected to
a height in excess of two feet; no vehicle, object or other obstruction of a
height in excess of two feet shall be permitted within the corner clearance
area; and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained at a
height in excess of two feet, except that trees whose branches are trimmed
V. Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet
(1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is
rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking
device.
A. The exterior of the premises and accessory structures shall be well
maintained and kept free of litter, debris and other unsightly conditions
such that the appearance of the premises and buildings shall not
constitute a blighting factor, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Signs. All permanent signs exposed to public view shall be
maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively
weathered or faded or those upon which the paint or finish has
excessively peeled or cracked and any which have become obsolete
shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith or put
into a good state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical
signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith. (See Borough Code Chapter 199.64)
(2) Windows. All windows shall be kept clean and free of marks or
foreign substances except when necessary in the course of
changing displays. No storage of materials, other than advertising
display, stock or inventory, shall be permitted in window areas or
other areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless said areas are
first screened from the public view by drapes, Venetian blinds or
other rendering of the windows opaque to the public view. All
screening of interiors shall be maintained in a clean and attractive
manner and in a good state of repair.
(3) Storefronts. All storefronts shall be kept in good repair and
restored as needed and shall not constitute a safety hazard or
nuisance. In the event that repairs to a storefront are made, such
repairs shall be made with the same or similar materials used in
construction of the storefront in such a manner as to permanently
repair the damaged area or areas.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 199, Signs.
§ 188-26 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-28
184:311
away to a height of at least seven feet above the curb level shall be
permitted. Such triangular area or "sight triangle" is defined as that area at
any intersection extending 50 feet from center point of the intersection in
all directions, or 35 feet from the curbline, whichever is greater.
§ 188-29. Means of egress.
§ 188-30. Maintenance of interior.65
The duties and responsibilities of owners and operators are as follows:
A. General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way.
Means of egress shall comply with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
B. Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code shall be unobstructed.
C. Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily operable from
the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys,
special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms
to that permitted by the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
D. Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings
shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of
construction, and the following: Required emergency escape and
rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room
without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices
are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue
openings, provided that the minimum net clear opening size complies
with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such
devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the
use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal
operation of the escape and rescue opening.
A. General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they
occupy or control in a sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure
containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory,
two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies
shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public
areas of the structure and exterior property.
B. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
C. Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or
65.Note: See also Ch. 159, Nuisances.
§ 188-28 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-30
184:312
§ 188-31. Handrails and guardrails.
Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall
have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair,
landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more
than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards.
Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42
inches (1,067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread
or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall
not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck or ramp or other walking surface. Exception: Guards
shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.66
§ 188-32. Maintenance of exterior.
abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose
plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected. Owner-occupied detached single-family dwellings shall be
exempt from this provision.
D. Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch,
deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition
and good repair.
E. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
F. Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its
frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being
properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended
by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. Owner-occupied
detached single-family dwellings shall be exempt from this provision.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, door, window, roof or other part of
a building shall be kept in good repair and capable of the use intended
by its design, and any exterior part or parts thereof subject to corrosion
or deterioration shall be kept maintained.
B. Every roof, wall, window, exterior door and hatchway or skylight shall
be free from holes or leaks that would permit the entrance of water
within a dwelling or be a cause of dampness.
C. Every foundation, floor and wall of a dwelling shall be made free from
chronic dampness.
D. Every dwelling shall be free from rodents, vermin and insects. Rodent
or vermin extermination and rodent-proofing and vermin-proofing may
be required by the local health agency. Rodent and vermin
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 188-30 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-32
184:313
§ 188-33. Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements.
§ 188-34. Required facilities.
extermination shall be carried out in accordance with applicable codes
and Borough Health Officer directives.
E. Every operable window, exterior door, skylight and other opening to the
outdoors shall be supplied with properly fitting screens in good repair
from May 1 until October 1 of each year. Such screens shall have a
mesh of not less than 16 gauge. Owner-occupied detached single-family
dwellings shall be exempt from this provision.
F. Every sidewalk, driveway and parking area shall be kept free of snow
and ice in accordance with this code and Borough Code Chapter 208. 67
G. The Property Maintenance Code Official, Construction Official or
Zoning Official may order the owners to clean, repair, paint, whitewash
or paper such walls or ceilings when a wall or ceiling within a dwelling
has deteriorated so as to provide a harborage for rodents or vermin, or
when such a wall or ceiling has become stained or soiled, or the plaster,
wallboard or other covering has become loose or badly cracked or
missing. Non-owner occupants shall keep that part of the dwelling they
occupy in a clean and sanitary condition.
H. Every water closet compartment floor and bathroom shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water so
as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean condition.
I. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or
lodging units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the common areas of the dwellings and premises
thereof.
J. All smoke detectors must be maintained in good working order.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
A. Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink, which shall be
maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close
67.Note: The provisions regarding snow and ice removal in Ch. 208 were included in Art. II,
Sidewalk Maintenance, which was repealed 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97.
§ 188-32 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-34
184:314
§ 188-35. Toilet rooms.
proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water
closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the
required lavatory.
B. Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
C. Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower
having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each 10
occupants.
D. Employees' facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and
one drinking facility shall be available to employees.
E. Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water
cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water
dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
F. Every water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each dwelling
unit or lodging house shall be accessible from within the building
without passing through any part of any other dwelling unit or lodging
unit and in a lodging house shall be located no further than one floor
above or below the lodging units served. Such water closet, lavatory
and bathtub or shower shall be contained in a room or rooms which are
separated from all other rooms by walls, doors or partitions that afford
privacy.
G. Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water and sewer systems
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and/or the local health agency, and shall be maintained in good working
condition.
H. Every kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or showers required by this
code shall be connected to both hot and cold water lines.
I. Cooking facilities, except microwave ovens, shall be limited to a kitchen
area having a sink and refrigeration. This area shall be ventilated to
remove cooking odor.
A. Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not
constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all
common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
B. Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units, dormitory units or housekeeping units shall have access by
traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from
a common hall or passageway.
§ 188-34 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-35
184:315
§ 188-36. Plumbing systems and fixtures.
§ 188-37. Water system.
C. Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access
from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities
shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees'
working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a
distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be
separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the
same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of
500 feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the
facilities.
D. Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall
be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit
such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which
such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be
maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.
B. Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
C. Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection,
backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for
similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
A. Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be provided with a safe
supply of potable water meeting the standards as set forth in the New
Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act regulations (N.J.A.C. 7:10-1 et seq.)
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
B. The source of such water supply shall be approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the local health agency.
C. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet
or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public
water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied
with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code.
§ 188-35 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-37
184:316
§ 188-38. Sanitary drainage system.
§ 188-39. Storm drainage.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas
on the premises, shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
§ 188-40. Janitorial service required.68
D. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all
water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level
rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other
hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place shall
be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
E. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a
supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to
function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
F. Water-heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a
temperature of not less than 110° F. (43° C.). A gas-burning water
heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or
other occupied room normally kept closed unless adequate combustion
air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressurerelief
valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained on water heaters.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
B. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
A. In every multifamily dwelling containing three or more dwelling units,
the owner shall provide or designate a superintendent, janitor,
caretaker or housekeeper, who shall at all times maintain the premises
in compliance with this code and keep the premises free from filth,
garbage, refuse and rubbish and who shall be responsible for the
collection of garbage and other refuse from the occupants on a regular
schedule and at a reasonable time, and placing the same out for
collection in accordance with the provisions of the Code of the Borough.
Said person shall be regularly available on the premises to perform his
required duties.
68.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 265, Sanitation.
§ 188-37 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-40
184:317
B. In the event that said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper
shall not reside in said premises, the owner or operator shall make his
name, address and telephone number known to all tenants and shall
register the same with the Police, Fire and Zoning Official or
Construction Official and shall also make available the name of an
alternative individual who shall be responsible during the absence of
said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper.
C. In any premises containing 35 or more dwelling units, rooming units or
a combination thereof, said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or
housekeeper shall reside on the premises. In any premises containing
70 or more dwelling units, rooming units or a combination thereof, said
superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper shall be a full-time
employee. Where more than one building adjoining premises or
premises in near proximity to each other are in common ownership or
under common management or maintenance supervision, the
requirements contained herein shall apply separately to each building
unless the owner or manager thereof can demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Official or Construction Official that the
proper operation of the premises and provisions for all essential
services and facilities as required under Borough codes can be provided
by a resident superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper of one
building who shall assume responsibility for the other building or
buildings adjoining or in near proximity of his place of residence. A
guide for staffing maintenance personnel is as follows:
Dwelling Units Full-Time Personnel
70 to 100 1
101 to 150 2
151 to 225 3
D. Said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper shall have
sufficient knowledge, competence and responsibility and shall have
authority from the owner or operator to attend to or arrange for
continual operation of all essential services and facilities required
under this code. Where violations arise under this code and, by reason
of the same, the Zoning Official or Construction Official is doubtful of
the qualifications, competence and sense of responsibility of any
superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper, he shall provide
written notice to the owner or operator. In the event that the Zoning
Official or Construction Official shall find that such person is not
capable, competent or willing to regularly perform the duties required
by this code, he shall so report to the Borough Council and, with its
approval, order the owner or operator to provide that a suitable person
be placed in charge and be responsible for said premises within 30 days
after notice.
E. The failure of any superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper to
comply with the provisions of this code, even in disobedience of
§ 188-40 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-40
184:318
§ 188-41. Garbage and rubbish containers.69
§ 188-42. Extermination.
instructions, shall not relieve the owner or operator from the duties and
responsibilities imposed by this code.
A. Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Approved garbage receptacles; removal of garbage.
(1) Garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in liquid-tight
receptacles of metal, plastic or other approved material by the
owner or renter. Such receptacles shall be provided with tightfitting
covers. At least one approved-type garbage receptacle shall
be provided for each dwelling unit.
(2) Garbage shall be removed from all residential or commercial units
at least once a week. (See Borough Code Chapter 265.)
C. Rubbish storage facilities. Rubbish shall be stored in receptacles of
metal, plastic or other approved material. At least one rubbish
receptacle shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
D. Garbage/rubbish containers shall be put out and removed from the
curbside within 24 hours of collection and stored out of the general
public's view.
E. Recycling containers shall be used for all approved recyclable
materials.
F. Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first
removing the doors.
G. Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an
approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
H. Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the
following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling
unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the
occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered,
outside garbage container.
I. Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof
containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such
materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
69.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 265, Sanitation.
§ 188-40 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-42
184:319
§ 188-43. Mechanical and electrical requirements.
§ 188-44. Heating facilities.
A. Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious
to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken
to prevent reinfestation.
B. Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the
structure.
C. Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a singletenant
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination
on the premises.
D. Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the
public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If
infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such
infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for
extermination.
E. Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent- and pest-free condition of the structure. Exception:
Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the
owner shall be responsible for extermination.
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
A. Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as
required by this section.
B. Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms during the period of
October 1 to May 1. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide
space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
C. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms,
either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
§ 188-42 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-44
184:320
§ 188-45. Mechanical equipment.70
§ 188-46. Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.
shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain
a temperature of not less than 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms. Exceptions:
(1) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
(2) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
D. Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures
shall be measured three feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center
of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each
exterior wall.
A. Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solidfuel-
burning appliances, cooking appliances and water-heating
appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working
condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.
B. Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled
for unvented operation.
C. Every approved space heater, except electrical, shall be properly vented
to a chimney or duct leading to the outdoors. Unvented portable and
unapproved space heaters burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuels shall be
prohibited.
D. Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
E. Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be
maintained in effective operation.
F. Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and
for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall
be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
G. Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel
supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom shall
not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is
specifically approved.
70.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 152, Mechanical Systems.
§ 188-44 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-46
184:321
§ 188-47. Duct systems.
Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable
of performing the required function.
§ 188-48. Electrical service and lighting.
A. General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in
compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certification of
inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or
attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. The
inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodical
intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise
specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
B. Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one
elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building
is occupied. Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall
be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing
or servicing.
A. Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window
of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the
floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure
face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than
three feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of
the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face
directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.
(1) Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without
exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the
unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of
the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25
square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on
the total floor area being served.
(2) In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein
prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with
the International Building Code may be provided.
B. Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings,
shall be lighted at all times with at least a sixty-watt standard
incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or
equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall
not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 mm). In other than residential
occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress,
stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by
§ 188-46 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-48
184:322
§ 188-49. Electrical facilities.
§ 188-50. Electrical equipment.
the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one footcandle (11
lux) at floors, landings and treads.
C. Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment and fixtures.
A. Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an
electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section
and § 188-50.
B. Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as
a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with the National Electrical Code. Units shall be served by a three-wire,
120/240 volt, single phase electrical service having a rating of not less
than 60 amperes.
C. Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system
in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle
and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or
damage, or for similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the
defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
A. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
B. Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least
two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a
ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least
one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground
fault circuit interrupter protection.
C. Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate, approved,
wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet
and one ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and
fixture shall be maintained in good and safe condition, and shall be
connected to the source of electric power. No temporary wiring shall be
used except extension cords which run directly from portable electrical
fixtures to convenience outlets, and which do not lie under rugs or other
floor coverings, nor extend through doorways, transoms or other
openings through structural elements.
D. Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen,
bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric luminary.
§ 188-48 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-50
184:323
§ 188-51. Use, occupancy and egress.
E. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have either
natural or artificial light available at all times, with an illumination of at
least three lumens per square foot (three footcandles). Such light shall
be measured 36 inches from the floor at the center of the room.
Artificial lighting shall be controlled by a wall switch so located as to
avoid danger of electrical hazards. Ground fault interrupter circuits
shall be installed to protect all bathroom wall outlets.
F. All electrical outlets, where required by the National Electrical Code,
shall be protected by ground fault interrupter (GFI) circuits.
A. Privacy. Dwelling units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be
arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
B. Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not
be less than seven feet (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens
shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm)
between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
C. Minimum ceiling heights.
(1) Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms,
toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling
height of not less than seven feet (2,134 mm).
(2) Exceptions:
(a) In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not
less than four feet (1,219 mm) on center and projecting not
more than six inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling
height.
(b) Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a
ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches (2,033 mm)
with not less than six feet four inches (1,932 mm) of clear
height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
(c) Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the
room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet (2,134
mm) over not less than 1/3 of the required minimum floor area.
In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions
of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524
mm) or more shall be included.
D. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
§ 188-50 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-51
184:324
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
E. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
F. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of
the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
G. A room located in whole or in part below the level of the ground may be
used for sleeping, provided that the walls and floor thereof in contact
with the earth have been waterproofed in accordance with a method
approved by the Construction Official; and provided that all
requirements otherwise applicable to habitable rooms generally are
satisfied.
H. Every dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging unit shall have safe and
unobstructed means of egress. Such means of egress shall not be
through any other dwelling unit or part thereof and shall lead to a safe
and open space at ground level accessible to a street.
I. A room used for sleeping purposes under the provisions of Subsection G
of this section shall be provided with two safe and unobstructed means
of egress leading directly to an outside area accessible to a street.
J. There shall be not fewer than two independent exits remote from each
other from every floor of a building greater than two stories in height
having more than two dwelling and/or lodging units.
K. Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of
access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the
only means of egress from other habitable spaces. Exception: Units that
contain fewer than two bedrooms.
L. Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least
one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least
one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom
or an adjacent story.
M. Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be
used for sleeping purposes.
N. Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this code, including but not limited to the light,
ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of
this chapter; the plumbing facilities described in § 188-34 and the
§ 188-51 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-51
184:325
§ 188-52. Ventilation.
§ 188-53. Duties and responsibilities of occupants.
Duties and responsibilities of occupants shall be as follows:
water-heating facilities requirements of § 188-37F; the heating facilities
and electrical receptacle requirements of §§ 188-44 and 188-50B,
respectively; and the smoke detector requirements of § 188-57B and
emergency escape requirements of § 188-29D.
O. Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall
not create conditions that, in the opinion of the Code Official, endanger
the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.
A. Means of ventilation shall be provided for every habitable room. Such
ventilation may be provided either by an easily operable window or
skylight having an openable area of at least 50% of the minimum
window area or minimum skylight area, or by other means acceptable
to the Construction Official which will provide at least two air changes
per hour.
B. Means of ventilation shall be provided for all bathroom or water closet
compartments. Such ventilation may be provided either by an easily
operable window or skylight having an openable area of at least 50% of
the minimum window area or minimum skylight area, or by other means
acceptable to the Construction Official which will provide at least six air
changes per hour.
A. General and specific provisions; all residential. Occupants shall not,
after notice as required under § 188-13, occupy or continue to occupy
premises which are substandard by reason of the failure of the dwelling
unit or rooming unit occupied by them or of the dwelling or premises to
conform to and comply with the requirement of this code. Upon
discovery by an occupant of any condition on premises which constitute
a violation of this code, said occupant first shall provide notice to the
owner or operator pursuant to Subsection G. Should relief be denied,
said occupant then shall report the same to the Zoning Official or
Construction Official responsible for enforcement hereunder.
B. Cleanliness and sanitation. All parts of the premises under the control
of the occupant and/or operator shall be kept in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain from performing any
acts which would render the premises substandard, unclean or
unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
performing any duty required hereunder or maintaining the premises in
a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Garbage disposal and personal accumulations. Occupants shall place all
garbage only in the receptacles provided for garbage disposal and,
where janitor service is not supplied, shall place for disposal all garbage
§ 188-51 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-53
184:326
§ 188-54. Suspension of service and utilities.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required to be supplied by the provisions of this code
or local or state laws to be removed from or discontinued for an occupied
dwelling unit except for necessary repairs, alterations for emergencies or
for such other reason as may be permitted pursuant to those sections of the
Borough ordinances applicable to such service, facility, equipment or utility.
and other refuse only in garbage cans located in the exterior of the
premises in an area designated and set forth for the same. Where
janitorial service for the removal of garbage and other refuse to the
exterior of the premises is provided by the owner or operator, then the
occupant shall dispose of garbage and other refuse only in containers
provided therefor by the owner or operator in designated and enclosed
areas in the interior of the premises. All recyclables shall be put in
approved containers for disposal.
D. Eliminating infestation.
(1) All residential. Every occupant of a residential dwelling unit shall
be responsible for eliminating all conditions affecting infestation
which are caused by the occupant and also those conditions which
are subject to and under his exclusive control.
(2) Nonresidential. Every owner, operator or occupant shall be
responsible for the elimination and extermination of infestation in
and on the premises subject to his control.
E. Malicious damage. Every occupant and owner or operator shall be
responsible for repairing damage caused to any part of the premises by
willful or malicious act.
F. Misuse of heating/cooking equipment. No occupant shall suffer or
cause excessive discoloration of the walls, ceiling or floors of any part of
the premises by improper use of heating or cooking equipment.
Cooking equipment may not be used for heating purposes.
G. Providing notice of defect to owner. Where the owner or operator would
not otherwise know of a defect of any facility, utility or equipment
required to be furnished hereunder and the same is defective or
inoperable, each occupant or operator affected shall upon learning of
said defect provide notice in writing to the owner, operator or other
person in charge of the premises. Nothing herein shall be construed to
provide a defense to any owner or operator violating this code. Repairs
are to be made within 30 days of notice.
H. Violations by minors and guests. Any adult member of the immediate
family shall be responsible and liable for any violation of this section
caused by minors in his or her care or custody occupying the same
dwelling unit. The adult members of the family shall also be responsible
for damage caused by guests.
§ 188-53 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-55
184:327
§ 188-55. Firesafety requirements.
§ 188-56. Fire-resistance ratings.
§ 188-57. Fire protection systems.
A. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed
or otherwise made inoperable.
B. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for firesafety relating to structures and
exterior premises, including firesafety facilities and equipment to be
provided.
C. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such firesafety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
A. Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of
fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and
floors shall be maintained.
B. Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained
in an operative condition. All fire and smoke-stop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition.
A. General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an
alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
B. Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not
regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of
the following locations:
(1) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
(2) In each room used for sleeping purposes.
(3) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements, but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or
dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper
level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level, provided that the
lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. Single
or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups
in accordance with the International Fire Code.
C. Power source.
§ 188-55 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-57
184:328
§ 188-58. Bamboo. [Added 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
(1) In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R
occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their
primary power from the building wiring, provided that such wiring
is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a
battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the
batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection.
(2) Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery
operated in buildings where no construction is taking place,
buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and
in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that
do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available which could provide access for building wiring
without the removal of interior finishes.
D. Interconnection.
(1) Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed
within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in
dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms
shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one
alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm
shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise
levels with all intervening.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
(b) Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the
removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the
structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement
available which could provide access for interconnection
without the removal of interior finishes.
A. Purpose. This section is adopted to control the planting, growing,
maintaining and/or cultivating of bamboo in the Borough of Florham
Park and to require barriers to prevent the spread of existing bamboo
into other areas of the Borough.
B. Regulation of the planting, growing or cultivating of bamboo. Subject to
certain exemptions set forth in this section, no persons, residents,
citizens, property owners and/or tenants of the Borough shall plant,
cultivate, or cause to grow, any bamboo on any lot and/or parcel of
§ 188-57 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-58
184:329
ground anywhere within the geographic boundaries of the Borough of
Florham Park, except for:
(1) Where the root system of such bamboo plants is entirely contained
within an above-ground-level planter, barrel, or other vessel of such
design, material and location as to entirely prevent the spread of
growth of the bamboo plants' root system beyond the container
beyond which it is planted,
(2) Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no
part of the plant shall be closer than 10 feet from any property line.
C. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any land owner or possessor
of said land who, prior to the effective date of this section, has any
bamboo on any property within the Borough limits. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, no portions of such bamboo shall be allowed to grow
upon, extend roots across, or extend branches, stalks or leaves over any
public way or onto any private property. If such occurs, the provisions of
Subsection D shall apply.
D. Complaint notice, order for removal and compliance. Whenever a
complaint is received by the Borough regarding the encroachment of
any bamboo plant or root, or whenever the Borough, on its own
observations and inspections, determines that there is an
encroachment of bamboo plants or roots on to the property of another
land owner, or tenant in possession of the property, or both, the
Borough shall cause notice to be served and the following actions
occur:
(1) The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, properly addressed and with sufficient postage, and also
by first-class mail. Notice by certified mail shall be deemed
complete on the date of personal delivery, or the date the certified
mail is marked refused or unclaimed or otherwise undeliverable by
the United States Post Office. First-class mail shall be deemed
delivered within five calendar days of its being mailed by the
Borough.
(2) The notice shall specify the nature of the violation(s).
(3) The notice shall state that the violation(s) must be corrected within
30 calendar days from the date of the received or returned mailing.
(4) The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the
responsible party to correct the violation(s).
E. Repealer. All ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed as
to the extent of such inconsistency.
F. Violations and penalties.
§ 188-58 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 188-58
184:330
Chapter 189
PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 199. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
(1) Any person determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to
have violated this section shall be subject to pay a fine of not less
than $25 per day nor more than $100 per day, for each day the
violation exists after the date for removal as set forth in the notice
which was sent to violator and received by the violator as defined
above. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a
separate offense, for which an additional fine can be levied. The
per-day fine will be in addition to a penalty for failure to comply
with the Bamboo Ordinance. This fine can be up to the maximum
penalty set by the State of New Jersey.
(2) If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the
aforesaid notice, the Borough is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed any encroaching bamboo and to take all reasonable
steps to eradicate the regrowth of the bamboo on the public rights
of way, including sidewalks, and to restore such land to its normal
condition, prior to such removal and eradication.
(3) The cost of the corrective action together with any civil penalties,
legal fees and other costs shall be recoverable from the responsible
party.
(4) See § 188-15 for further details with regard to violations and
penalties.
G. Severability. If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this section
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any Court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portion of this section.
§ 188-58 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 188-58
184:331

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Banners and Other Displays
[Adopted 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 36-06]
§ 189-1. Requirements.
Banners and other forms of public displays of information may be permitted
on public property or rights-of-way within the Borough, provided that such
displays meet the following requirements:
A. Displays are permitted only on behalf of Florham Park community
organizations. By allowing the mounting of organizational displays, the
Borough intends to promote volunteer efforts in the community,
recognize beneficial achievements, and celebrate significant events or
dates.
B. All display designs shall be submitted for review by the Borough
Administrator. Each submission shall be accompanied by a completed
display permit application. The Borough Administrator shall
communicate with the organization regarding any unacceptable
aspects of the proposed display design.
C. Upon receiving a display recommendation from the Borough
Administrator, the governing body shall vote to approve or disapprove
the recommendation prior to mounting the display.
D. The time period allowed for any display shall be limited in accordance
with the decision by the governing body, but in no circumstances shall
any display be allowed beyond 21 days.
E. It is the responsibility of the sponsoring organization to provide to the
Department of Community Services, in a timely manner, the permitted
banner or display. The Department shall be responsible for mounting
the display on or before the beginning date of the approved time period
and for removal of the display at the ending date of the approved time
period.
F. The Borough reserves the right to remove or relocate any display in the
event that circumstances warrant such a removal or relocation prior to
the end date of the permitted use.
G. Any banner or other form of public display of information that is
displayed on public property or right-of-way in the Borough in violation
of this article shall be removed or relocated by the Borough.
H. The fee for display of a banner shall be $100. All nonprofit community
organizations shall be exempt from the requirement to pay this fee.
[Amended 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2]
§ 189-1 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 189-1
184:333
Chapter 189A
RACES
§ 189A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RACE — Any organized event of speed or endurance involving five-kilometer
(5k) foot races.
§ 189A-2. Permit required.
No person shall conduct, operate, start, sanction, supervise, or otherwise
allow a race to be held in the Borough of Florham Park unless such person
has applied for and received a race permit from the Borough of Florham
Park and has complied with all of the terms of this chapter.
§ 189A-3. Application process.
A. Any person seeking to hold a race within the Borough of Florham Park
shall secure a race permit application from the Engineering
Department of the Borough of Florham Park. A complete race
application permit must be submitted to the Engineering Department,
with all required attachments and fees, no later than 60 days prior to
the start of the proposed race. Failure to timely submit an application
may be grounds for denial of a race permit.
B. The Engineering Department of the Borough of Florham Park shall keep
on file a form entitled "Race Permit Application," which it may revise
from time to time as necessary. The race permit application shall
request the applicant to provide at least the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address and essential contact information.
The applicant's name shall be the name of the person or
organization responsible for conducting the race. If the applicant is
an organization, the applicant shall provide the names and
addresses of the officers of the organization.
(2) Contact information for the primary person who will be responsible
for the conduct of the race, including at least the person's address,
telephone number, fax number, e-mail address, and emergency
contact information.
(3) The date of the race, including all dates which would involve
prerace activities taking place in the Borough of Florham Park, as
well as a schedule of race activities.
(4) The race route, which shall include a map depicting the proposed
race route.
§ 189-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 189A-3
184:334
§ 189A-4. Review by Engineer.
(5) A narrative description of the proposed race, including the type of
race proposed, any events within the Borough of Florham Park to
promote the race, any prerace events within the Borough of
Florham Park, and any events to take place on the day of the race,
other than the race itself.
(6) Any provisions that the applicant is making for food and drink for
participants as well as spectators, as well as any provisions to be
made for personal hygiene, litter control, parking and lighting (if
necessary).
(7) A statement addressing how the applicant proposes to handle
crowd control, spectator parking and traffic control.
(8) A statement as to any contingency plans in the event of inclement
weather.
A. The Borough Engineer shall be responsible for reviewing the permit
application and granting or denying the permit. A decision to grant or
deny such permit shall be made no later than 10 business days after
receipt of all of the information required by the application form. In the
course of such review, the Borough Engineer shall, in his/her discretion,
seek advice from the Chief of Police or any other municipal employee or
official who may provide information relevant to the review of the
permit application. If the Borough Engineer denies the permit, then the
Borough Engineer shall provide the applicant with a written statement
of reasons for denial. The Borough Engineer shall be permitted to deny
the application if one or more of the following circumstances are found:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide sufficient information required
by the permit application or this chapter in order to determine if
the application satisfies the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The proposed route, or the proposed dates, or other elements of the
race would interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic or with
access for emergency services vehicles or would otherwise
constitute a potential hazard to public safety.
(3) There would be an insufficient number of supervisory or law
enforcement personnel or emergency services in order for the race
to be conducted in a safe and secure manner.
(4) The applicant has failed to demonstrate that it will have sufficient
support staff or other resources to conduct the race as proposed.
B. If the Borough Engineer determines that the application could be
granted if the application is amended, then the Borough Engineer may,
but is not required to, submit to the applicant a statement of such
amendments which would result in granting of the permit.
§ 189A-3 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 189A-5
184:335
§ 189A-5. Responsibilities of applicant.
The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all of the ordinances
of the Borough of Florham Park, as well as any other regulatory authorities.
The applicant shall designate a specific individual who shall be responsible
for being available for communications with Borough officials at all times
during the race and for race cleanup after the race is conducted. The person
designated by the applicant shall have the legal authority to act on behalf of
the applicant at all times.
§ 189A-6. Approval of route; review by Police Chief; time
restrictions.
§ 189A-7. Use of Borough police officers.
In the event that the applicant seeks to utilize the services of Borough police
officers, then the applicant shall make the application required by § 46-8,
Third-party assignments, of the Borough Code.
§ 189A-8. Other permits.
The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any other permits that
may be necessary for any aspect of the race that is regulated by other
authorities, whether municipal or otherwise. This would include, but not be
limited to, any permits seeking to dispense alcoholic beverages, any roadclosing
permits, any permits seeking to race on highways or property owned
by the County of Morris or other public bodies, any permits to permit racing
in other municipalities, or any other permits that may be required.
§ 189A-9. Fees.
The applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application fee to the Borough
of Florham Park at the time of application. The application fee shall be $150.
In addition, the applicant shall deposit an escrow fee with the Borough
which shall be reasonably calculated to cover the cost of cleanup of any
litter or other debris. The escrow amount shall be determined by the
Borough Engineer at the time of issuance of the permit and must be paid
A. The exact route of the race shall be subject to the approval of the
Borough Engineer and the Chief of Police.
B. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall review the application and
traffic plan and have the authority to deny the application for any
reason concerning the public safety of the citizens, event staffing and
police staffing concerns.
C. The race schedule shall be subject to approval of the Borough Engineer,
including the date on which the race is to take place. However, in no
event shall a race be scheduled to take place between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays.
§ 189A-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 189A-9
184:336
no later than 10 business days prior to the race. The Borough shall deduct
from such escrow any amount necessary to clean up after the race in the
event that the applicant does not fully undertake postrace cleanup.
§ 189A-10. Public notice.
The applicant shall undertake to notify the property owners in the race
area of the event at least two business days in advance. The applicant
shall provide such notice by conspicuously posting notices of the race, such
posting to be done as permitted by law.
§ 189A-11. Indemnification; insurance.
A. The applicant shall save, indemnify and hold harmless the Borough and
its officers, agents, boards and employees from any and all actions at
law or at equity, charges, debts, liens, encumbrances, costs and counsel
fees which may arise from any damage or loss arising from the conduct
of the race (or prerace or postrace events), except where the Borough
or its agents have been judicially determined to have acted contrary to
law or have failed to perform acts required by law.
B. The applicant will add the Borough of Florham Park as an additional
insured under its liability insurance, in connection with this subsection,
and provide appropriate proof of insurance thereof. The applicant or its
assignees or designees shall obtain and pay all premiums for liability
insurance, insuring the Borough as a named insured against all claims
for personal injury or property damage arising from the conduct of the
race (or prerace or postrace events). The aforementioned insurance
coverage shall not be less than the following amounts:
Type of Insurance Amount of Coverage
Comprehensive general liability
(combined injury and property
damage)
$1,000,000 (combined single
limit)
Auto liability (bodily injury and
property damage)
$1,000,000 (combined single
limit)
Excess liability and property
damage
$2,000,000 (combined single
limit)
C. The applicant shall provide workers' compensation insurance coverage
for employees in amounts in accordance with law. Certificates
disclosing proper coverage shall be delivered to the Borough and shall
be acceptable to the Borough Attorney and the Borough Insurance Risk
Manager in form and content as well as to the insurer, before any race
activities are undertaken.
§ 189A-9 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 189A-11
184:337
Chapter 190
RAFFLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-16. Bingo — See Ch. 85.
§ 190-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INSTANT RAFFLE GAMES — Includes all instant raffle games and other
similar lawful games of chance for use by qualified organizations, which
includes charitable, educational, fraternal, civic and religious organizations,
volunteer fire companies, rescue squads and senior citizen associations
which have first been registered with the Legalized Games of Chance
Control Commission of the State of New Jersey ("Control Commission").
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 190-2. License required.
No person shall conduct an instant raffle game within the Borough unless
such person first shall have obtained a license for such purpose from the
Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 190-3. Application; issuance.
A. The Mayor and Borough Council may, after application in an acceptable
manner and form, grant a license to hold an instant raffle game for a
term not exceeding one year from the date of the issuance of such
license. Application forms may be obtained from the office of the
Borough Clerk. Applications must be submitted at least 60 days in
advance of the scheduled instant raffle game. The information required
to be provided on an application includes:
(1) The type of activity to be licensed.
(2) The dates and hours during which the game(s) will be conducted.
(3) The address where the game(s) will be conducted.
(4) A schedule of expenses to be incurred in connection with the
game(s).
(5) The purpose(s) for which the net game proceeds will be used.
(6) A description of the prizes to be offered.
§ 189A-11 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 190-3
184:338
§ 190-4. Fees.
The following fees must be paid to the Borough Clerk before the issuance of
any license under this chapter:
§ 190-5. Revocation of license.
The Mayor and Borough Council shall have the right to revoke any license
issued for any violation of this chapter or for the violation of any ordinance
of the Borough.
§ 190-5.1. Authority to approve granting of licenses. [Added
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
The authority set forth in this chapter of the governing body to approve the
granting of raffle licenses within the Borough of Florham Park is hereby
delegated to the Borough Clerk.
(7) A sworn statement by the organization's member in charge that the
game(s) will be conducted in accordance with the relevant gaming
laws and that the proceeds will be used for the authorized
purposes, as described in the application.
B. The application must be filed in quadruplicate with the Borough Clerk.
One copy will be retained by the Borough, the second will be returned
to the applicant after a license is issued or denied by the Borough, the
third will be forwarded to the Control Commission, and the fourth will
be filed with the Borough Police Department. No application for a
license shall be considered unless the applicant shall have first
registered with and received an identification number from the Control
Commission.
A. A fee payable to the Borough of Florham Park in the amount of:
(1) Twenty dollars for each day on which the instant raffle game tickets
are sold or offered for sale (for one-time events); or [Amended
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 33-06]
(2) Fifty dollars for a one-year license to sell or to offer for sale, on an
unlimited basis, instant raffle game tickets during the licensing
year (for weekly raffles conducted during the course of a year).
B. A fee payable to the Control Commission in the amount of:
(1) Twenty dollars for each day on which the instant raffle game tickets
are sold or offered for sale (for one-time events); or [Amended
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 33-06]
(2) Five hundred dollars for a one-year license to sell or to offer for
sale, on an unlimited basis, instant raffle game tickets during the
licensing year (for weekly raffles conducted during the course of a
year).
§ 190-3 POOLROOMS AND BILL1ARD PARLORS § 190-5.2
184:339
§ 190-5.2. Authority to operate on Sundays at public events. [Added
8-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-28; amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-5]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-58, raffles may be operated on Sundays within the
Borough at public events.
§ 190-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating a provision of this chapter by operating an instant
raffle game encompassed by this chapter without a license shall be
punished as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-16 of the Code of the Borough of
Florham Park.
Chapter 191
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hours for poolrooms — See Ch. 184, § 184-9. Retail food establishments (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 259.
§ 190-5.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 190-6
191:340
ARTICLE I
Retail Food Establishments
[Adopted 8-19-1975 by Ord. No. 14-75]
§ 191-1. Hours of operation. [Amended 8-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1788]
Retail food establishments can serve the public between 6:00 am. and 11:00
p.m., with the establishments being closed for the remaining hours of the
day and the public not being served.
§ 191-1 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 191-1
191:341

ARTICLE II
Retail Businesses
[Adopted 8-16-1988 as Sec. IV of Ord. No. 17-88]
§ 191-2. Hours of operation.
A. All retail businesses located within the Borough of Florham Park, with
the exception of those especially licensed under N.J.S.A. 33:1-3.1 et seq.
and 33:1-47.1,71 shall have hours of operation only between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., during which time the public shall be served.
B. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the retail businesses
shall be closed and the public shall not be served.
C. Establishments licensed to serve and sell products under N.J.S.A.
33:1-3.1 et seq. and 33:1-47.1 shall be governed by the terms of the
license, but that in no way shall be interpreted to permit other retail
sales as otherwise proscribed by this chapter.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Alcoholic Beverages, § 72-2.
§ 191-2 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 191-2
191:343
Chapter 192
RIPARIAN ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater control — See Ch. 213. Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 215.
§ 192-1. Scope and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to designate riparian zones, and to provide for
land use regulation therein in order to protect the streams, lakes, and other
surface water bodies of the Borough of Florham Park and to comply with
N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires municipalities to adopt an ordinance
that prevents new disturbance for projects or activities in riparian zones
as described herein; and furthermore designates any new disturbance for
projects or activities in riparian zones as a violation of use necessitating
a use variance from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Compliance with the
riparian zone requirements of this chapter does not constitute compliance
with the riparian zone or buffer requirements imposed under any other
federal, state or local statute, regulation or ordinance.
§ 192-2. Definitions.
The definitions of the words and/or terms utilized in this chapter shall be
further defined or described in the Water Quality Management Planning
Rule, N.J.A.C. 7:15, the Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and/or
Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, as they exist as of the
effective date of this chapter and as they may be amended over time.
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acidproducing
soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction
Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this chapter, and that would be located in whole or in part within a
regulated Riparian Zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS OR C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water quality
characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
§ 191-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 192-2
191:344
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special
water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys.
LAKE, POND, OR RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water
resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys; that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water resource
protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Map or in
the County Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their
point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and shown
on the USGS Quadrangle Map or in the County Soil Surveys within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
§ 192-2 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 192-2
191:345
SURFACE WATER BODY or BODIES — Any perennial stream, intermittent
stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any
regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:13-2.2, or state open waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued
under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Division of Land
Use Regulation shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§§ 1531 et seq., or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 192-3. Establishment and protection of riparian zones.
A. Except as provided in §§ 192-4 and 192-5 below, riparian zones adjacent
to all surface water bodies shall be protected from avoidable
disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed.
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the surface
water body for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the
length of the regulated water; and
(d) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
acid-producing soils.
§ 192-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 192-3
191:346
§ 192-4. Variances.
To the extent allowed by the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8),
the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38), new disturbances
for projects or activities in the riparian zone established by this chapter
may be allowed through a Zoning Board of Adjustment review and approval
of a variance, provided the disturbance is proposed to be located on a
preexisting lot (existing as of the effective date of this chapter) when there
is insufficient room outside the riparian zone for the proposed use otherwise
permitted by the underlying zoning; there is no other reasonable or prudent
alternative to placement in the riparian zone, including obtaining variances
from setback or other requirements that would allow conformance with
the riparian zone requirements; and upon proof by virtue of submission of
appropriate maps, drawings, reports and testimony, that the disturbance is:
(3) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide
shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
B. If a discernible bank is not present along a surface water body, the
portion of the riparian zone outside the surface water body is measured
landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the feature's center line;
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit;
(3) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the mean high water line; and
(4) Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
C. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site, and for
identifying the area of the riparian zone on any plan submitted to the
Borough of Florham Park in conjunction with an application for a
construction permit, subdivision, site plan, land development, or other
improvement that requires plan submissions or permits. This initial
determination shall be subject to review and approval by the Municipal
Engineer and Zoning Officer and, where required by state regulation,
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare;
B. To provide an environmental benefit;
C. To prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or
§ 192-3 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 192-4
191:347
§ 192-5. Exceptions.
To the extent allowed under the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38) and
subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to the extent required by those rules, the
following disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone
established by this chapter are allowed:
§ 192-6. Appeals, conflicts, and severability.
D. To prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, by not allowing a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
A. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
B. Linear development with no feasible alternative route;
C. Disturbance that is in accordance with a stream corridor restoration or
stream bank stabilization plan or project approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection;
D. Disturbance necessary to provide for public pedestrian access or waterdependent
recreation that meets the requirements of the Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone Management
Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E; or
E. Disturbance with no feasible alternative required for the remediation of
hazardous substances performed with New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or federal oversight pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et seq. or the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.
A. Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone boundary
determination under this chapter may appeal to the Borough of
Florham Park under the provisions of this chapter. The party contesting
the location of the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of
proof in case of any such appeal.
B. Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Borough of
Florham Park under this chapter may appeal to the governing body of
the Borough of Florham Park. The party contesting the determination
or decision shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
C. Conflicts: All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are
§ 192-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 192-6
191:348
§ 192-7. Enforcement.
A prompt investigation shall be made, by the Zoning Officer, of any person
or entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition
which is in violation of this chapter is discovered, a civil action in the Special
Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court if the primary relief
sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the
Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the right of the Borough of
Florham Park, pursuant to N.J.S.A 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings
hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent
of the violation of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued
pursuant to this chapter. Each day a violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense. Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as set
forth in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 192-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with the law on the date it is filed with the County Planning
Board after adoption.
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
D. Severability:
(1) Interpretation: This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding that any provision of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of the Ordinance shall continue to be of full
force and effect.
(3) The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 192-6 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 192-8
191:349
Chapter 193
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCE
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Soil removal — See Ch. 203.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Sanitation — See Ch. 265.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems — See Ch. 278.
§ 192-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 192-8
191:350
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 193-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING — Any building or structure constructed and designed or used
for dwelling purposes, either temporary or permanent, or other use or
occupancy by persons.
SEWER — Any sewer or main designed or used for collection or disposal of
sanitary sewage and located in any public street in the Borough.
§ 193-2. Connection required.
The owner of any building located upon any public street in the Borough
in which a sewer is constructed or shall be constructed shall connect such
building and every toilet therein with such sewer, provided that the building
is within 300 feet of the connection point.
§ 193-3. Specifications.
All sewer specifications will be in accordance with the current standards
adopted by the Florham Park Sewerage Authority.72
§ 193-4. Installation by Borough.
If the owner of any property in the Borough shall fail to make any
connection or installation required by this chapter within the time required,
the Borough may proceed to make such connection or installation or cause
the same to be made and charge and assess the cost thereof against such
property, pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:63-54.
72.Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Art. II, Sewer Utility, of this chapter.
§ 193-1 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 193-4
191:351

ARTICLE II
Sewer Utility
§ 193-5. Establishment.
The existing publicly owned and operated sanitary sewer system of the
Borough, previously operated by the Florham Park Sewerage Authority, is
hereby declared to be a utility of the Borough of Florham Park. Such utility
shall hereafter be referred to as the "Sewer Utility," which shall be a division
of the Department of Community Services, under the control of the Director
of such Department.
§ 193-6. Sewer Utility Fund.
All future revenue and accounting therefor from said Sewer Utility shall be
on a dedicated utility basis in conformance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:4-35. All monies derived from the operation of said Sewer Utility and
any other monies applicable to its support shall be segregated and kept in
a separate fund which shall be known as the "Sewer Utility Fund," and all
disbursements for the operation and maintenance of said Sewer Utility shall
be taken from said Sewer Utility Fund.
§ 193-7. Budget.
The dedicated budget of this Sewer Utility shall include appropriations
for operating expenses, capital improvements, debt service and for the
payment of all other deferred charges and statutory expenses as may be
required.
§ 193-8. Administration.
Subject to statutory requirements, the Sewer Utility and the Sewer Plant
Manager are a part of the Department of Community Services. The Sewer
Plant Manager shall report to the Director of Community Services.
§ 193-9. Powers and duties.
A. Powers and duties of the Sewer Plant Manager. The Sewer Plant
Manager shall be a person holding such license as may be required by
state law. Subject to the direction of the Director of Community
Services, the Sewer Plant Manager shall be responsible for all phases of
the provision of sewer services to sewer users in the Borough. The
Sewer Plant Manager shall perform all duties and carry out all
responsibilities set forth in state statutes and regulations of the State
Department of Environmental Protection and in this Code. The Sewer
Plant Manager shall be responsible for maintaining all records and
submitting reports so as to assure proper sewer service in the Borough.
B. Powers and duties of the Director of Community Services.
§ 193-5 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 193-9
191:353
(1) The Director of Community Services is responsible for directing all
personnel of the Sewer Utility in carrying out their assigned
departmental responsibilities.
(2) The Director of Community Services shall make an annual
inventory of all tools, equipment, and supplies of the Sewer Utility
and render a report to the Mayor and Council.
(3) The Director of Community Services shall submit to the Mayor and
Council regular monthly and annual reports regarding the status of
the Sewer Utility and such other reports as may be requested by
the Mayor and Council or Borough Administrator.
(4) The Director of Community Services shall prepare and maintain
rules and regulations for the operation of the Sewer Utility which
shall set forth the means for the public to make application for the
use of water in the Borough and provide for standards of
construction, maintenance and operation of the sewer system and
any additions thereto.
§ 193-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 193-9
191:354
ARTICLE III
Fees and Charges
§ 193-10. Sewer user charges.
The Borough Council is hereby authorized to establish, from time to time,
the charges and fees for sewer and incidental services to be provided by
the Sewer Utility. Effective January 1, 2009, the Borough Council hereby
adopts the schedule of charges currently established by the Florham Park
Sewerage Authority73 for the collection, disposal and treatment of sanitary
sewage material charged to all customers of the Authority.74
73.Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Art. II, Sewer Utility, of this chapter.
74.Editor's Note: The schedule is on file in the offices of the Department of Community
Services, 111 Ridgedale Avenue, Florham Park, NJ.
§ 193-10 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 193-10
191:355
Chapter 199
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 199-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 199-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing or color changes,
requiring electrical energy.
APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — A plastic material more than 1/
20 inch in thickness, which burns at a rate of not more than 2 1/2 inches per
minute when subjected to the American Society for Testing and Materials
standard test for flammability of plastic in sheets of 0.06 inch thickness.
A. To regulate the nature and extent of signs within all zones.
B. To provide for a reasonable system of control of signs, integrated within
and as part of the Comprehensive Zoning Plan75 established in the
Code.
C. To protect and enhance the economic value of the community in each
area thereof through the regulation of such things as size, location,
design and illumination of signs.
D. To eliminate possible traffic and safety hazards.
E. To protect the appearance and visual peace of the community by
prohibiting devices which tend to make the diversion of attention an
involuntary act or which are aesthetically repellent.
F. To limit signs to the identification and location of the occupant or
permitted use of the premises.
G. To permit adequate means of political communication.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 193-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-2
191:356
AREA OF SIGN — Computed as the total square-foot content of the
background upon which the lettering, illustration or display is presented. If
there is no background, the "sign area" shall be computed as the product of
the largest horizontal width and the largest vertical height of the lettering,
illustration or display. This shall not be construed to include the supporting
members of any sign which are used solely for such purpose. For signs with
two display faces, the maximum area requirement shall be permitted on
each side. Signs with more than two display faces are prohibited.
AWNING — Any structure made of cloth, metal or plastic, with a metal
frame attached to a building, not used as a dwelling and projecting over
an area designed or intended to be used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic
outside of the walls of a building, when the same is so erected as to permit
its being frame-raised or rolled to a position flat or rolled against the
building when not in use or is supported by a frame fastened to the ground
or other surface.
BILLBOARD SIGN — Any sign erected or maintained for the purpose of
displaying outdoor advertising by means of posters, pictures, pictorial and
reading matter, supported by uprights placed in the ground and not
attached to any part of a building.
CANOPY-MARQUEE — Any temporary or permanent covering or other
rooflike structure supported by a frame or bracketing extending outward
from the face of a building and constructed for shade or shelter, other than
an awning, over an area designed or intended to be used for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic outside the walls of the building. For the purposes hereof,
it shall be deemed to be included in the term "wall sign" as used herein and,
where permitted, shall be in lieu of a wall sign.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A panel which is characterized by changeable
copy, regardless of method of attachment or operation, be it manual,
mechanical or electronic.
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL — The Construction Code Official of the
Borough of Florham Park.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include the painting of wall signs.
FACING or SURFACE — The surface on the sign upon, against or through
which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
GROUND SIGN — Any sign supported by uprights, braces or foundations
placed in or upon the ground and not attached to any building.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outline illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or other
illuminating device.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — Any material which will not ignite at or
below a temperature of 1,200° F. and will not continue to burn or glow at
that temperature.
§ 199-2 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-2
191:357
MAINTENANCE OF SIGN — Includes the upkeep or replacement, without
substantial change, of any parts or supports of any sign and the repainting
of the sign and the wall or structure supporting it.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign easily moved from place to place on a stand
or A-type frame having no permanent attachment to the ground, building or
structure.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon
or over the roof of any building, with the principal support on the roof
structure.
SHOPPING CENTER, MALL or PLAZA — A group of commercial
establishments built on one tract that is planned and developed as an
operating unit, providing on-site parking. The commercial establishments
may be located in one or several buildings, attached or separated.
SIGN — Includes every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign,
illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, awning sign, canopy sign
and street clock, and shall include any announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration, insignia and any appurtenance used to
advertise or promote the attention or interest of any person when the same
is placed in view of the general public.
SIGN HEIGHT MEASUREMENT — Determined by the distance between the
vertical extremes of the background upon which the lettering, illustration
or display is presented. If the letters, illustration or display are attached
directly to the face of the building, the height of the sign shall be the height
of the largest letter, illustration or total display, whichever is greater.
STREET CLOCK — Any timepiece erected upon a standard upon the
sidewalk or on the exterior of any building or structure for the convenience
of the public and placed and maintained by some person for the purpose of
advertising his place of business.
STRUCTURAL TRIM — The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips,
latticing and platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign constructed of any material, with or without
frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only, and shall be
permitted only with the approval of the Borough Council.
WALL SIGN — All flat signs which are placed against a building or other
structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building
or other structure so that the display surface is parallel with the plan of
the wall or other structure. In the case of a multiple occupancy of a single
business space, the total sign area shall not exceed that allowed for a single
occupant. Signs painted on an exterior of a wall shall be deemed to be "wall
signs" subject to this chapter. They shall only identify the occupant of the
premises on which they are displayed.
§ 199-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-2
191:358
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Enforcement Officer of
the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 199-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate any sign,
as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a permit from the
Construction Code Official and making payment of a fee required by
ordinance, except as exempt under provisions of § 199-7 hereof.
§ 199-4. Application.
Applications for construction permits shall be made upon blanks provided
by the Construction Code Official and shall contain or have attached thereto
the following information:
§ 199-5. Issuance or denial of permit.
It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official, upon the filing of
an application for a permit, to examine such plans and specifications and
other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign,
and if it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the
sign is to be attached or erected.
C. The position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures.
sidewalks, if any, and streets.
D. Two sets of the plans and specifications showing methods of
construction and attachment to the building or in the ground, including
dimensions, materials, colors, weight, details of construction, distance
from windows and fire escapes and type and intensity of illumination, if
any.
E. Copies of calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead
load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by the
Building Code.76
F. The name of the person, firm, corporation or association who will erect
the sign.
G. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which
or on which the sign is to be erected.
H. Such other information as the Construction Code Official may require to
show full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and
ordinances of the Borough.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 199-2 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-5
191:359
of the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the
Borough, he shall then issue the permit or deny the permit within 20 days.
§ 199-6. Fees.
Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder shall pay to the
Borough a permit fee as from time to time established by ordinance.
§ 199-7. Exemptions.
The provisions and regulations of this chapter concerning permits and fees
shall not apply to the following signs:
A. Residential: signs in the residential zones as accessory uses, including
and limited to one of each of the following.
(1) A nonilluminated residential nameplate not to exceed six inches by
18 inches in area.
(2) A nonilluminated temporary real estate sign, not exceeding four
square feet in area, which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said sign is located, to be removed within five
days of the signing of the sales contract.
(3) Externally illuminated bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square
feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions when the
same are located on the premises of said institutions.
B. All nonresidential zones: signs in all other zones as accessory uses,
including and limited to one of each of the following:
(1) A nonilluminated temporary real estate sign not exceeding 12
square feet in area, which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said sign is located.
(2) Professional nameplates not exceeding six inches in height or 18
inches in length for each lawful occupant of the premises under the
Zoning Ordinance.77
(3) Externally illuminated bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square
feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions, when the
same are located on the premises of such institutions.
(4) Occupational nonilluminated signs affixed to the surface of the
building, denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a
commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling
house, and not exceeding two square feet in area. All such signs on
each building shall be of uniform color and materials.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 199-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-7
191:360
§ 199-8. Unsafe signs.
If the Construction Code Official shall find that any sign is unsafe or is
a menace to the public, he shall give written notice, by certified mail,
return receipt, to the permittee and owner at the property upon which it is
located. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so
as to comply with the standards herein set forth within 30 days after such
notice, the Construction Code Official may cause such sign to be removed.
He shall give written notice of the cost thereof to the permittee and said
owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. If neither the permittee
nor said owner shall reimburse the Borough for said cost within 30 days
after receipt of said notice, the Construction Code Official shall certify said
cost to the§ Collector of Taxes, who shall cause such cost to be added to
and become a part of the moneys due from said owner and shall become
an interest-bearing lien upon the property of said owner and collected in
the same manner as delinquent taxes. The Construction Code Official may
cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be
removed summarily without notice, in which event he shall give notice of
the cost thereof as above provided and shall proceed in the same manner as
if the aforesaid thirty-day notice had been given.
§ 199-9. Obsolete or nonmaintained signs.
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer announces a bona
fide business or a product sold on the premises or is being maintained in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be taken down and removed
by the owner or agent of the building or structure upon which such sign
may be found within 15 days after written notice from the Construction
Code Official, and, upon failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in such order, the Construction Code Official is hereby authorized
to cause the removal of such sign. The Construction Code Official shall give
notice of the cost thereof and proceed in all respects in the same manner as
provided in § 199-8 to obtain reimbursement to the Borough for said costs
as if said procedure was set forth at full length in this section.
§ 199-10. Maintenance.
Maintenance of signs shall include the upkeep or replacement, without
substantial change, of any parts or supports of any sign from the wall
or structure supporting it. The exterior of every sign shall be maintained
in good repair, and all exterior surfaces thereof shall be kept painted
(5) Governmental traffic control or other signs, legal notices and such
temporary or noncommercial signs as may be approved by the
Council.
(6) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
(7) Signs of any governmental agency deemed necessary to the public
welfare.
§ 199-7 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-10
191:361
or otherwise provided with a protective treatment where necessary for
purposes of preservation and appearance. All exterior surfaces thereof shall
be maintained free from broken glass or plastic, peeling paint or other
condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. All work
which shall be done on the sign must always conform to the provisions of
this chapter and shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
§ 199-11. Termination of use.
Upon termination of an occupancy or use of any premises, it shall be
unlawful to maintain any sign in accordance with § 199-9. Any change of
occupancy shall require a permit for a sign and shall conform in all respects
to the requirements and restrictions of this chapter.
§ 199-12. Compliance with other regulations.
All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
appropriate codes.
§ 199-13. Posting on poles and trees.
No utility pole or tree shall be used for the posting of signs except for those
required by the Borough for the enforcement of traffic ordinances.
§ 199-14. Obstruction of passage.
No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free
ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any
kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
§ 199-15. Area; duration of temporary signs.
The total square feet of all signs, temporary or otherwise, on the interior or
exterior of a window shall not exceed more than 1/3 of the aggregate area
of said window. Such sign, if temporary, shall not remain more than 30 days.
§ 199-16. Traffic hazards.
No sign as regulated by this chapter shall be erected at the intersection
of any street in such manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or at any
location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device; and no sign shall make use of words, phrases, symbols or
characters in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
§ 199-17. Illumination.
Lights shall be permitted on ground signs and wall signs; provided,
however, that the reflectors shall be provided with proper lenses to prevent
the public from viewing the source of light and to concentrate the
illumination on the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or
§ 199-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-17
191:362
other properties. Lights or external illumination shall be restricted to only
the allowable heights of the sign which it is designed to illuminate.
§ 199-18. Commercial signs and billboards; display of obscene
matter.
A. In all cases where illumination of signs is necessary and is permitted
under the terms of this chapter. such signs shall not be illuminated by
other than a shielded or otherwise indirect nonflashing white light or
illuminated from the interior of a sign with a translucent face.
B. In no event will red or green illumination be permitted on any sign in a
location which will be confused with a traffic control signal. The
Construction Code Official shall have the authority to compel the
removal or correction of such sign within 30 days of notification of his
decision, whether or not such sign existed at the time of the enactment
of this chapter, and proceed in all respects in the same manner as
provided in § 199-8.
C. In no event will any illumination of any sign be so arranged as to
produce undue glare. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare
exceeding 0.5 footcandle, measured at the property line of the lot
occupied by such use. The Construction Code Official shall have the
authority to compel the removal or correction of such sign within 30
days of notification of his decision, whether or not such sign existed at
the time of the enactment of the chapter, and proceed in all respects in
the same manner as provided in § 199-8.
D. Highly reflective materials or fluorescent paint is prohibited.
E. Illuminated lighting outlining roofs, doors or windows or wall edges of a
building or strings of lights are not permitted.
F. All lighting in connection with signs shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m.
prevailing time or at the close of the business serviced by said signs or
lights, whichever occurs later; provided, however, that the Construction
Code Official may authorize exterior lighting at additional hours to
assist in the protection of properties which otherwise may be subject to
this section when so recommended by the Chief of Police.
A. Commercial outdoor signs, billboards or other signs which are not
expressly and directly related to the business being conducted on the
premises and which do not conform to the applicable requirements and
standards set forth in other sections of this chapter shall not be
permitted, and all other such commercial outdoor signs, billboards and
other nonconforming signs are specifically prohibited.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any
obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
§ 199-17 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-19
191:363
§ 199-19. Dual-faced signs.
Dual-faced signs shall be allowed. For size limitation purposes, one side
shall govern.
§ 199-20. Rotating and moving devices.
Any sign of which all or any part is in motion by any means is prohibited.
Fluttering, rotating or other moving devices set in motion by movement of
the atmosphere are also prohibited. This provision is intended to include
spinners, banners, nongovernmental flags or similar devices, etc.
§ 199-21. Interference with communication or electrical signals or
traffic visibility.
No illuminated sign shall be of the flasher- or speller-type or interfere with
radio, television or other electrical appliances or interfere with the visibility
on roads or highways.
§ 199-22. Signs for separate uses in one building.
Each use in a building shall be entitled to a sign, but in no case shall the
total square footage of all signs exceed the permitted square footage of a
single sign as allowed by this chapter.
§ 199-23. Freestanding ground signs.
Freestanding ground signs shall be as follows:
A. Materials required. All ground signs for which a permit is required
under this chapter shall have a surface or facing of incombustible
material or be of approved combustible material.
B. Letters, etc., to be secured. All letters, figures, characters or
representations in cutout or irregular form, maintained in conjunction
with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign, shall be safely and
securely built or attached to the sign structure.
C. Location and size. No ground sign shall exceed four feet by six feet in
area.
D. Height limitation. It shall be unlawful to erect any ground sign whose
total height above ground level is greater than eight feet above the level
of the street upon which the sign faces.
E. Setback line. No ground sign shall be nearer the street or a property
line than 10 feet from the line thereof, and it shall be placed further
back if practicable. No ground sign may be erected within the
triangular area formed by connecting with a straight line each of two
points situated 40 feet distant along the curbline from point of
intersection of two streets forming a corner.
§ 199-19 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-23
191:364
§ 199-24. Wall signs.
Wall signs shall be as follows:
F. Content of sign. Only the name of the store or business or its officially
registered logo or insignia shall appear on any sign.
G. Not to mislead, interfere with or confuse traffic. All ground signs shall
conform to the provisions of § 199-17.
H. Directional signs. Signs indicating direction, parking or service shall be
permitted, provided that they do not exceed three square feet in area
and the top of the sign is below four feet in height.
I. Erection.
(1) Bracing, anchorage and supports. All grounds signs shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable Building Code.78
(2) Premises to be kept free of weeds, etc. All ground signs and
premises surrounding the same shall be maintained by the owner
thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition and free and
clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
J. Limitation of signs. One ground sign will be permitted for each 300 feet
of street frontage of a single-occupancy premises on which said signs
are situate, but in no event will a total of more than two be permitted
for each property in the B-1 and all C Zones. Freestanding ground signs
may also be erected to identify a shopping center, mall or plaza;
provided, however, that only the name of the shopping center, mall or
plaza is allowed, in conformance with the street frontage requirements
stated above.
A. Construction materials required. All wall signs for which a permit is
required under this chapter shall have a surface or facing of
incombustible material or be of an approved combustible material.
B. Location and size; limitation on placement and area. No wall sign shall
cover wholly or partially any wall opening or project beyond the end or
top of the wall to which it is attached, nor shall it project more than six
inches outward from the wall to which it is attached. It shall be
displayed on the building as follows:
(1) On the front facade or principal entrance which abuts and faces a
public street, approved parking area or arcade, a sign not
exceeding 30 inches in height and no more than 75% of the length
of the front of the store or business shall be permitted.
(2) If a business shall directly face more than one street, an additional
sign shall be permitted on the side street facade not exceeding 15
inches in height and 15 feet in length.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Constructions Codes, Uniform.
§ 199-23 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-24
191:365
§ 199-25. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs shall be as follows:
(3) On an approved or permitted rear or side entrance designed for
and used by the public, a sign not to exceed 24 inches high and 36
inches in length shall be permitted.
(4) In no case will more than one sign be allowed on any building
facade or a total of three signs on any building, except a building
with more than one store or business, which shall be allowed one
wall sign for each store or business.
(5) Only the name of the store or business or its officially registered
logo or insignia shall apear on any sign.
(6) In a shopping center having walkways roofed over with a
permanent rigid canopy or other structural device, one sign may be
hung from the underside of the canopy for each store or shop in the
center. These signs shall not exceed one foot by three feet in area
on each of two sides and shall not be less than eight feet above the
walks.
(7) In a shopping center, mall or plaza and a multiple occupancy of a
single building, where practicable, all signs shall be of uniform size,
color and lettering designed to conform to the architecture of the
building.
C. Projection above sidewalk and setback line. No wall sign shall be
permitted to extend more than six inches beyond the building and shall
not be attached to a wall at a height of less than eight feet above the
sidewalk or ground.
D. Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes. No wall sign shall be
erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent ingress to or egress
from any door, window or fire escape.
E. Design of painted signs. Painted signs shall be enclosed by a molding or
border.
F. Erection, anchorage and supports. All signs shall be constructed,
anchored and supported in accordance with applicable building codes.
A. Construction.
(1) Materials and area limitations. No temporary sign of a combustible
material shall exceed four feet in one of its dimensions or 100
square feet in area, and such signs in excess of 60 square feet shall
be made of rigid materials.
(2) Weight limitation. Every temporary sign weighing in excess of 50
pounds must be approved by the Construction Code Official as
conforming to the safety requirements of the applicable codes.
§ 199-24 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-25
191:366
§ 199-26. Awnings.
Awnings shall be as follows:
B. Location.
(1) Projection. No temporary sign shall extend over or into any alley,
sidewalk or other public thoroughfare a distance greater than four
inches from the wall upon which it is erected, and it shall not be
placed or projected over any wall opening, except for street
banners which shall be no less than 18 feet above said street.
(2) Obstructions to doors, windows and fire escapes. No temporary
sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from
any door, window or fire escape, nor shall such sign be attached to
any standpipe or fire escape.
C. Erection, anchorage and support. Every temporary sign shall be
attached to the wall with wire or steel cable, and no strings, ropes or
wood slats for anchorage or support purposes shall be permitted.
D. Duration of permits. Permits for temporary signs shall authorize
erection of said signs and their maintenance for a period not exceeding
30 days or less as determined by the Borough Council and shall be
removed sooner if torn or damaged.
E. Hold-harmless requirements. An agreement holding the Borough, its
officials and employees harmless while the temporary sign is erected
and/or maintained shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit by
the Borough Council.
A. Construction. Awnings may be constructed of cloth, metal or plastic,
provided that all frames and supports are made of metal.
B. Location. All awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the
lowest portion thereof designed to be overhead shall be not less than
eight feet above the surface of the covered area, and they shall not
extend from the building toward a street beyond a point distant two
feet, measured from the curbline of said street.
C. Erection. Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by
the building. Posts or columns beyond the building line shall not be
permitted for folding or rolling awnings. All supporting framework shall
be metal and designed to withstand a wind pressure as provided in
§ 199-4E.
D. Advertising. No advertising shall be placed on any awning.
E. Permits. Permits for all awnings shall be required as provided in § 199-3
of this chapter.
§ 199-25 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-27
191:367
§ 199-27. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in all locations within the Borough of
Florham Park:
§ 199-28. Gasoline stations. [Amended 3-16-1982 by Ord. No. 4-82]
A. Animated signs.
B. Billboard signs, if not permitted as a ground sign in accordance with
§ 199-23.
C. Changeable copy panel signs.
D. Portable signs.
E. Roof signs.
F. Signs with more than two display faces.
G. Street clocks.
A. Ground sign. A gasoline station shall be allowed one ground sign
indicating the brand name, insignia or emblem of the principal product
sold on the premises.
(1) Height and area. The height and area of the ground sign shall not
exceed 24 square feet in area, and the top of the sign shall not be
less than 10 feet nor more than 15 feet above the ground.
(2) Said ground sign shall conform in all other respects to the
provisions of § 199-23.
B. Portable freestanding two-faced ground sign. A gasoline service station
shall be allowed one portable freestanding ground sign, which may be
two-faced, not to exceed three feet wide by five feet in height, and it
shall not extend above the ground level more than six feet.
(1) Said portable freestanding ground sign shall be used exclusively
for the advertisement of the price of fuel sold.
(2) The portable freestanding ground sign shall be allowed to be
displayed only in the front of the gasoline service station, either on
or behind the property line.
(3) Said sign shall conform in all other respects to the provisions of
§ 199-23.
C. Wall sign. A gasoline station shall be allowed one wall sign not to exceed
two feet high by eight feet long. Said wall sign shall conform in all other
respects to the provisions of § 199-24.
D. Exterior wall-mounted sign. A gasoline service station shall be allowed
one exterior wall-mounted sign not to exceed three feet by four feet in
area and not to project out from the building more than four inches.
§ 199-27 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-28
191:368
§ 199-29. One-family and multifamily residential zones.
§ 199-30. Open Space and Recreation Zone.
Said wall sign shall conform in all other respects to the provisions of
§ 199-24.
E. Gasoline stations shall conform in all other respects to requirements of
this chapter.
A. Signs permitted in the one-family residential zones as accessory uses
shall include and be limited to one of each of the following:
(1) A nonilluminated residential nameplate not to exceed six inches by
18 inches in area.
(2) One externally illuminated professional ground sign not exceeding
24 inches by 24 inches in area for lawful professional occupants of
the premises under the Zoning Ordinance.79
(3) Nonilluminated temporary real estate sign not exceeding four
square feet in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said sign is located.
B. Signs permitted in the multifamily residential zones as accessory uses
shall include and be limited to one of each of the following:
(1) A nonilluminated residential nameplate.
(2) A nonilluminated temporary real estate sign not exceeding four
square feet in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said sign is located.
(3) One externally illuminated freestanding ground sign not to exceed
24 square feet in area and no higher than six feet above the ground.
(4) A nonilluminated wall sign to identify the building or structure, not
to exceed 12 inches by 12 inches in area.
C. Illuminated bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for
public, charitable or religious institutions, when the same are located
on the premises of said institutions, shall be allowed in residential
zones.
D. One-family and multifamily zones shall conform in all other respects to
requirements of this chapter.
A. Signs permitted in the Open Space and Recreation Zone as accessory
uses shall include the followinw
(1) Two illuminated single-faced freestanding ground signs not to
exceed 24 square feet in area and no higher than six feet above the
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 199-28 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-30
191:369
§ 199-31. Business Zone.
§ 199-32. Professional and business zones.
ground or one dual-faced ground sign not to exceed 24 square feet
in area and no higher than eight feet above the ground.
B. The Open Space and Recreation Zone shall conform in all other
respects to requirements of this chapter.
A. Signs permitted in the Business Zone shall be as follows:
(1) A nonilluminated temporary real estate sign not exceeding 12
square feet in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said sign is located, no higher than six feet
above ground.
(2) Professional nameplates not exceeding six inches in height or 18
inches in length for lawful occupants of the premises under the
Zoning Ordinance.80
(3) Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on
the premises of said institutions.
(4) Occupational nonilluminated signs affixed to the surface of the
building, denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a
commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling
house and not exceeding two square feet in area. All such signs
shall be of uniform color and materials.
(5) Governmental traffic control or other signs, legal notices and such
temporary or noncommercial advertising signs as may be approved
by the Council.
(6) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
(7) Signs of any governmental agency deemed necessary to the public
welfare.
(8) Ground signs, in conformance with § 199-23 of this chapter.
(9) Wall signs, in conformance with § 199-24 of this chapter.
(10) Election signs are permitted only in a political headquarters
storefront office in conformance with § 199-34 of this chapter.
B. The Business Zone shall conform in all other respects to requirements
of this chapter.
A. Signs permitted in professional and business zones shall be as follows:
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 199-30 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-32
191:370
§ 199-33. Office, manufacturing and research and laboratory zones.
(1) A nonilluminated temporary real estate sign not exceeding 12
square feet in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said sign is located, no higher than six feet
above the ground.
(2) Professional nameplates not exceeding six inches in height or 18
inches in length for lawful occupants of the premises under the
Zoning Ordinance.81
(3) Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on
the premises of said institutions.
(4) Occupational nonilluminated signs affixed to the surface of a
building, denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in
commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling
house and not exceeding two square feet in area. All such signs
shall be of uniform color and materials.
(5) Governmental traffic control or other signs, legal notices and such
temporary or noncommercial advertising signs as may be approved
by the Council.
(6) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
(7) Signs of any governmental agency deemed necessary to the public
welfare.
(8) Illuminated freestanding ground sign not to exceed 16 square feet
in area and no higher than eight feet above the ground.
B. Wall signs are not permitted in the professional and business zones.
C. Professional and business zones shall conform in all other respects to
requirements of this chapter.
A. Signs permitted in office, manufacturing and research and laboratory
zones shall be as follows:
(1) A nonilluminated temporary real estate sign not exceeding 12
square feet in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said sign is located, no higher than six feet
above the ground.
(2) Professional nameplates not exceeding six inches in height or 18
inches in length or lawful occupants of the premises under the
Zoning Ordinance.82
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 199-32 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-33
191:371
§ 199-34. Election signs. [Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-14]
Election signs shall not be erected prior to 40 days before any election to
which they pertain and shall be removed not more than five days after the
election. Such temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area in
the B-1 Zone and such temporary signs shall not exceed four square feet in
any residential zone. Election signs shall not be erected on private property
without the prior consent of the property owner. Such signs shall conform
in all other respects to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 199-35. Nonconforming signs.
(3) Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on
the premises of said institutions.
(4) Occupational nonilluminated signs affixed to the surface of the
building, denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a
commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling
house and not exceeding two square feet in area. All such signs
shall be of uniform color and materials.
(5) Governmental traffic control or other signs, legal notices and such
temporary or noncommercial advertising signs as may be approved
by the Council.
(6) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
(7) Signs of any governmental agency deemed necessary to the public
welfare.
(8) Illuminated freestanding ground sign not to exceed 24 square feet
in area and no higher than eight feet above the ground.
B. Wall signs are not permitted in the office, manufacturing, research and
laboratory zones.
C. Office, manufacturing and research and laboratory zones shall conform
in all other respects to requirements of this chapter.
A. All ground and wall signs in existence and presently serving a business
or profession which are in violation of and nonconforming to this
chapter shall be allowed to remain until such time as the property has a
change of use of the premises.
B. Every sign lawfully in existence and presently serving a business or
profession on the adoption of this chapter shall not be replaced or
moved unless it is made to comply with all provisions of this chapter.
C. Any sign which is damaged more than 50% of its physical value shall be
replaced in conformance with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 199-33 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-35
191:372
§ 199-36. Revocation of permit; enforcement,
§ 199-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No.
3-1988]
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law to
hear and determine the matter, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
§ 1-16, of this Code. Each day that such violation exists may be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
§ 199-38. Signs in the POD-S Zone. [Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No.
10-9; amended 7-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12]
Signs permitted for commercial development in the POD-S Zone shall be as
follows:
D. Any sign which was unlawful prior to the adoption of this chapter shall
continue to be unlawful unless said sign conforms to all provisions of
this chapter.
A. The Construction Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to
revoke any permit issued by the Construction Code Official upon failure
of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official and/or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer of the Borough to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Any sign permitted by § 199-33. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary elsewhere in this chapter in regard to freestanding ground
signs permitted by § 199-33, one freestanding ground sign shall be
permitted for each 300 feet of street frontage abutting the lot on which
the sign is located, up to a maximum of two such freestanding ground
signs per lot. These signs shall not be located on Park Avenue frontage.
These signs shall be in addition to any freestanding sign identifying the
name of the planned development in which such lot is located. For
purposes of this section, "street" shall be deemed to include both Park
Avenue and any Park Avenue connector street as defined in
§ 250-121B(1).
B. Wall signs identifying a principal occupant of a building, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Maximum number:
(a) Two per building, provided that no more than one sign shall be
erected on each facade (i.e., side) of the building.
(b) Restaurants shall be permitted no more than two signs per
restaurant, provided that no more than one sign shall be
erected on each facade (i.e., side) of the building.
§ 199-35 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-38
191:373
§ 199-39. Signs in the POD-S and C-4 Zones for commercial uses.
[Added 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-19]
(2) Maximum area: an area equal to 2% of the area of the side of the
building upon which the sign is mounted or 125 square feet,
whichever is less. Restaurants shall be permitted the same sign
area as permitted in the B-1 Zone per § 199-24B(1). Hotels shall be
permitted a maximum single sign area of 160 square feet.
(3) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated by internal lighting,
backlighting behind opaque letters, or external lighting.
C. Wall signs identifying the street address of the building subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Maximum number: one per building.
(2) Maximum area: 15 square feet.
(3) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated by internal lighting,
backlighting behind opaque letters, or external lighting.
D. Directional signs subject to the following regulations:
(1) Location and number: as determined by the Planning Board during
the course of site plan review in order to insure efficient on-site
vehicular and pedestrian circulation and clear directions for
pedestrians and motorists.
(2) Content: Directional signs that display the street address of the
property on which they are located may display the name of the
businesses at such address where the Planning Board finds that
display of the business names will facilitate efficient vehicular or
pedestrian circulation and/or improved directional information for
visitors and guests.
(3) Maximum area: 24 square feet.
(4) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated by internal lighting,
backlighting behind opaque letters, or external lighting.
A. Signs permitted for commercial development in the POD-S and C-4
Zones shall be as follows:
(1) Campus identification signs.
(a) No more than two campus identification freestanding signs
shall be permitted fronting on Park Avenue. Such signs shall
conform to the following requirements:
[1] Maximum size: Seventy square feet per sign, and no sign
shall have more than two display faces.
§ 199-38 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-39
191:374
[2] Location: Campus identification signs shall be located no
closer to Park Avenue than 15 feet.
[3] Maximum height: Eight feet.
[4] Illumination: Any illumination for any ground-mounted
sign in the C-4 Zone shall not create glare, and the light
source shall be shielded from the general public's view.
(2) Any sign permitted by § 199-33.
(a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this
chapter, in regard to freestanding ground signs permitted by
§ 199-33:
[1] One freestanding ground sign shall be permitted for each
400 feet of street frontage of the main access drive
abutting the lot on which the sign is located, up to a
maximum of two such freestanding ground signs per lot. In
the case of multiple buildings per lot, there shall be no
more than one freestanding sign per building located
along the main access road. These signs shall not face Park
Avenue. Additional freestanding signs are permitted in the
interior of the lots subject to site plan approval. These
signs shall be in addition to any freestanding sign campus
identification sign permitted per § 199-39A(1).
[2] Such freestanding ground signs shall conform to the
following requirements:
[a] Maximum size: Sixty square feet per sign, and no sign
shall have more than two faces.
[b] Maximum height: Eight feet.
[c] Minimum setback: Ten feet from the property line.
(3) Wall signs identifying the principal occupant(s) of a building,
subject to the following regulations: [Amended 7-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-12]
(a) Maximum number: two per building, provided that no more
than one sign shall be erected on each facade (i.e., side) of the
building, subject to the same limitations for restaurants as
stated in § 199-38B(1).
(b) Maximum area: Each sign shall be no more than 2% of the area
of the side of the building upon which the sign is mounted, or
125 square feet, whichever is less, subject to the same
limitations for restaurants and hotels as stated in § 199-38B(2).
§ 199-39 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS § 199-39
191:375
Chapter 203
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 90.
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 216.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Sewage disposal systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 278.
(c) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated by internal
lighting, backlighting behind opaque letters, or external
lighting.
(4) Wall signs identifying the street address of the building, subject to
the following regulations: [Amended 7-16-2015 by Ord. No.
15-12]
(a) Maximum number: one per building.
(b) Maximum area: 15 square feet.
(c) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated by internal
lighting, backlighting behind opaque letters, or external
lighting.
(5) Directional signs, subject to the following regulations:
(a) Location and number: As determined by the Planning Board
during the course of site plan review, in order to ensure
efficient onsite vehicular and pedestrian circulation and clear
directions for pedestrians and motorists.
(b) Content: Directional signs that display the street address of the
property in which they are located may display the name of the
business at such address where the Planning Board finds that
the display of the business name will facilitate efficient
vehicular or pedestrian circulation and/or improved directional
information for visitors and guests.
(c) Maximum area: 24 square feet.
(d) Maximum height: Eight feet.
(e) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated by (i) internal
lighting, (ii) backlighting behind opaque letter, or (iii) external
lighting.
§ 199-39 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 199-39
203:376
§ 203-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOIL — Any earth, clay, loam, gravel, stone, sand, dirt or rock without
regard to the presence or absence of organic matter.
§ 203-2. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 203-3. Application.
A. No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, unless a
permit therefor is first secured from the Borough Council, provided that
no permit shall be required for the removal of excess soil resulting from
cellar excavation or grading incidental thereto.
B. No permit shall be required for grading resulting in either soil removal
or soil importation on premises included within approved subdivisions
and site plans. [Added 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 34-98]
A. Application for a soil removal permit shall be filed with the Borough
Engineer in triplicate, accompanied by the fee set forth in § 203-5,
setting forth the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of owner, if other than the applicant.
(3) The description and location of the land in question, including the
Tax Map lot and block numbers.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil.
(5) The kind and quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be removed.
(6) The destination of soil to be removed.
(7) The proposed date of commencement and completion of the soil
removal.
(8) The name, address and telephone number of the person having
direct charge over the soil removal operation.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a topographical map, in
triplicate, of the lands in question. Such map shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
on a horizontal scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, with
contours at a two-foot interval, and showing the following:
(1) The present grades on a one-hundred-foot grid layout.
§ 199-39 SOIL REMOVAL § 203-3
203:377
§ 203-4. Notice.
After receipt of an application for a permit as set forth in § 203-2, the
Borough Council shall advise the applicant that the matter will be
considered at a meeting to be held not less than 15 nor more than 30 days
thereafter. Upon being advised of the date of the meeting for consideration
of the application, the applicant shall serve written notice, either by
personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon all
property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the property, as
their names appear on the borough tax records. Such notice shall be served
as aforesaid not later than seven days prior to the date of the meeting
scheduled for consideration of the application. The applicant shall deliver
an affidavit of service to the Municipal Clerk at least two days prior to the
date of the meeting.
§ 203-5. Fees; waiver of fees.
(2) The proposed finished grades.
(3) The quantity in cubic yards of the soil to be removed.
(4) The grades of all streets and lots within 100 feet of the property in
question.
(5) Proposed slopes and lateral supports.
(6) Present and proposed surface water drainage.
(7) The location of existing trees. [Added 12-15-1998 by Ord. No.
34-98]
A. Along with the application for a permit under this chapter, there shall
be deposited with the Borough Clerk a permit fee calculated in
accordance with the following schedule:
Cubic Yards of
Soil to be
Removed Permit Fee
Up to 500 $25.00
Above 500 $75.00, plus a sum computed at $0.03 per cubic
yard, multiplied by number of yards
B. The charge in accordance with the schedule hereinbefore set forth
includes all engineering and other services the borough may deem
desirable or necessary to assure an orderly soil operation in full
compliance with provisions of this chapter.
C. Since the borough may have large areas of land which need to be
reclaimed or filled in and since it is an intended purpose of this chapter
to control the removal of soil, the Borough Council may waive the fee
§ 203-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 203-5
203:378
§ 203-6. Issuance of permit.
§ 203-7. Revocation of permit; completion by borough.
In the event that, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the soil removal
project, or any part thereof, has been abandoned or unnecessarily delayed
and completion cannot be within the time set forth in the soil removal
permit, then the Borough Engineer may so certify to the Borough Council in
writing, and after hearing, on seven days' notice to the permittee, in writing,
by certified mail, at the address on the permit application, the Borough
Council may revoke the permit or call upon any surety on the performance
guaranty to complete the project. In the event that a cash deposit guaranty
is posted, the borough may complete the project and deduct the cost thereof
from the deposit.
§ 203-8. Performance guaranty.
Prior to the issuance of a soil removal permit, the applicant shall have
posted with the borough a performance guaranty, conditioned upon full
required hereunder if soil is removed to fill or reclaim other lands in the
borough. [Amended 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 34-98]
A. [Amended 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 34-98] In considering and
reviewing applications for soil removal permits, the Borough
Council, Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall be guided
and will take into consideration the public health, safety and
general welfare, and particular consideration shall be given to
the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slope and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the borough,
such as wetlands or flood hazard areas.
B. If, following the hearing during which all persons shall be given an
opportunity to be heard, the Borough Council shall be of the opinion
that the proposed soil removal will not create conditions detrimental to
the public health, welfare and safety and will not result in the creation
of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility
problems or depressed land values nor create any drainage or
sewerage problem or hazardous conditions, permission to remove soil
shall be granted.
§ 203-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 203-8
203:379
compliance with all the terms and conditions of approval. The amount of the
bond shall be in accordance with recommendation of the Borough Engineer,
which amount shall be sufficient to insure the faithful performance of the
work to be undertaken as approved, and the form of the bond shall be
approved by the Borough Attorney.
§ 203-9. Conditions of operation.
If a permit to move soil is issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, the operation conducted thereunder shall be subject to the
following conditions:
§ 203-10. Use of soil.
Where soil removal is permitted, no person shall deposit soil upon, fill in or
raise the grade of any lot without first making provisions for:
A. The person receiving the permit shall agree, in writing, to properly level
off, remove debris and grade the premises to conform to the contour
lines established by the Borough Council.
B. Operations shall be conducted only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. on weekdays. It shall be unlawful to conduct moving, grading
or excavating operations at any other time or on Sundays and legal
holidays.
C. Soil removal operations shall be restricted to street routes established
by the Borough Council. Determination by the Council of the street
routes to be used shall be based on factors which contribute to the best
interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
borough.
D. All reasonable means shall be employed by the person conducting a soil
removal or grading or excavating operation to prevent air pollution by
large quantities of dust and dirt. Such means may include but are not
necessarily limited to spraying water, oil or other dampening agents on
the surface of the ground.
E. Permits for the moving of soil issued in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall not be transferable.
F. The person receiving the permit shall not take away the top layer of
arable soil for a depth of 12 inches, but such layer of topsoil shall be set
aside and shall be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil
has been removed, in conformity to the contour lines approved by the
Borough Council.
A. The use, in the work, of soil or such other materials as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity thereof by
reason of shrinkage or settlement.
§ 203-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 203-10
203:380
§ 203-11. Monthly certification.
The permittee under this chapter shall, within 10 days after the end of
each month, furnish the Borough Engineer with certification, by a licensed
engineer or land surveyor, of the soil removed during the preceding month.
§ 203-12. Enforcement officer; inspections.
The Borough Engineer is hereby designated as the officer whose duty it
shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall, from time
to time, upon his own initiative and whenever directed by the Borough
Council, inspect the premises for which permits have been granted to
ensure compliance with the terms of the permit and of this chapter.
§ 203-13. Construal; zoning regulations to prevail.
B. The collection and storage upon the lot of original topsoil not being
buried beneath soil or other material of inferior quality and the uniform
replacement of the topsoil so stored over the entire area or surface of
the fill soil or other material, so that the final grade of the replaced
topsoil shall be in accordance with the proposed final grades shown on
the topographical map. In the event that the requirement of the first
sentence of this subsection is not practicable, provision shall be made
for the uniform placement over the entire area or surface of the fill soil
or other material, except only such portions thereof as shall be or shall
have become permanently covered by a building or structure, street,
pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveways or other paved area, or by any
body of water or waterway or a layer of topsoil not inferior in quality to
that of the original topsoil, to a depth of not less than six inches,
measured from the proposed final grades as shown on the
topographical map. The determination of quality which shall be the
same or better than as originally existed, as referred to hereinabove,
shall be by the county agricultural agent, in case of dispute between the
permit holder and the borough.
C. The preservation of existing watercourses, in accordance with the plans
on file.
D. The planting of shrubbery and trees as may be directed by the Shade
Tree Committee, or as may be required by this Code or other
ordinances of the borough.
E. At no time will excavation be permitted to go below the final grade as
established by the approved plans.
F. The seeding of the entire area upon completion of the restoration of the
topsoil in accordance with the requirements hereof. The seed spread
shall germinate to the extent that soil erosion by wind and water will be
limited. The seed shall be of perennial rye grass or comparable quality.
§ 203-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 203-13
203:381
Chapter 207
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Hazardous or toxic substance
discharge — See Ch. 144.
Illicit connections — See Ch. 146.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 213.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 215.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 216.
Sewage disposal systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 278.
§ 207-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "The Storm Sewer Disposal Regulations
Ordinance."
§ 207-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Florham Park so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 207-3. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to modify or repeal
any of the provisions of the zoning regulations of the borough.83
B. In the event of an inconsistency between this chapter and the zoning
regulations, the inconsistency shall be resolved in favor of the
enforcement of the zoning regulations.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 203-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 207-3
207:382
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Florham Park or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
§ 207-4. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Florham Park is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 207-5. Exceptions to prohibitions.
The following are exceptions to the prohibitions.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn-watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car-washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: beach
maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its intended
purposes and equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material applications.
Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
§ 207-3 STORM SEWERS § 207-5
207:383
§ 207-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Florham Park Police Department.
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is
limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
J. Uncontaminated water from roof drains resulting from precipitation.
K. Discharges from pools. [Added 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-4]
(1) Discharges from chlorine treated only commercial pools or pools
serving multi-residential community associations for the purpose of
complete draw-down for maintenance purposes, provided that the
company or entity conducting the discharge abides by the following
conditions, which are to be documented and incorporated into the
Development’s Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance
Manual that shall be located on-site:
(a) Provide certification in conformance with the requirements of
NJDEP General Permit for Swimming Pool Discharges
(NJ0128589) to include statement that “no detectable level of
chlorine is present in the discharge water”; submit test results
to Borough Engineer’s office prior to discharge and request
approval to discharge from the Borough Engineer.
(b) Abide by all the conditions and water quality requirements of
NJDEP General Permit for Swimming Pool Discharges
(NJ0128589).
(c) Limit discharge to once per year per individual pool.
(d) Restrict discharge to days of no forecasted rainfall.
(e) Provide discharge volume and full detailed description of how
pool water will be removed and discharged into the
stormwater system to Borough Engineer prior to a discharge.
(f) Notify the Borough Engineer’s office in writing at least seven
days prior to a discharge.
(g) Allow inspections by a representative of the Borough
Engineer’s office during the discharge.
(2) An annual fee of $500 plus $5.50 per 1,000 gallons shall be paid to
the Borough of Florham Park and placed in a stormwater facility
account to fund the statewide basic municipal requirements of the
New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJDES) Tier A
Municipal Stormwater General Permit.
§ 207-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 207-7
207:384
§ 207-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,500.
Chapter 208
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-16.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 90.
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 125.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Hazardous or toxic substance
discharge — See Ch. 144.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
Parking lots — See Ch. 167.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Soil removal — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Trees — See Ch. 229.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 235.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Sanitation (Board of Health) — See Ch. 265.
Sewage disposal systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 278.
§ 207-7 STORM SEWERS § 207-7
207:385

ARTICLE I
Street Obstructions
[Adopted 12-16-1969 as Ch. 11, § 11-21, of the 1969 Code; amended
in its entirety 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
§ 208-1. Restrictions.
No person shall unnecessarily obstruct any street, avenue, road, highway,
alley or public place with any kind of vehicle or with boxes, lumber, wood or
any other thing; but the provisions of this section shall not prevent persons
who are building from occupying, until notified by any Borough official to
cease such occupancy, 1/2 of the street in front of the place where they are
so building, unless another person is building on the opposite side of the
street, in which case neither shall occupy more than 1/4 of the street. No
person who is building shall continue such occupancy of any street after
notice from any Borough official or police officer to discontinue the same.
§ 208-1 STORM SEWERS § 208-1
207:387

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)84
84.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Sidewalk Maintenance, adopted 12-16-1969 as Ch. 19, Art. I,
of the 1969 Code, as amended, which previously consisted of §§ 208-2 through 208-6, was
repealed 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97. For related provisions, see Ch. 188, Property
Maintenance.
STORM SEWERS § 208-1
207:389

ARTICLE III
Street Openings
[Adopted 12-16-1969 as Ch. 19, Art. II, of the 1969 Code; amended
in its entirety 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
§ 208-2. Permit required; copy to Director of Public Works and
Chief of Police.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make an opening or place any
form of construction in, over or on any street, curb or sidewalk under
the control of the Borough or otherwise endanger or obstruct the
normal flow of traffic by placing any barricade, structure, material or
equipment not normally designed to be operated, placed or used on a
public highway or public right-of-way without first obtaining a written
permit from the Director of Public Works or the Borough Engineer or
his duly appointed representative.
B. A copy of the permit shall be submitted by the applicant to the Director
of Public Works and the Chief of Police, who shall notify the Fire
Department of the pending street opening.
C. Five-year moratorium following paving. [Added 10-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-14]
(1) Prior to the start of any paving or repaving work on any Borough
road, street or Borough-controlled right-of-way, the Director of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer shall notify each utility
company, resident, and business impacted by paving or repaving
work of said work so any excavations, trench and patch repairs may
be completed before paving is started. Such notice shall provide
that no excavation permit shall be issued for openings, cuts, or
excavations in said street for a period of five years from the date of
such paving unless appropriate pavement restoration requirements
are met. The notice shall also provide that applications for
excavation permits for work to be done prior to such paving or
repaving shall be submitted promptly so that any work may be
completed not later than 90 days from the date of such notification.
(2) During such five-year period, any permit issued to open, cut, or
excavate in such a Borough road, street or Borough-controlled
right-of-way shall require a road opening permit in accordance with
§ 208-3. Additionally, the Director of Public Works or the Borough
Engineer shall ensure that any street opening on any Borough
Road, street or Borough-controlled right-of-way paved within five
years is restored satisfactorily using appropriate pavement
restoration methods to include milling and paving, infrared
pavement restoration, or any other acceptable pavement
restoration technology approved by the Borough Engineer.
(3) The distances of pavement restoration in either direction of the
opening will be determined by the Borough Engineer and Director
§ 208-2 STORM SEWERS § 208-2
207:391
§ 208-3. Application; fees; duration; posting of signs.
§ 208-4. Separate permit required to make utility connections.
[Amended 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
Permission to make an opening in any street does not carry with it any right
to make drainage, sewer, water, gas, electric, cable or telephone, or similar
connections. A separate permit to make such connection shall be obtained
from the proper officials having jurisdiction.
§ 208-5. Emergencies.
Street openings may be made without the necessity of a written application
as provided in § 208-2 in case of emergencies, such as broken gas lines,
broken or frozen waterlines or other occurrences which would endanger
public health or safety, provided that notice thereof shall be given verbally
to the Chief of Police, who shall notify the Borough Engineer and Director
of Public Works as soon as convenient. Written application for a permit shall
nevertheless be made as soon as conveniently possible and, in any event,
within 48 hours in accordance with §§ 208-2, 208-3, 208-4 and 208-6.
§ 208-6. Bond.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, there shall be deposited with the
Treasurer of the Borough an amount sufficient to pay the expenses of
repairing, replacing and maintaining such street or other surface or
of Public Works based on proximity to other Borough roads, streets
or Borough-controlled rights-of-way or utility concerns.
(4) Proof of insurance. Any contractor hired to perform a street or
roadway excavation in the Borough of Florham Park shall provide
proof that it is licensed and bonded within the State of New Jersey.
A. Written application for a permit under this article shall be made to the
Director of Public Works or the Borough Engineer or his representative,
who is hereby authorized to issue such permits.
B. The fee for such permit shall be $50.
C. The permit shall indicate the date upon which operation shall start and
the date upon which it shall be completed. In no case shall the duration
of a permit be more than seven days.
D. If the proposed operation will completely obstruct any street for a
period in excess of 24 hours, then, for a period of not less than 72 hours
prior to the date set forth on the permit for operation to begin, the
person to whom such permit is granted shall post conspicuous signs in
accordance with the provisions of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey,
Title 39, and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD),
1988 addition, at or near the site of the operation, setting forth that the
street will be closed and the date, duration and reason for the closing.
§ 208-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-6
207:392
appurtenances within the area of the street as may be determined by the
Borough Engineer and/or the Director of Public Works.
§ 208-7. Indemnification of Borough.
The person obtaining a permit under this article shall, as a condition of
accepting any permit issued under this article, save, hold and keep harmless
and indemnify the Borough, its officers, agents, servants or employees from
A. The amount deemed sufficient to pay the expenses of repairing,
replacing and maintaining the street or other surfaces or
appurtenances shall be predicated upon the following schedule:
(1) Paved area openings: minimum sum based upon $28 per square
yard.
(2) Road shoulder openings, unpaved: minimum sum based upon $2.50
per square yard.
(3) Curb replacements: minimum sum based upon $20 per linear foot.
(4) Macadam drive openings: minimum sum based upon $28 per
square yard.
(5) Four-inch concrete sidewalk openings: minimum sum based on
$3.25 per square foot ($29.25 per square yard), and six-inch
concrete openings based on $4.75 per square foot ($42.75 per
square yard).
(6) Lawn area openings: minimum sum based upon $2.50 per square
yard.
B. The minimum amount to be deposited with the Borough shall be $500.
In the event that the repair, replacement or maintenance of the street
or other surface or appurtenances within the area of the street shall
encompass extraordinary work, the Borough Engineer or Director of
Public Works shall consider the extraordinary work in computing the
deposit required.
C. Where the deposit for replacement of street openings is greater than
$500, any person may file a bond, satisfactory to the Borough as to
form, amount and surety, with the Treasurer of the Borough, which
bond shall be conditional upon replacing any such opening or openings
in the manner required in this article, and the work shall be performed
and paid for by the person obtaining the permit. Nothing to the contrary
in this article withstanding, the minimum amount of $500 or 20% of the
cost of the work, whichever is greater, shall be deposited with the
Borough and the bond provided in addition thereto. The filing of such
bond shall not relieve any person of the necessity of securing a permit
and complying with all the terms and conditions of this article. Public
utility corporations of the state may file a corporate bond on a five-year
basis in the amount of $25,000 in lieu of cash or construction bonds.
§ 208-6 STORM SEWERS § 208-7
207:393
and against any loss, damage, claim, demand or expense arising out of any
suit or claim for damage or injury alleged to have been sustained as a result
of any action or work under the permit.
§ 208-8. Submission of plans; inspections.
§ 208-9. Excavations extending the full width of the street.
Unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer or Director of Public
Works, where an excavation is to extend the full width of a street, only 1/2 of
the excavation shall be made at one time, and it shall be properly backfilled
and temporary pavement installed before the other half is excavated.
§ 208-10. Utility trenches. [Amended 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23]
Trenches for the construction of gas, water, sewer, telephone, electric,
cable or other installations shall be excavated so that the near side of the
trench shall be at least three feet from the edge of the pavement. The
applicant shall furnish and put in place at his own expense such shores,
braces, sheeting, etc., as may be considered by the Borough Engineer or
Director of Public Works necessary for the safety of the work or the public.
It shall be removed as the work progresses in such manner as to prevent
the caving in of the side of the trench, unless ordered left in place by the
Borough Engineer or Director of Public Works. Any street installations that
are removed, damaged or destroyed shall be replaced, using new materials.
All driveways shall be restored as directed by the Borough Engineer or
Director of Public Works.
§ 208-11. Backfilling.
Unless otherwise directed by the Borough Engineer or Director of Public
Works, the following specifications shall govern the backfill to be placed in
excavated trenches:
A. The person obtaining a permit under this article shall submit plans and
specifications, in duplicate, which plans shall indicate the extent of the
proposed work within the Borough.
B. The Borough may assign an inspector to ensure compliance with the
specifications herein set forth. Such inspection shall be made at the
expense of the person obtaining the permit at the prevailing wage rates
paid by the Borough for inspection of public projects, the cost thereof to
be deducted from the deposit made in accordance with this article.
A. All street, shoulder and driveway openings shall be backfilled with a
quarry-processed stone, and all excess backfill material shall be
removed from the site by the person, municipal or public utility
responsible for the opening. Excess backfill removal shall be at the
direction of the Borough Engineer or Director of Public Works.
§ 208-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-11
207:394
§ 208-12. Specifications for maintenance and repair.
Upon completion of the opening and backfill as specified and upon the
Borough being notified of the same, the following specifications shall govern
the street maintenance and repair of street openings by the Borough or by
the permittee, as the case may be:
B. All other openings shall be backfilled with the quarry-processed stone
and shall be tamped in twelve-inch layers with a mechanical tamper.
C. Backfill shall be placed in trenches, as above specified, by the person,
municipal or public utility making the opening.
D. When directed by the Borough Engineer or the Director of Public
Works, the road shall be swept with an approved street sweeper, and
when directed by the officials, the dust shall be controlled by sprinkling
the road with water or spreading calcium chloride.
A. Shoulder openings. Shoulder openings shall be backfilled to within
eight inches of the existing shoulder surfaces. The remainder of the
trench shall be filled with six inches of two-and-one-half-inch stone and
all voids with stone dust. When authorized, approved shoulder stone
may be used as an alternate for the macadam base. The remainder of
the opening, over the macadam base, shall be filled with the shoulder
stone and tamped or rolled with the equivalent capacity of a five-to-tenton
roller. The above trench shall be maintained and kept to the existing
shoulder grade by the addition of shoulder stone as required.
B. Pavement openings and pavement replacement (temporary). Pavement
openings shall be filled and paved as hereinabove for shoulder
openings, except that, in place of shoulder stone used to fill in the
remainder of the trench openings, bituminous concrete Type A two
inches thick shall be used.
C. Pavement replacement (final). When, in the opinion of the Borough
Engineer or Director of Public Works, settlement in the pavement
opening has ceased, the bituminous concrete surface shall be removed,
and the existing pavement shall be cut back to a sharp line one foot
each side of the opening. After surfaces of the existing pavement are
tack coated with an asphaltic oil, the entire area shall be filled with
bituminous concrete type FABC-1, two inches thick and rolled to
present an even-riding surface. "Pavement openings" are herein
described as openings within the traveled roadway or between curbs
where curbs exist on a street.
D. Driveway openings. Driveway openings shall be replaced in kind, and
the appropriate specifications for shoulder openings or road openings
shall govern the replacement of the same.
§ 208-11 STORM SEWERS § 208-13
207:395
§ 208-13. Monuments.
Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose
of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision or
a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey bench mark within
the Borough shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or
disturbed unless permission to do so is first obtained, in writing, from the
Borough Engineer or Director of Public Works. Permission shall be granted
upon condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incidental to the
proper replacement of the monument.
§ 208-14. Access to hydrants and driveways.
§ 208-15. Curb opening permits.
Curb opening permits shall only be issued to provide ingress and egress to
driveways or parking areas and shall be made only to the extent that it is
necessary to permit ingress and egress to the driveways and parking areas.
No person shall be granted a permit to open any curb until a deposit shall
be made with the Borough Treasurer in an amount sufficient to pay the
expenses of opening, repairing or replacing the curb. The amount deemed
necessary to pay the expenses of opening, repairing or replacing the curb
shall be a sum equal to $20 per linear foot of opening, provided that the
minimum payment shall be $500.
§ 208-16. Sidewalk opening permits; specifications.
§ 208-17. Sheathing.
In the event that a trench is required to be six feet or greater in depth, the
person obtaining the permit shall install sheathing, subject to inspection by
the Borough Engineer or Director of Public Works.
A. Free access shall be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
B. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
A. Sidewalk opening permits shall only be issued by the Borough Engineer
or Director of Public Works for the repair, removal and replacement of
sidewalks.
B. All new sidewalks shall be composed of a mix of 4,000 pounds per
square inch (1 to 2 to 4) of air-entrained concrete with a four-inch
minimum thickness. At driveway crossings, the minimum thickness of
sidewalks shall be six inches and composed of air-entrained concrete.
C. The opening, repairing and replacement of pavement or other surfaces
or installations within the street area shall be done in accordance with
Borough specifications and under the direction of the Borough
Engineer or Director of Public Works.
§ 208-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-18
207:396
§ 208-18. Notice upon failure to comply; repair by Borough; costs.
§ 208-19. Acceptance of streets by Borough; return of deposit.
§ 208-20. Applicability to Borough-owned utilities.
All street openings required and performed by utilities owned or operated
by the Borough shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Any fees
required to be paid by this article are hereby waived, but all deposit,
insurance and bond requirements shall be applicable.
A. In the event that the person obtaining a permit under this article shall
fail to comply with the terms and conditions of this article for
replacement of openings, the Borough Engineer or Director of Public
Works shall notify such person to repair and replace the street or other
surfaces and appurtenances within three days of the receipt thereof.
Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the person obtaining the permit at the address set forth in the
application for the permit. It a bond has been posted in lieu of cash
deposit, the notice called for herein shall also be sent in the same
manner to the bonding company to the address of the local bond agent.
B. In the event that the person obtaining a permit under this article
neglects or refuses to make the repairs and replacements required
within 48 hours of the mailing of notice, the Borough shall make the
repairs and replacements, deducting the cost thereof from the deposit.
If a bond has been posted in addition to a cash deposit, a claim shall be
made against the bonding company for the costs in excess of cash
deposit.
C. If, due to the failure of the person obtaining the permit to properly
backfill or restore a street opening, a dangerous or hazardous condition
shall result, the Borough may repair and restore the same immediately
and thereafter give notice of the condition to such person and the
bonding company, if the case may be. The cost of such repairing and
restoration shall be deducted from the deposit or charged against the
bonding company.
A. All Borough streets restored under this article shall be subject to final
release and acceptance, in writing, by the Borough Engineer or
Director of Public Works.
B. No deposit money shall be returned nor bond released until 18 months
after the completion of the project and its acceptance by the Borough
Engineer or Director of Public Works, and then only upon a written
certification of the Borough Engineer and Director of Public Works that
the work has remained in satisfactory condition for the 18 months.
§ 208-18 STORM SEWERS § 208-21
207:397
§ 208-21. Enforcement.
The Borough Engineer or the Director of Public Works is hereby designated
the person responsible to enforce the provisions of this article and, in
connection herewith, is the agent of the Borough. However, this section
shall not be construed to prevent the Police Department from prosecuting
violators hereof.
§ 208-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-21
207:398
ARTICLE IV
Public Works Improvements
[Adopted 4-15-1975 by Ord. No. 5-75; amended in its entirety
12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
§ 208-22. Standards.
A. For the purpose of establishing design, details and standards for the
construction, repair and maintenance of public works projects within
the Borough, including but not limited to streets and street openings,
there is hereby adopted by the Borough that certain handbook of detail
drawings entitled "Borough of Florham Park, Morris County, New
Jersey, Public Works Improvement Standards, Engineering Department,
dated November 7, 1974," and Street Design Handbook (1996). Such
standards shall be applicable to all related provisions of this Code and
may be amended from time to time by added drawings recommended to
the Borough Council and approved by it by resolution. A copy of the
Public Works Improvement Standards, 1974 Edition, as amended, and
the Street Design Handbook (1996) may be obtained from the Borough
Clerk upon payment of a fee as shall be established from year to year.
B. For the purpose of establishing design requirements for public roads
located within the Borough, there is hereby adopted by the Borough a
handbook of basic road classifications and design principles entitled
"Street Design Handbook 1996, Borough of Florham Park." Such design
requirements shall be applicable to all related provisions of this Code
and may be amended by resolution. A copy of the Street Design
Handbook, 1996 Edition, as amended, may be obtained from the
Borough Clerk upon payment of a fee as shall be established from year
to year.
§ 208-22 STORM SEWERS § 208-22
207:399

ARTICLE V
Approved Streets
[Adopted 10-18-1983 by Ord. No. 16-83; amended in its entirety
12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
§ 208-23. Enumeration of streets.
The following streets have been inspected and accepted by the Borough
Engineer and are officially designated as Borough streets:
Afton Drive
Allerton Court
Annabelle Lane
Arrowhead Road (paper street)
Baldwin Road
Beechwood Road
Birch Lane
Blanchet Court
Braidburn Road
Briarwood Road
Broadway
Brooklake Road
Burnet Road
Burnside Avenue [Amended 10-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-21]
Campus Drive
Carrigan Lane
Cathedral Avenue
Cherokee Trail
Circle Road
Columbia Turnpike (county road)
Cory Road
Country Club Lane
Crane Lane
Crescent Road [Amended 11-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-13]
Cross Lane
Dawn Court
Decker Lane
Deerfield Drive
Delaware Road
§ 208-23 STORM SEWERS § 208-23
207:401
Dellwood Drive
Driftway
East Madison Avenue
Edgewood Drive
Elm Street
Elmwood Road
Farr Lane
Felch Road
Fernwood Road
First Street
Florham Avenue
Forest Drive
Genung Court
Greenwood Avenue
Gregmar Court
Gregory Drive
Hancock Drive
Hanover Road (county road)
Harvale Drive
Heritage Road [Amended 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 15-02]
Hillside Avenue
Honeymoon Lane
Hopping Lane
Hughes Court
Indian Lane
Insley Road
James Street
Jolen Court
Joyce Court
Kenneth Court
Kenwood Lane
Keyes Street
Kice Road
Knapp Avenue
Lakeview Avenue
Laurel Avenue (paper street)
Lauri Drive
§ 208-23 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-23
207:402
Leigh Drive
Leslie Avenue
Lincoln Avenue
Lloyd Avenue
Loveys Drive
Manker Drive
Mann Avenue
Midwood Drive
Milton Avenue
Minnisink Road
Murphy Circle
Myrtle Avenue
Northern Avenue
Nottingham Drive
Old Mill Road
Orchard Road
Overlook Drive
Park Avenue (county road)
Park Street
Parker Court
Partridge Lane
Passaic Avenue (county road)
Pheasant Way
Pierson Lane
Pine Valley Way
Pinchbrook Drive
Pollard Avenue
Puddingstone Way
Punchbowl Road
Quail Run
Rever Drive
Ridgedale Avenue (county road)
Riverside Drive
Rockwood Road
Roosevelt Boulevard
Rustic Court
Rosemont Hills Drive [Amended 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 15-02]
§ 208-23 STORM SEWERS § 208-23
207:403
Sherbrooke Drive
Shetland Road
Smithfield Lane
Spring Valley Drive
Summit Road
Sutton Place
Thayer Court
Timber Court
Totty Court
Tower Lane
Townsend Drive
Tucker Street
Village Road
Vreeland Road
Vultee Drive
Ward Place
Washington Avenue
Welsh Drive
West End Avenue
Willow Way
Woodbine Road
Woodcrest Road
Woods End Road
§ 208-23 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-23
207:404
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalk Cafe85
[Adopted 8-19-1997 by Ord. No. 10-97A]
§ 208-24. Purpose.
The sidewalk cafe regulations as set forth in this article are designed to
permit sidewalk cafes to be established on public or quasi-public property
in locations where they shall be determined to be appropriate by these
regulations and, considering all applicable related ordinances, in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The
general purposes of these regulations shall include, but are not limited to,
the following specific purposes:
§ 208-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK CAFE — The extension of the services of an existing restaurant
preparing and serving foods for consumption within an existing building
to the extent that food is permitted to be served and consumed at tables
placed on the public sidewalk adjacent to and within the confines of the
frontage of that portion of the building in which the restaurant is situated.
A sidewalk cafe may contain readily removable tables, chairs, temporary
railings and planters but shall be otherwise unenclosed by fixed walls
and open to the air, except for retractable awnings, umbrellas or other
nonpermanent covers, provided that such covers do not interfere with
pedestrian circulation.
§ 208-26. License required; renewal. [Amended 12-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-24]
Any person, firm or corporation may operate a sidewalk cafe (hereinafter
called a "cafe") within the Borough of Florham Park in any zone in which
such use is permitted on the sidewalk adjacent to an existing restaurant
operated by such person, firm or corporation upon obtaining a license from
the Borough Clerk. Such license may be renewed annually.
§ 208-27. Application procedures; requirements; fee; specifications.
A. To ensure that adequate space will be provided for pedestrian
circulation through areas where sidewalk cafes are established and to
ensure adequate access to adjoining properties and businesses.
B. To encourage the establishment of sidewalk cafes as one means of
developing a pleasant and distinctive shopping atmosphere.
85.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 20-97, adopted 12-16-1997, the sections contained in
this article were renumbered from §§ 208-29 through 208-35 to §§ 208-24 through 208-30,
respectively.
§ 208-24 STORM SEWERS § 208-27
207:405
A. Application and fee. Each applicant for a license shall submit a letter of
application together with three copies of a development plan for the
cafe and a nonrefundable fee of $100 to the Borough Clerk. The letter of
application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the
property owner if other than the applicant, the person preparing the
development plan and the written authorization of the owner of the
property to submit the application if the applicant is not the owner.
B. Development plans. The following information shall be shown on all
development plans:
(1) The applicant's entire property and adjacent properties, including
public streets.
(2) The design and location of all temporary structures proposed,
including tables, chairs, planters, awnings and other equipment, as
well as lighting and electrical outlet locations, if any.
(3) The capacity of existing restaurant and proposed cafe.
(4) A proposal for providing adequate pedestrian circulation.
C. Referral of development plans. Prior to the issuance of a license
pursuant to this section, the development plans and application shall be
referred to the Construction Official who shall recommend to the
Borough Administrator approval, disapproval or modification of said
plans within 10 days of the submission of the plans.
D. Conditions for issuance of license. Upon approval by the Borough
administration of the application and plans submitted by the applicant
pursuant to this section, the Borough Clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant, provided that the applicant has furnished the Borough of
Florham Park the following:
(1) An agreement by the applicant to repair any damage caused to the
sidewalk in the operation of the cafe at the expense of the
applicant. The Borough administration may require a bond to be
filed by the applicant in an amount to be fixed by the Borough
administration.
(2) An agreement by the applicant indemnifying the Borough against
loss, including costs and expenses, resulting from injury to person
or property as a direct or indirect result of the operation of the cafe
or for injury to person or property occurring on the premises
occupied by the cafe. The applicant shall provide an insurance
policy to the Borough in the amount of $500,000, which amount
shall be stipulated on the liability policy naming the Borough as
coinsured.
E. Rules, regulations and specifications. A cafe authorized and operated
pursuant to this section shall comply with all of the following rules,
regulations and specifications:
§ 208-27 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-27
207:406
§ 208-28. Notice of violation; failure to comply; hearing; revocation
of license.
Upon a finding by the Borough administration or Zoning Officer that an
applicant has violated any provisions of this article, the Borough
administration or Zoning Officer shall give notice to the applicant to correct
said violation within 24 hours of receipt of said notice by the applicant.
Upon failure to correct said violation within 24 hours, the Borough
administration may revoke the applicant's license issued pursuant to this
article. Upon the revocation of such license, the applicant shall be entitled
(1) The applicant and/or operator shall fully comply with all plans
submitted and approved by the administration under the terms of
this section.
(2) (Reserved)86
(3) The area of operation shall be kept clean and free of litter.
Sidewalks shall be washed daily, and trash receptacles shall be
provided as approved by the Borough administration.
(4) Music is not permitted in or around the area.
(5) The operator shall maintain the following setback distances from
the curb, free of any obstruction, in the following locations:
(a) In locations abutting quasi-public thoroughfares, i.e., shopping
centers and parking lots, a distance of 36 inches.
(b) In locations abutting public streets where the speed limit does
not exceed 25 miles per hour, a distance of 72 inches.
(c) In locations abutting public streets where the speed limit is
between 25 miles per hour and 35 miles per hour, a distance of
144 inches.
(d) In locations abutting public streets where the speed limit is in
excess of 35 miles per hour, sidewalk cafes shall be prohibited.
(6) Umbrellas, if used, must be anchored and/or weighted down in
such a manner to prevent them from dislodging and injuring a
pedestrian or damaging autos.
(7) The operator shall comply with all the requirements of N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq., also known as Chapter XII of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code, and N.J.S.A. 24:15-1 et seq.
(8) The operator shall comply with all other ordinances of the Borough
of Florham Park, inclusive.
86.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(2), regarding removal of furniture, utensils,
customers or other materials by 10:00 p.m., was repealed 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-24.
§ 208-27 STORM SEWERS § 208-28
207:407
to a hearing and notice thereof, if such is requested, within five days of
revocation.
§ 208-29. Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
The area encompassed within a cafe authorized pursuant to this article
shall be considered duty licensed for sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, provided that approval for the same has been obtained from
the Borough of Florham Park. Such approval is separate from and must
be obtained in addition to the license to operate a sidewalk cafe issued
pursuant to this article.
§ 208-30. Violations and penalties.
Each violation of a section or subsection of this article shall constitute
a separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or
subsection or any order issued pursuant to this article. Each day's failure
to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate
violation. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
§ 208-28 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-30
207:408
ARTICLE VII
Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and
Maintenance Operations
[Adopted 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
§ 208-31. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
§ 208-32. Additional responsibilities of contractor.
A. The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above or below
ground, which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the
normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the work forces performing these operations.
B. The Borough of Florham Park in the County of Morris, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, 1998 Edition, herein known as "MUTCD," except as
supplemented or amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work is in
violation of this section.
A. Preconstruction meetings. It shall be the responsibility of the person,
contractor or public utility (as required under the public utility
agreement, Section 16:25-9.2), wishing to conduct work on, under or
above the roadway, to contact the Borough to arrange a preconstruction
meeting with the Police, Public Works and Engineering Departments in
order to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such
periods of construction work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails
to comply with this section prior to the start of such work or whose
plans are not approved by these Departments shall be in violation of
this section.
B. Emergency contact phone numbers. The person, contractor or utility
shall provide the Traffic Bureau with at least two emergency contact
phone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the
construction or maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If, for
any reason, emergency contacts cannot be reached, or if the emergency
contact person does not respond to a call from the Police Department or
Public Works Department to correct a hazardous condition, the
Borough may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The
reasonable fees for such emergency services by the Borough shall be
§ 208-31 STORM SEWERS § 208-32
207:409
§ 208-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-16-2006 by Ord. No.
10-06]
charged to the person, contractor or utility responsible for such
condition.
C. Time limits. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or
utility work on any roadway in the Borough before the hour of 9:00 a.m.
or after 4:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Traffic
Bureau of the Florham Park Police Department. If it is determined by
the officer in charge of the Florham Park Police Traffic Bureau that
construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard,
the time limits for performing such work shall not be adjusted. If any
person, contractor or utility allows work to begin or continue outside of
the specified time limits without obtaining permission to do so as set
forth above, it shall be considered a separate violation for every fifteenminute
period that elapses prior to or after the specified time limit.
D. Road closings and detours. Road closings and/or detours shall not be
permitted unless first approved by the Florham Park Police, Director of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer.
E. Stop work. The Traffic Bureau of the Florham Park Police Department
or the Director of Public Works of the Borough of Florham Park shall
have the authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment
and vehicles, stored material within the street right-of-way, backfilling
of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any
nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this section.
A. Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
§ 1-16, of this Code.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues to occur, unless otherwise
specified in this article.
§ 208-32 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-33
207:410
ARTICLE VIII
Obstruction of Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 18-02]
§ 208-34. Definitions.
As used in this Article VIII, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BLOCK — To interfere with unobstructed travel by any means, including but
not limited to standing on the part of the walk that is fit for travel, or placing
any object or vehicle whatsoever on such walk.
SIDEWALK — Any sidewalk owned or maintained by the Borough. The term
shall not include sidewalks or walkways on private property in shopping
centers, apartment complexes, office building sites or any other private
property.
§ 208-35. Blocking sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall block any sidewalk by obstructing the same so that it is
impossible for a pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the
sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street, and so as to
leave a passageway of less than four feet.
§ 208-36. Free speech.
This article shall not be interpreted as prohibiting any person from stopping
on any sidewalk to talk or to make a speech, provided that such person shall
not stand in such a location that is impossible for any pedestrian to travel
along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent
property or on the street. If two or more persons are engaged in talking
while stopped on a sidewalk, they shall not stand in such locations as to
completely prevent any pedestrian from passing them on the sidewalk.
§ 208-37. Plants, shrubs and trees.
No person shall permit any shrub, tree on other plant to grow over or
on any sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct the sidewalk. It is the
responsibility of the owner of the property on which such plant, shrub or
tree is located to remove or trim the plant so that it will not block the
sidewalk. No limbs or branches extending over the sidewalk shall be under
seven feet in height. No person, firm or corporation shall be fined for
violating this section unless such person has been notified in writing by any
Borough officer or employee to remove or trim such plant within 15 days,
and has failed to remove or trim such plant within 15 days.
§ 208-34 STORM SEWERS § 208-38
207:411
§ 208-38. Violations and penalties.
Each violation of a section of this article shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation independent of any other section or any order issued
pursuant to this article. Each day's failure to comply with any section shall
constitute a separate violation. Any person violating the provisions of this
article shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
§ 208-38 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-38
207:412
ARTICLE IX
Snowplowing Operations
[Adopted 7-15-2003 by Ord. No. 10-03]
§ 208-39. Obstruction of snowplowing operations prohibited.
No person shall interfere with the snowplowing of any portion of any of the
Borough streets by obstructing the travel or operation of a snowplowing
vehicle operated on behalf of the Borough by placing any object, vehicle,
or one's person in a manner that prevents movement of the vehicle past
any point on any Borough street or prevents the movement or depositing of
snow in any location.
§ 208-40. No snow to be deposited on streets.
No person, including, but not limited to, any resident or contractor
performing private snowplowing operations or clearing snow by shovel,
plow or snow blower within the Borough, shall cause snow to be deposited
from any premises within the Borough onto any Borough street.
§ 208-41. No snowplowing against opposite curb.
Snow shall not be plowed and piled from a driveway against the opposite
curb. Snow shall be plowed back onto the property from which it was
plowed or shoveled and feathered along the curbline of the same property
so that piles do not extend into the street.
§ 208-42. No parking on snow-covered Borough sheets.
No car may be parked on any Borough street whenever snow has
accumulated on the street to such a depth that snow removal operations
will be required.
§ 208-43. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-16-2006 by Ord. No.
10-06]
Property owners are responsible for the actions of their contractors and
may be held responsible for any violation of this article committed by
their contractor. Each violation of a section of this article shall constitute
a separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or any
order issued pursuant to this article. Each day's failure to comply with
any section shall constitute a separate violation. Any person violating the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000
or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 208-39 STORM SEWERS § 208-43
207:413
Chapter 212
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 42.
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 62.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 125.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Soil removal — See Ch. 203.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Sanitation (Board of Health) — See Ch. 265.
Sewage disposal systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 278.
§ 208-43 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 208-43
207:414
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 212-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPLICANT — The developer or landowner submitting an application for
development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by the Code for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, plan development, conditional use, zoning
variance or for the issuance of a permit for the development of all
construction on property located in the Borough.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough or the Board of
Adjustment, where applicable.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by this chapter and the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and
all accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of the
application for development, including, where applicable, but not limited
to a site plan or subdivision plat, provided that the municipal agency may
require such additional information not specified in this chapter or any
revisions in the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information
or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
municipal agency. An application shall be certified as complete immediately
upon the meeting of all requirements specified in this chapter and in
the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and shall be deemed
complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative officer for
purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the
municipal agency.[Added 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
CONCEPT PLAN — A plan intended for informal review and discussion
purposes which presents in a general manner to the Borough Planning
Board the proposed design and features of development but which carries
no vesting rights or obligation to any party.[Added 12-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 31-98]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the Zoning Ordinance87 and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-1 STORM SEWERS § 212-1
207:415
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL — A qualified person appointed by the
Mayor or the Council to enforce and administer the regulations as from time
to time are promulgated by the State Uniform Construction Code.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or any mining,
excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure or land or extension of use of land for which permission may
be required.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development,
necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of
flooding.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Board taken on a
preliminarily approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site
plan which is presented to the Board for final approval in accordance with
its regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the Clerk of the
county for recording in accordance with law.
FLOODPLAIN; FLOODWAY; FLOOD HAZARD AREA — All lands lying within
designated flood areas, as determined by a map entitled "Special Flood
Hazard Area and Floodway Map," dated January 9, 1976, and prepared
by the Borough Engineering Department. The general boundaries of such
areas are based upon data obtained from the Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development Flood Insurance Study, Type 15, dated
December 1974, and more particularly encompassed by the Florham Park
Surface Water Management Ordinance (Article VII of this chapter).
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned commercial development or a planned unit
development as provided by this chapter.[Added 3-19-2002 by Ord. No.
4-02; amended 12-19-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02A; 3-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-4]
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise as permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit. Adjoining parcels in common ownership which do not meet the
§ 212-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-1
207:416
dimensional and area requirements for building lots as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance88 shall be considered as a single lot for the purposes of
this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality, which shall
have been duly adopted by the Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A plan for nonresidential development (other than
subdivision) for any addition, alteration, or modification of less than 1,000
square feet of floor area and/or less than 2,000 square feet of improved lot
coverage; provided, however, that such plan:[Added 4-15-1980 by Ord.
No. 9-80; amended 6-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-12]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than three
lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street, the
extension of any off-tract improvements the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to this chapter and not adversely affecting the development of the
remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not in conflict with any
provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance89
or this chapter; provided, however, that, in the event that more than one
"minor subdivision" from any tract of land as recorded is submitted, then
for the purpose of administering this chapter, the subsequent subdivision
shall be construed as a major subdivision and shall be processed
accordingly.[Added 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a Zoning Ordinance90 but which fails to
Does not involve a planned development, any new street, or extension
of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42;
A.
Does not require the granting of any variances from the zoning
requirements of this chapter or waivers from the design standards of
Article XV of this chapter;
B.
Does not involve any lot, tract, parcel, building or structure that was
approved as a minor or major site plan within the preceding 18 months;
C.
D. Is limited to a use permitted by ordinance; and
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make any
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
E.
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-1 STORM SEWERS § 212-1
207:417
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of the
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OWNER — Any person, individual, firm, association, legal entity, syndicate,
copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide such property under this chapter.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPLICATION — All maps, documents, reports and
checklists indicating the proposed development necessary for a complete
application to the Planning Board sufficient to warrant preliminary action
by the Planning Board.
SEWERAGE AUTHORITY — The Borough Sewerage Authority.91
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or a street or way shown upon a plat duly filed and recorded in the office
of the Clerk of the county prior to the appointment of a Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, including the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The locations of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informal determination pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter requiring review and approval of site plans.
C.
91.Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer Utility.
§ 212-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-1
207:418
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines.
SUBDIVIDER — Any owner commencing proceedings under this chapter to
effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION[Added 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80] — The division of a
lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or other divisions
of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development. The following divisions shall not be considered "subdivisions"
within the meaning of this chapter if no new streets or roads are created:
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE (TRC) — A committee comprised of
the Borough Engineer, the Borough Planner, the Planning Board Attorney,
the Planning Board Chairman, one other member of the Planning Board to
be named by the Chairman, and the Construction Official for the purpose
of determining the completeness of all applications in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and such other duties relating to land use
or subdivision which may be conferred on this Committee by the
Board.[Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-11]
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of any proceeding or
reproduction thereof.[Added 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
VARIANCE — The permission to depart from the literal requirements of
the Borough Zoning Ordinance92 as provided herein.[Added 4-15-1980 by
Ord. No. 9-80]
§ 212-2. Purpose.
Divisions of land for agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels
are five acres or larger in size.
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
C.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found
and certified by the Borough Clerk to conform to the requirements of
this chapter and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or
parcels on the Tax Maps of the Borough of Florham Park.
D.
E. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
A. The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision and site plan review in the Borough
in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare of the municipality.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-1 STORM SEWERS § 212-2
207:419
§ 212-3. Administration.
§ 212-4. Sale of land prior to approval.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55, before final approval has been obtained or,
in the case of a minor subdivision, classification established, no person shall
transfer or sell or agree to sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly
conditioned upon final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any land
which forms a part of a subdivision on which, by this chapter, the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment is required to act.
B. This chapter adopts all of the applicable mandatory provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.93
C. This chapter shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
provide adequate provisions for circulation, utilities and services.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Borough
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. These rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter shall
be considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any
action taken by the Boards under the terms of this chapter shall give
primary consideration to the matters mentioned above and to the
welfare of the entire community. However, if the subdivider or his agent
can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may
permit such exception as may be reasonable and within the general
purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established
by this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
C. As a condition for approval of any development application, an
applicant shall be required to submit proof that no municipal taxes,
liens or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on
the property for which said application is made. [Added 4-15-1980 by
Ord. No. 9-80]
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 212-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-4
207:420
ARTICLE II
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 212-5. Powers and duties.
A. Planning Board.
(1) The Planning Board, in its consideration of site plans, subdivisions
or conditional uses, shall have the same power as the Board of
Adjustment to grant:
(a) Variances from lot area, lot dimensional, setback and yard
requirements. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(b) Approval to construct a building or structure in the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
area reserved for the public or flood hazard area.
(c) Approval for the issuance of a building permit for a building or
structure not related to a street.
(2) At the request of a developer, the Borough Planning Board shall
have the power to grant an informal review of a concept plan for
development in the Borough. The escrow fee for this review is
$1,000. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for
which review is requested, nor shall the Borough Planning Board
be bound by any such review. [Added 12-15-1998 by Ord. No.
31-98]
B. Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by any administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement
of the Zoning Ordinance.94
(2) Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any such
ordinance, requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which
such Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or Official Map
Ordinance in accordance with this chapter.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-5 STORM SEWERS § 212-5
207:421
property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, including a variance
for conditional use; provided, however, that no variance shall be
granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use; and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review
a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 et seq.
[Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(4) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from regulations pursuant to Chapter 250 of this
Code, including but not limited to allowing a structure or use, but
only by affirmative vote of at least five members of the Board. No
variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning
Ordinance.95 An application under this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board,
for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
act. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(5) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25 of Chapter 291
of the laws of New Jersey 197596 for a building or structure in the
bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin
or public area reserved pursuant to Section 23 of Chapter 291 of
the Laws of New Jersey 1975.97 [Added 4-15-1980 by Ord. No.
9-80]
(6) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 27 of Chapter 291
of the Laws of New Jersey 1975 98 for a building or structure not
related to a street. [Added 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(7) Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to
Article 6 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 197599 or
conditional use approval pursuant to Section 54 of said chapter100
whenever the proposed development requires approval by the
Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to Section 57d of said
chapter.101 The developer may elect to submit a separate
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
99.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 through 55D-59.
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
§ 212-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-5
207:422
§ 212-6. Conflict of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 212-7. Meetings.
application requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall be
conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by
the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be
granted unless such approval can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of
the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning Ordinance.102
The number of votes of Board members required to grant any such
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter
for the approval in question, and the special vote pursuant to the
aforesaid Section 57d of said chapter shall not be required. [Added
4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(8) Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board, subdivision approval involving a subdivision of
three lots or less, site plan approval or conditional use approval
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for a use variance.
In the event of a subdivision in excess of three lots, the Board of
Adjustment shall first refer the completed application to the
Planning Board for its report or approval.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members and shall be held on notice to its
members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum's being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at
the meeting, except as otherwise required by any provision of Chapter
291 of the Laws of 1975.103 [Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88]
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-5 STORM SEWERS § 212-7
207:423
§ 212-8. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter
be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at
the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the law.
§ 212-9. Fees and deposits. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-1]
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, Chapter 231 of the
Laws of 1975.104 An executive session for the purpose of discussing and
studying any matters to come before either Board shall not be deemed a
regular or special meeting in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9.
A. Escrow deposits. In addition to the initial fees or charges as elsewhere
set forth, the Borough shall require escrow deposits in accordance with
the provisions of the fee and deposit schedules set forth in §§ 212-18
and 212-23. The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall make all of
the payments to professionals for services rendered to the municipality
or approving authority for review of applications for development,
review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or
other purposes under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The
application review and inspection charges shall be limited only to
professional charges for review of applications, review and preparation
of documents and inspections of developments under construction and
for review by outside consultants when an application is of a nature
beyond the scope of the expertise of the professionals normally utilized
by the Borough. The only cost that shall be added to any such charges
shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of such professionals or
consultants including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications and inspecting improvements. No applicant
shall be charged for any municipal, clerical or administrative functions,
overhead expenses, meeting room charges or any of the Borough costs
and expenses, except as provided for specifically by statute, nor shall a
Borough professional add any such charge to his bill.
B. Scope of reimbursed services. The Borough shall be entitled to be
reimbursed for the review of applications, both as to completeness and
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 212-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-9
207:424
as to content, for the review and preparation of documents such as,
but not limited to, drafting resolutions, developer's agreements, and
necessary correspondence with applicant or applicant's professionals.
C. Deposit of escrow funds; refunds. Deposits received from any applicant
in excess of $5,000 shall be held by the Chief Financial Officer in a
special interest-bearing deposit account, and upon receipt of bills from
professionals and approval of said bills as hereinafter provided for, the
Chief Financial Officer may use such funds to pay the bills submitted by
such professionals or experts. The Borough shall not be required to
refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed
$100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100, the entire
amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by
the Borough annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied for
the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may be, except that
the Borough may retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent to
no more than 33 1/3% of that entire amount which shall be in lieu of all
other administrative and custodial expenses. All sums not actually so
expended shall be refunded to the applicant within 90 days after action
on the application is complete, as evidenced by the issuance of all
certificates of occupancy or a final denial of the application.
D. Payments.
(1) Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications,
review and preparation of documents and inspection of
improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the professional
which voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service,
each date the services were performed, the hours spent to onequarter
hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses
incurred. All professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough on a monthly basis in accordance
with the schedules and procedures established by the Chief
Financial Officer. The professional shall send an informational copy
of all vouchers or statements submitted to the Chief Financial
Officer simultaneously to the applicant and the Borough agency for
whom said services were performed.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided
on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a
monthly basis if monthly charges exceed $1,000. If an escrow
account or deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the
Borough or approving authority to perform required application
reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial Officer
shall provide the applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow
or deposit balance. In order for work to continue on the
development or the application, the applicant shall within a
reasonable time period post a deposit to the account in an amount
§ 212-9 STORM SEWERS § 212-9
207:425
to be agreed upon by the Borough or approving authority and
the applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety
inspections shall be made and charged back against the
replenishment of funds.
E. Payments required prior to issuance of permits. No zoning permits,
building permits, certificates of occupancy or any other types of permits
may be issued with respect to any approved application for
development until all bills for reimbursable services have been received
by the Borough from professional personnel rendering services in
connection with such application and payment has been made.
F. Close-out procedures. The following close-out procedures shall apply to
all deposits and escrow accounts established under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and shall commence after the approving
authority has taken final action on the application, evidenced by the
issuing of all applicable certificates of occupancy or final denial of the
application. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to
the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough and the approving authority
and to the relevant Borough professional that the application or the
improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt of such
notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough shall render a written final accounting to the applicant on the
uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final
bill. Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including
interest in accordance with N.J.S.A 40:55D-53.1, shall be refunded to
the developer along with the final accounting.
G. Scope of charges. All professional charges for review of an application
for development, review and preparation of documents or inspection of
improvements shall be reasonable and necessary given the status and
progress of the application or construction. Review fees shall be
charged only in connection with an application for development
presently pending before the approving authority or upon review of
compliance with the conditions of approval, or review of requests for
modification or amendment made by the applicant. A professional shall
not review items which are subject to approval by any state
governmental agency and not under Borough jurisdiction except to the
extent consultation with a state agency is necessary due to the effect of
state approvals on the subdivision or site plan.
H. Limitation of inspection fees. Inspection fees shall be charged only for
actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or required by an
approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements under
construction shall charge only for inspections that are reasonably
necessary to check the progress and quality of the work, and such
inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved development
plans and documents.
§ 212-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-9
207:426
I. Estimate of cost of improvements. The cost of the installation of
improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall be estimated
by the Borough Engineer based on documented construction costs for
the public improvements prevailing in the general area of the Borough.
The developer may appeal the Borough Engineer's estimate to the
County Construction Board of Appeals, established pursuant to N.J.S.A
52:27D-127.
J. Appeals.
(1) An applicant shall notify, in writing, the governing body with copies
to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by
a professional for a service rendered to the Borough in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements, or other charges made
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. The governing body or its
designee shall within a reasonable time attempt to remediate any
disputed charges. If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of
the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the County Construction
Board of Appeals, established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127, any
charge to an escrow account or deposit by any Borough
professional or consultant, or the cost of the installation of
improvements estimated by the Borough Engineer pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. An applicant or his authorized agent shall
submit the appeal, in writing, to the County Construction Board of
Appeals. The applicant or his authorized agent shall simultaneously
send a copy of the appeal to the Borough, approving authority, and
any professional whose charges are the subject of the appeal. An
applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the
informational copy of the professional's voucher required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c), except that if the professional has not
supplied the applicant with an informational copy of the voucher,
then the applicant shall file his appeal within 60 days from receipt
of the Borough statement of activity against the deposit or escrow
account required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c). An applicant may file
an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by a professional during
a period not exceeding six months to demonstrate that they
represent a pattern of excessive or inaccurate charges. An
applicant making use of this provision need not appeal each charge
individually.
(2) Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the Rules and
procedures established by the County Construction Board of
Appeals.
(3) During the pendency of any appeal, the Borough or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear and decide the application
of development and to inspect the development in the normal
course and shall not withhold, delay or deny reviews, inspections,
signing of subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the
§ 212-9 STORM SEWERS § 212-9
207:427
§ 212-10. Time limit for filing documents.
All applications, maps and documents for which approval is sought shall be
on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date of
the hearing.
§ 212-11. Hearings.
release of performance of maintenance guarantees, the issuance
of construction permits or certificates of occupancy, or any other
approval or permit because an appeal has been filed or is pending
under this subsection. The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough
may pay charges out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit
for which an appeal has been filed. If the charge is disallowed
after payment, the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall
reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the amount of any
such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the applicant. If a
charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or consultant
who is not an employee of the Borough, the professional or
consultant shall reimburse the Borough in the amount of any such
disallowed charge.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties;
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, the
Laws of 1953, Chapter 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented. subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof, on request to any interested party, at his expense.
§ 212-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-11
207:428
§ 212-12. Notice. [Amended 5-16-1978 by Ord. No. 13-78]
F. Absences; eligibility to vote. When any hearing shall carry over two or
more times, a member of the Board who was absent for one or more of
the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter, provided that that
member has available to him a transcript or recording of the meeting or
meetings from which he was absent and certifies, in writing, to the
Board that he has read or listened to the record.105
A. Whenever a notice for a hearing is required on an application for
development, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall
give notice thereof as follows:
(1) Notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the
municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given to the owners located in the state of all real
property, as shown on the current tax duplicate or duplicates,
located within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is
subject to such hearing. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(3) Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice
required to be given pursuant to the preceding subsection to the
owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located
within 200 feet of the subject premises.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include copies of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10b.
105. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (g), added 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80. which dealt with
quorum requirements and which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions. Art I.)
§ 212-11 STORM SEWERS § 212-12
207:429
§ 212-13. List of owners to be notified. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord.
No. 9-80]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessor of the
Borough shall, within seven days' receipt of a request therefor and upon
receipt of payment of a fee not in excess of $0.25 per name or $10,
whichever is greater, make and certify a list, from the current tax duplicate,
of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to § 212-12.
§ 212-14. Decisions.
B. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
matters to be considered and identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax
Assessor's office, and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available as required by
law. If relief is requested in the form of a variance, the notice shall
include a brief description of the relief sought.
C. All notices specified in this section shall be given at least 10 days prior
to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file an affidavit of
proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the application
for development.
D. Any notice made by certified mail, as required by this section, shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
E. Such notice shall be given by:
(1) Serving a copy thereof on the owner, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, or on his agent in charge of the property; or
(2) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the current tax duplicate. A return receipt is
not required.
F. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
A. Written resolutions. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced
to writing as provided in this subsection and shall include findings
of facts and conclusions based thereon.
§ 212-12 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-14
207:430
(2) Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to
receive the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed
an action denying the application.
(3) The municipal agency may provide such written decisions and
findings and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which
the municipal agency takes to grant or deny approval or, if the
meeting at which such action is taken occurs within the final 45
days of the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the
application for development, within 45 days of such meeting by the
adoption of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the
decision and the findings and conclusions of the municipal agency
thereon. An action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve
an application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided
above, notwithstanding the time at which such action occurs within
the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the
application.
(4) The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this
subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time
period for rendering a decision on the application for development.
Such resolution shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the
members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
previously taken, and no other member shall vote thereon. The vote
on such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of an
action of the municipal agency and not to be an action of the
municipal agency, except that failure to adopt such resolution
within the forty-five-day period shall result in the approval of the
application for development, notwithstanding any prior action
taken thereon.
(5) Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute the
date of the decision for purposes of mailings, filings and
publications required by this chapter.
B. Copies. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board, within 10
days of the date of decision, to the applicant or, if represented, to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested copies and who have paid the
fee prescribed by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision
shall also be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a
copy of such filed decision available to any interested party upon
payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as established for
copies of other public documents in the municipality.
C. Timing. Failure of a Board to render a decision within the time
prescribed by Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, as amended,106 or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 212-14 STORM SEWERS § 212-14
207:431
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant. The time periods for
approval shall be as follows: [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(1) Preliminary subdivision:
(a) More than 10 lots: 95 days.
(b) Ten lots or less: 45 days.
(2) Preliminary site plan:
(a) More than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling units: 95 days.
(b) Ten acres or less or 10 dwelling units or less: 45 days.
(3) Final approval: 45 days.
(4) Conditional use: 95 days.
(5) Variance: 120 days.
(6) Classification of minor subdivision: 45 days.
(7) Combined application:
(a) For a conditional use permit and a site plan: 95 days.
(b) For a subdivision plat, site plan or conditional use permit and
certain zoning variances or direction of the issuance of a
permit for a building not related to a street or in an area
designated on the Official Map for public acquisition or use: 95
days.
(c) For a subdivision plat and a conditional use permit or site plan:
the longest time period or action by the Planning Board,
whether it is for subdivision, conditional use or site plan
approval.
D. Special provisions. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(1) If an application is found to be incomplete, the applicant must be
given written notification of all deficiencies within 45 days of the
submission of such application, or it shall be deemed properly
submitted.
(2) If any application involves variances from lot area, lot dimension,
setback or yard requirements, the time for action shall be 95 days.
(3) All times may be extended with the consent of the applicant.
E. Publication. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in
the official newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be. without separate charge to the
§ 212-14 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-14
207:432
§ 212-15. Planning Board and Zoning Board application fees.
[Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 24-89; 5-18-1993 by Ord. No.
4-93; 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 19-97; 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-17;
2-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1]
applicant. Such notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
F. Certificates of approval. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(1) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other
person interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision or
which formed part of such subdivision three years preceding the
effective date of the Municipal Land Use Act107 may apply, in
writing, to the Borough Clerk of the municipality for the issuance of
a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been
approved by the Planning Board. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be
covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
(2) The Borough Clerk shall make and issue such certificate within 15
days after the receipt of such written application and the fees
therefor. The Clerk shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged,
in a binder as a permanent record in her office.
(3) Each such certificate shall be designated as a certificate as to
approval of subdivision of land and shall certify:
(a) Whether there exists in said municipality a duly established
Planning Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling
subdivision of land adopted under the authority of this chapter.
(b) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if
so, the date of such approval and any extensions and terms
thereof, showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part
is a validly existing subdivision.
(c) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved,
is statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as
provided in this chapter.
(4) The Borough Clerk shall be entitled to demand and receive for such
certificate issued by her a reasonable fee not in excess of those
provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15. The fees so collected by
the Clerk shall be paid by her to the municipality.
107. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 212-14 STORM SEWERS § 212-15
207:433
A. Prior to the certification of completeness of any application to the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all applicable fees
shall be paid.
B. Fees for applications to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be as set forth in the attached schedule at the end of
this chapter.108
108. Editor's Note: The Zoning Board of Adjustment Fee Schedule and Planning Board Fee
Schedule are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 212-15 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-15
207:434
ARTICLE III
Subdivisions
§ 212-16. Minor subdivisions.
A. Application, filing and fee. An applicant for the subdivision of land, as
defined in this chapter, shall submit to the Secretary of the Board an
application on the appropriate form provided by the Board. The number
and type of copies of the application form and map shall be as specified
in the procedure manual for subdivisions, as prepared, approved and
from time to time revised by the Planning Board. An application fee
shall also be submitted, as required in § 212-18.
B. Action by Technical Review Committee and County Planning Board. The
application shall first be considered by the Technical Review Committee
and also shall be submitted to the County Planning Board for review
under the land development standards of the county. The Technical
Review Committee shall consider and act upon the completeness of the
application before the next regular meeting of the Board following the
submission of the application. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-11]
C. Classification; approval. If the Technical Review Committee shall
classify the subdivision as a minor subdivision and finds no cause for
review by the entire Board or for unfavorable action upon the
subdivision, such finding shall be reported in writing to the Board by
the Committee. In such event, the Board is hereby empowered, as
provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, to waive the requirements for full
notice and hearing, and thereupon such finding shall be deemed to be
favorable approval by the Board. No further approval shall be required,
and the plat shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board and the Board
Secretary and returned to the subdivider within 45 days of the date of
submission of a completed application. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-11]
D. Filing of plat; copies and prints.
(1) Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date
of municipal approval, unless within such period a plat, in
conformity with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing
Law, the Laws of 1960, Chapter 141,109 or a deed clearly describing
the approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the
county recording officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall
have been signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board.
(2) The developer shall furnish the Borough Engineering Department
with a sepia of the filed map, showing the date of filing and the
109. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 212-16 STORM SEWERS § 212-16
207:435
§ 212-17. Major subdivisions.
county filing information. The Engineering Department shall then
provide prints for the Municipal Assessor and the Secretary of the
Planning Board.
E. Duration of requirements and conditions. The zoning requirements and
general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon
which minor subdivision approval is granted shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval,
provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly
recorded as provided in this chapter.
A. Preliminary plat.
(1) Application, filing and fee. An applicant for the subdivision of land,
as defined in this chapter, shall submit to the Secretary of the
Board an application, on the appropriate form provided by the
Board, and the appropriate copies of a preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision. The number and type of copies of the
application form and map shall be as specified in the procedure
manual for subdivisions, as prepared, approved and from time to
time revised by the Planning Board. An application fee shall also be
submitted, as required herein.
(2) Action by Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review
Committee shall consider each application filed at least seven days
prior to its regularly scheduled monthly meeting and shall
determine whether the application is complete and in proper form
as provided for in this chapter. If the application is found to be
complete and in proper form, the Technical Review Committee
shall certify the application to the Secretary for public hearing to
be held at the next regular meeting of the Board. Upon receipt of
such certification, the Secretary shall notify the subdivider of the
date of the public hearing. If the TRC finds the application
incomplete, the Planning Board Secretary shall be notified, and the
notification shall indicate the manner in which the application is
incomplete. The Planning Board Secretary shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of any finding of incompleteness and said
specific deficiencies of the application. The application shall be
deemed to be complete if a written notification of incompleteness,
as provided above, has not been sent to the applicant within 45
days of the submission of the application to the Board. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the Board shall grant or
deny the request within 45 days from the first hearing date before
the Board. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the
applicant's obligation to prove in the application process that he is
entitled to approval of the application. [Amended 3-18-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 212-16 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-17
207:436
(3) Revision; amendment.
(a) Following the public hearing and prior to adoption of a
resolution of approval or disapproval of a subdivision
application, the subdivider may request and the Board may
grant permission to revise the preliminary plat.
(b) The Board shall also have the discretion to permit the applicant
to submit an amended application in appropriate instances.
(4) Timing of Board action. The Board shall act to approve or
disapprove the plat with revisions, if any, in accordance with the
time provisions set forth in this chapter, as soon as it has been
certified that the application submitted is complete.
(5) Approval notation. Where the Board acts favorably on a preliminary
plat, the Chairman and the Secretary of the Board shall affix their
signatures to the plat with a notation that it has now received
approval, and it shall be returned to the subdivider for compliance
with final approval requirements.
(6) Effect. Approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute approval of
the subdivision as to form only, that is, as to the arrangement and
approximate dimensions of streets, lots and other planned features.
(7) Rights of applicant. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
of approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions under which the
approval was granted will not be changed.
(b) That the applicant may submit, on or before the expiration
date, the whole or part of the plat for final approval.
B. Procedures prior to application for final approval.
(1) Installation of improvements. Before filing an application for final
approval, the subdivider shall install all improvements and
requirements set forth in the resolution of the Board granting
preliminary approval. Construction plans must first be submitted
for approval to the Borough Engineer, and provisions shall be made
for inspection by the Borough Engineer during construction and
the certification of construction. Before certifying approval of such
plans and documents, the Borough Engineer shall obtain necessary
approval of all plans for sewerage, water, sedimentation control,
surface water management, stream encroachment and all other
approvals which may be required. The Borough Engineer shall also
obtain or provide estimated costs of construction, as required for
all performance or maintenance guaranties.
(2) Performance guaranties. Performance guaranties shall be a total
amount sufficient to cover the cost of all required trees,
§ 212-17 STORM SEWERS § 212-17
207:437
monuments, sidewalks and the top course of all street pavements.
Such performance guaranties shall be in the form of cash, a
certified check or a letter of credit from an approved banking
institution; it also, in isolated instances, may include a performance
bond issued by a bonding or surety company, but this selection is
solely within the discretion and to be approved by the governing
body. If the governing body elects to permit a performance bond,
it shall contain the following clause: "It is hereby understood and
agreed that, in the event that the principal shall default in the
performance of its obligation under this obligation, then the surety
shall perform said principal's obligations at the option of the
obligee. All of the provisions of the subdivider's contract are
expressly included and covered by this obligation." [Amended
4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80; 5-18-1982 by Ord. No. 8-82]
(3) Amount of performance guaranty. The performance guaranty for
the installation of those improvements required shall be in favor of
the Borough in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of such
improvements. At least 10% of the performance guaranty shall be
in the form of cash or a certified check made payable to the
Borough. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(a) The performance guaranty shall run for a term not to exceed
18 months from the date of final approval. With the consent of
the principal, the performance guaranty may be extended by
the governing body, after the recommendation by the Planning
Board by resolution, for an additional period not exceeding 18
months as a condition or as part of any such extension; the
amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased or
reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120%
of the cost of the installation as determined as of the time of
the resolution.
(b) The Planning Board may, upon application by the developer or
subdivider, recommend to the governing body the reduction of
the amount of the performance guaranty upon certification, in
writing, by the Borough Engineer that certain portions of the
required improvements and conditions of the Board have been
properly completed and upon posting of proper guaranties and
maintenance bonds and deposit moneys adequate to insure the
completion of the remaining improvements.
(4) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety,
if any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost
of the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough
may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof,
complete such improvements. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No.
9-80]
§ 212-17 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-17
207:438
(5) Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Borough Clerk, of the completion or
substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Borough Engineer. Thereupon, the Borough Engineer
shall inspect all improvements of which notice has been given and
shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing body,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of such
improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The
cost of the improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
[Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(6) The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject
the improvements on the basis of the report of the Borough
Engineer and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of
the contents of said report and the action of the governing body
with relation thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt of the
notice from the obligor of the completion of the improvements.
Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released
from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for
that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of the
improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount
of the performance guaranty posted may be retained to insure
completion of all improvements. Failure of the governing body to
send or provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall
be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements, and the
obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability
pursuant to such performance guaranty for such improvements.
[Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(7) If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the
governing body may require the obligor to complete such
improvements, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as set forth in this section shall be followed. [Amended
4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(8) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements, provided that the municipality may
require of the developer a deposit for all or a portion of the
reasonable anticipated fees to be paid to the Borough Engineer for
such inspection. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
(9) In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of
development, then the provisions of this section shall be applied by
stage or section. [Amended 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 9-80]
C. Final plat.
§ 212-17 STORM SEWERS § 212-17
207:439
(1) Application, filing and fee. An applicant for the subdivision of land,
as defined in this chapter, shall submit to the Secretary of the
Board an application of the appropriate form provided by the Board
and appropriate copies of a final plat of the proposed subdivision.
The number and type of copies of the application form and map
shall be as specified in the procedure manual for subdivisions, as
prepared, approved and from time to time revised by the Planning
Board. An application fee shall also be submitted as required. The
applicant may first, before filing, request an informal meeting with
the Subdivision Committee or the Board to ascertain any detailed
conditions which may have changed since the approval of the
preliminary plat.
(2) Action by Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review
Committee shall consider each application filed at least seven days
prior to its regularly scheduled monthly meeting and shall
determine whether the application is complete and in proper form
as provided for in this chapter. If the application is found to be
complete and in proper form, the Technical Review Committee
shall certify the application to the Secretary for public hearing to
be held at the next regular meeting of the Board. Upon receipt of
such certification, the Secretary shall notify the subdivider of the
date of the public hearing. If the TRC finds the application
incomplete, the Planning Board Secretary shall be notified, and the
notification shall indicate the manner in which the application is
incomplete. The Planning Board Secretary shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of any finding of incompleteness and said
specific deficiencies of the application. The application shall be
deemed to be complete if a written notification of incompleteness,
as provided above, has not been sent to the applicant within 45
days of the submission of the application to the Board. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the Board shall grant or
deny the request within 45 days from the first hearing date before
the Board. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the
applicant's obligation to prove in the application process that he is
entitled to approval of the application. [Amended 3-18-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-11]
(3) Timing of Board action. The Board shall act to approve or
disapprove the plat submitted for final approval with revisions, if
any, within 45 days after it is submitted. The action of the County
Planning Board, if any, shall be noted on the plat, and, if
disapproved, a copy of the plat and the reasons for disapproval
shall be returned to the subdivider.
(4) Notation of approval. If the Board approved the final plat, a
notation to that effect shall be made on each plat and shall be
signed by the Chairman of the Board and the Board Secretary.
§ 212-17 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-17
207:440
§ 212-18. Fees.
§ 212-19. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be prepared and certified by a professional
engineer licensed by the state, at a scale where one inch equals not more
than 100 feet, and shall be 24 inches by 36 inches in size and shall show all
the information required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. and Article IV of this
chapter and shall comply with the design standards set forth in this chapter.
In addition thereto, the plat shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
(5) Filing; extensions. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat
signed by the Chairman and the Secretary of the Planning Board
shall be filed by the applicant with the county recording officer and
the County Planning Board. If the plat has not been filed with the
county recording officer within 95 days from the date of signing,
the approval shall expire. The Planning Board, for good cause
shown, may extend this period to no more than 190 days from the
date of the signing of the plat.
A. Application for preliminary approval. A deposit shall be paid at the time
of submission in accordance with § 212-9 of this chapter. The minimum
deposit shall be $1,000, and $100 per individual lot, together with an
inspection deposit of $2,000. There shall also be a final fee of $500. Any
minor subdivision shall have an application fee of $500, and $50 per
individual lot, together with an inspection deposit of $2,000.
[Amended 2-19-1985 by Ord. No. 2-85; 12-20-1994 by Ord. No.
16-94; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-1; 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-17]
B. Installation of improvements and final plat. At the time of submission of
construction plans for improvements, the applicant shall deposit with
the Clerk a fee equal to 4% of the estimated improvement costs, as
determined by the Borough Engineer, to cover the costs of inspection
and examination of all plats, maps, drawings, construction of
improvements and any other engineering or administrative expenses in
connection with the subdivision. Where a surface water management
plan is required by Article VII of this chapter, the fee therefor shall be
waived, and all costs for review shall be included in these fees. Any of
these moneys not otherwise expended shall be returned to the applicant
upon approval of the installed improvements.
A. Key map: a key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
existing areas.
B. Lots: The lot layout shall show the dimensions and square-foot area of
each lot and minimum building setback lines.
C. The identity: the tract name. Tax Map sheet, date of revision as shown
thereon, block and lot numbers, reference meridian and graphic scale
and existing zoning.
§ 212-17 STORM SEWERS § 212-19
207:441
D. Acreage: acreage of the tract to the nearest tenth of an acre.
E. Elevation, contours, horizontal and vertical control: sufficient
elevations and contours at five-foot vertical intervals for slopes
averaging 10% or greater, to determine the general slope and natural
drainage of the land and the high and low points. All horizontal and
vertical controls shall be based upon the United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey, the United States Geological Survey or the New Jersey
Geodetic Control Survey. All horizontal controls shall be referenced to
the state plan coordinate system contour maps, at two-foot intervals
and the horizontal and vertical control points. Areas below the elevation
referred to in the Borough Zoning Ordinance110 or by the State
Department of Environmental Protection as the limit of flood plains
shall be identified and a showing made of how any relevant Borough or
state requirements as to the restriction of development in these areas
are complied with.
F. Existing and proposed locations: the locations of existing and proposed
property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, bridges, culverts, drain
pipes and any natural features such as wooded areas, large trees and
rock formations.
G. Streets: plans and profiles of all proposed streets within the subdivision
and profiles of existing or future continuing streets, a minimum
distance of 200 feet beyond the subdivision boundaries.
H. Utilities: plans of proposed utility layouts, including but not limited to
water, gas and electricity, showing connections to existing or proposed
utility systems.
I. Sewers. drains, ditches, etc: plans and profiles of all proposed and
existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, drainage ditches and streams
within the subdivision, as well as the locations, sizes, elevations, grades
and capacities of any existing sanitary sewer, storm drain, drainage
ditch or stream to which the proposed facility shall be connected. When
the storm drains, drainage ditches or brook channel improvements are
proposed or required, the plans for such improvement shall be
approved by the State Water Policy Commission, if so required by the
Planning Board or state law. The water supply and sewage disposal
system shall have been approved by the appropriate local, county and/
or state agency. When a public sewage disposal system is not available,
the developer shall submit evidence that he can comply with the Local
Board of Health requirements.
J. Open spaces: open spaces to be dedicated for public parks, playgrounds
or other public uses and the locations and uses of all land reserved by
the subdivider for the common use of all future owners of lots in the
subdivision.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-19 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-19
207:442
§ 212-20. Final plat.
The final plat shall be prepared and certified by a land surveyor licensed
by the state, at a scale where an inch equals not more than 100 feet, and
the accompanying engineering plans and construction drawings shall be
prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state. All plats, plans
and drawings shall be on tracing cloth 24 inches by 36 inches in size and
shall show all the information required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 et seq. It shall
also show the following:
K. Sediment and erosion control: The applicant shall submit, where
applicable, a soil erosion and sediment control plan and a surface water
management plan.
L. Taxes: The applicant shall submit a report of a tax search certifying that
all taxes have been paid, prior to Board approval. (Neither minor nor
major subdivision approval shall be granted if the taxes are not
current.) [Added 5-16-1978 by Ord. No. 13-78]
A. Identification: date, name and location of the subdivision, name of the
owner, graphic scale and reference meridian.
B. Boundary lines, streets, etc: tract boundary lines, existing zoning, rightof-
way lines of streets, street names, easements and other rights-of-way,
land to be reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site
lines, with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii,
arcs and central angles of all curves.
C. Public use: The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated
to public use shall be designated.
D. Blocks and lots: all block and lot numbers as approved by the Borough
Engineer.
E. Setback lines: minimum building setback lines on all lots and other
sites.
F. Monuments: locations and descriptions of all monuments.
G. Owners: names of owners of adjoining properties and those across from
any existing or proposed street.
H. Certification: certification by the applicant's surveyor as to accuracy of
details of plat.
I. Consent of owner: certification of consent by the owner or duly
authorized agent of the owner; if by agent, proof of authority shall be
filed with the Board.
J. Approval: when approval of a plat is required by any officer or body,
whether municipal, county or state, approval shall be certified on the
plat.
§ 212-19 STORM SEWERS § 212-20
207:443

ARTICLE IV
Site Plans
§ 212-21. General procedures. [Amended 3-20-1979 by Ord. No.
7-79; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 212-22. Information to be provided.
The following information shall be provided:
A. Review and approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or
certificate of occupancy for any use other than a single-family residence
as permitted by this chapter or for any change in the use of a building or
part thereof or where a new use requires a greater amount of off-street
parking than the prior use, the Planning Board or Borough Engineer
shall review and approve a site development plan of the proposed use
and shall ascertain that all of the requirements of this chapter and this
Code are complied with. [Amended 6-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-12]
B. Filing; submission of revisions. Twelve copies of the site plan, with
three completed application forms, shall be filed with the Secretary of
the Planning Board seven days prior to the regular monthly meeting of
the Technical Review Committee. Whenever revision to a site plan is
required, the revised plan shall be submitted at least five working days
prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Where appropriate, the applicant may request from the Planning Board
waiver of site plan detail.
D. Action by Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review
Committee shall consider each application filed at least seven days
prior to its regularly scheduled monthly meeting and shall determine
whether the application is complete and in proper form as provided for
in this chapter. If the application is found to be complete and in proper
form, the Technical Review Committee shall certify the application to
the Secretary for public hearing to be held at the next regular meeting
of the Board. Upon receipt of such certification, the Secretary shall
notify the subdivider of the date of the public hearing. If the TRC finds
the application incomplete, the Planning Board Secretary shall be
notified, and the notification shall indicate the manner in which the
application is incomplete. The Planning Board Secretary shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of any finding of incompleteness and said specific
deficiencies of the application. The application shall be deemed to be
complete if a written notification of incompleteness, as provided above,
has not been sent to the applicant within 45 days of the submission of
the application to the Board. The applicant may request that one or
more of the submission requirements be waived, in which event the
Board shall grant or deny the request within 45 days from the first
hearing date before the Board. Nothing herein shall be construed as
diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the application
process that he is entitled to approval of the application.
§ 212-21 STORM SEWERS § 212-22
207:445
A. Marginal information and administrative data:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or applicant
and identification of the project.
(2) Owner's certificate of concurrence with the plan:
"I certify that I am the owner of record of the site hereon
depicted and that I concur with the plan."
Signature
Address
Phone Number
(3) The name and state license number of the engineer, date and
revision of drawings.
(4) Scale, not less than one inch equals 50 feet.
(5) A key map, not smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet, showing
location in the Borough, the zone district and properties with
names of owners within 200 feet. (Contiguous ownership may be
shown on the main drawing.)
(6) A site data box showing:
(a) Total area of the site in square feet.
(b) Total building area in square feet.
(c) Total landscaping area in square feet.
(d) Total area for driveways. access roads and walkways in square
feet.
(e) Total parking area in square feet.
(f) Number of parking stalls and stall dimensions.
(g) Number of employees, total and maximum on one shift.
(h) Ratio of parking to building size or occupancy, or both,
depending upon use.
B. Topography:
(1) Present and proposed grades based on state geodetic control
survey datum at two-foot contour intervals, except that when the
slope is greater than 10%, five-foot intervals shall be required.
§ 212-22 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-22
207:446
(2) County site plan review standards require that locations of existing
and proposed monuments be tied to the state grid coordinate
system.
(3) Front, rear and side elevations of all proposed buildings, showing
construction materials and building floor plans, are to be submitted
with each site plan.
C. Buildings and structures:
(1) The location of all existing and proposed structures and buildings
on and within 100 feet of the site, with finished grade elevations at
corners.
(2) Storage areas for refuse and garbage.
(3) Ground floor area in square feet.
(4) Proposed uses of all buildings.
(5) Locations and descriptions of all existing and proposed signs.
(6) Loading areas, showing dimensions.
(7) Separately submitted elevations, with additional details, as
required by the Planning Board, to ensure architectural
compatibility. (See § 25-407 of this Code.111)
D. Parking areas; traffic control; lighting:
(1) Parking areas, showing spaces.
(2) Driveways, showing vehicular circulation.
(3) Existing and proposed streets abutting the site, showing right-ofway
and paved widths.
(4) Locations and widths of fire zones, as determined by the Fire Chief.
(5) Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways.
(6) Lighting standards and utility poles, designating their sizes,
heights, type, construction and locations, within 50 feet of any
existing or proposed county road right-of-way line.
(7) Lighting plan, including lumens, spacing and height.
E. Roads: driveways; walks; curbs; walkways; fencing;
(1) Locations and dimensions of all items in this category on the site
and within 100 feet.
(2) Cross-sections and profiles of all existing and proposed streets
abutting the lots within 250 feet.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-22 STORM SEWERS § 212-22
207:447
(3) Details of driveway and road intersections with municipal and
county streets at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet.
(4) Locations, sizes and nature of all existing and proposed rights-ofway,
easements and other encumbrances which may affect the lot
or lots in question and the locations, sizes and descriptions of any
lands to be dedicated to the county or municipality.
F. Drainage, storm and sanitary sewers and utilities:
(1) Locations, types and sizes of all existing and proposed catch basins,
storm drainage structures, facilities and watercourses.
(2) Locations, types and sizes of waste disposal systems and sanitary
sewer lines; certificate from Sewerage Authority112 of adequacy of
sewage disposal facilities to accept the site's sewage.
(3) Locations, profiles and types of underground utilities: gas, electric,
telephone, water; certificate from Water Superintendent of the
adequacy of the Borough water supply to provide the site's
projected needs.
(4) Showing, by means of arrows, that the lot drains properly into
existing waterways or adequate storm drains.
(5) Locations of all easements related to drainage, as in Subsection
E(4) above.
(6) Evidence of approval of drainage by the Division of Water Policy
and Supply, Department of Environmental Protection, where
applicable.
(7) Storm drainage calculations.
(8) Locations and profiles of all watercourses and drainage facilities
within 200 feet of property limits of development.
(9) Soil erosion and sediment control requirements and standards as
set forth in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, adopted June 14, 1972, by the State Soil Conservation
Committee.
G. Landscaping:
(1) Total square feet of landscaping.
(2) Landscaping within the parking areas, at least 1,000 square feet
within each 10,000 square feet of paved areas.
(3) Buffer areas, including the location of landscape screen.
112. Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer Utility.
§ 212-22 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-22
207:448
§ 212-23. Application; deposit required. [Amended 10-18-1977 by
Ord. No. 22-77; 2-19-1985 by Ord. No. 2-85; 8-19-1986 by Ord. No.
12-86; 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 1-89; 12-20-1994 by Ord. No. 16-94;
10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 20-99; 3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 4-02;
12-19-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02A; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-1;
3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-11; 5-20-2008
by Ord. No. 08-17]
(4) All areas to be graded and landscaped; all fencing and/or sizes and
types of plant material.
(5) All existing and proposed trees over four inches in diameter.
(6) Fencing within 100 feet of any existing or proposed county road
right-of-way line.
(7) Proposed locations and proposed species of trees to be planted
within the right-of-way of an abutting county road or roads.
A. Certification of completeness of any application shall be contingent
upon the payment of all fees required to be paid hereunder at the time
of the submission of the application.
B. Fee schedule. [Amended 6-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-12]
PLANNING BOARD FEE SCHEDULE
Site plan waiver
Application fee $350
Escrow deposit $600
Major subdivision
Application fee $1,000 plus $100 per individual
lot
Escrow deposit $5,000
Final approval fee $500
Variance $300 for each variance requested
Minor subdivision
Application fee $500 plus $50 per individual lot
Escrow deposit $3,000
Major site plan
Application fee (preliminary) $500 per acre or part thereof plus
$7.50 per 100 square feet of
building floor area. (Minimum fee:
$250)
Minimum charge (preliminary) $1,500
Escrow deposit $5,000
§ 212-22 STORM SEWERS § 212-23
207:449
PLANNING BOARD FEE SCHEDULE
Final approval fee $1,000 for each final approval
Escrow deposit (if filed
separately)
$3,000
Variance $300 for each variance requested
Site plan revisions $350
Minor site plan
Application fee $1,000
Escrow deposit $3,000
General development plan Refer to Borough Code § 212-23
for fee calculation
Rezoning request/Zoning
Ordinance amendment request
Application fee $1,000
Escrow deposit $5,000
Informal concept review
Administrative fee $250
Escrow deposit $1,000
Special meetings $1,000
Borough engineer meeting $250
Development permit
Fee $100 per acre, plus 1 1/2% of the
Borough Engineer's cost of
improvement estimate, plus cost
of survey if required
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT FEE SCHEDULE
Bulk area variance (C):
Residential application fee $200 (per variance)
Escrow deposit $500
Nonresidential application fee $300 (per variance)
Escrow deposit $600
Use variance (D)
Residential application fee $500 (per variance)
Escrow deposit $1,000
Nonresidential application fee $1,000 (per variance)
Escrow deposit $2,500
§ 212-23 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-23
207:450
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT FEE SCHEDULE
Site plans, subdivisions, site
plan waivers
Refer to Planning Board Fee
Schedule
Request for interpretation of
Zoning Map or Zoning
Ordinance
Residential application fee $200 (per request)
Nonresidential application fee $400 (per request)
Escrow deposit $1,000
Appeal of decision of Zoning
Officer
Residential application fee $200 (per appeal)
Nonresidential application fee $400 (per appeal)
Escrow deposit $1,000
Floodplain, wetlands or
construction in or on an
unimproved road
Application fee $1,000
C. Fees for general development plans. [Amended 6-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-12]
(1) Application fees and escrow requirements. Upon submission of an
application for a planned commercial development, all applicants
shall be required to submit specified fees in accordance with the
following schedule at the Office of the Secretary of the Planning
Board:
(a) $25 per acre, plus $0.01 per square foot of gross floor area for
each building, for a general development plan. If any portion of
the property comprising the general development plan is
intended or proposed for dedication to the Borough of Florham
Park, not comprised of any roadways to be established, the
Borough may waive the aforementioned per-acre charge for
those acres.
(b) The escrow review deposit for a general development plan
shall be calculated and paid in the same manner as provided
for site plans.
(c) Conditions of approval to be binding. All conditions of general
development plans, preliminary and final approval of any
planned commercial development or all conditions of
§ 212-23 STORM SEWERS § 212-23
207:451
preliminary and final approval of a particular phase of a
planned commercial development shall be binding upon all
present and future owners, tenants, occupants, lessors,
lessees, heirs, assignees, developers, contractors and
subcontractors, and the same shall be set forth in a developer's
agreement in recordable form and approved by the Borough
Council.
D. At any time a revision to any previously submitted site plan is
submitted, there shall be a fee of $350.
E. Conference meetings with the Borough Engineer concerning the
development of any subdivision or site plan shall be charged at a fee of
$250.
F. Fees for general development plans.
(1) Application fees and escrow requirements. Upon submission of an
application for a planned commercial development, all applicants
shall be required to submit specified fees in accordance with the
following schedule at the Office of the Secretary of the Planning
Board:
(a) Twenty-five dollars per acre, plus $0.01 per square foot of
gross floor area for each building, for a general development
plan. If any portion of the property comprising the general
development plan is intended or proposed for dedication to the
Borough of Florham Park, not comprised of any roadways to be
established, the Borough may waive the aforementioned peracre
charge for those acres.
(b) The escrow review deposit for a general development plan
shall be calculated and paid in the same manner as provided
for site plans.
(c) Conditions of approval to be binding. All conditions of general
development plans, preliminary and final approval of any
planned commercial development or all conditions of
preliminary and final approval of a particular phase of a
planned commercial development shall be binding upon all
present and future owners, tenants, occupants, lessors,
lessees, heirs, assignees, developers, contractors and
subcontractors, and the same shall be set forth in a developer's
agreement in recordable form and approved by the Borough
Council.
G. Fees for informal concept review. The fee for an informal concept
review by the Planning Board shall include an application fee of $250,
together with an escrow deposit of $1,000.
§ 212-23 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-23
207:452
§ 212-24. Planning Board review.
In reviewing the site plan, the Planning Board shall consider its conformity
with the Master Plan and the other codes and ordinances of the Borough.
H. Special meetings fee. A fee of $1,000 shall be charged to any applicant
for each special meeting of the Planning Board held to accommodate an
applicant. [Amended 6-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-12]
A. It shall review and ascertain that all the following requirements are
complied with:
(1) Traffic flow, circulation and parking shall ensure the safety of the
public and users of the facility and ensure that there is no
unreasonable interference with traffic on surrounding streets. Also,
provisions are made and shown for all off-street parking, in
accordance with this chapter, to properly ensure adequate traffic
circulation and protection to adjoining property and for paving and
curbing or approved design and construction in all parking areas,
unless expressly modified or waived by the Planning Board.
(2) The surface water management plan and all other plans for
drainage shall ensure against flooding.
(3) The location, design or construction of any building or use is not
likely to increase risk or traffic congestion or risk to public safety;
nor will such building or use be so markedly incongruous with the
character of the neighborhood as to affect the value of adjacent or
nearby property.
(4) There is an adequacy of Borough water supply and sewage disposal
facilities to serve the site.
(5) There is conformance with the standards for control of soil erosion
and sediment control as set forth in Chapter 203, Soil Removal.
(6) There shall be no objectionable smoke, gases, vapors, fumes, dust,
odors or noise emanating from any building or use.
(7) The specifications for installation, as set forth in the public works
construction standards, shall be applicable to all site plan work,
with the exception of structures.
(8) There is a report of a tax search certifying that all taxes are paid.
prior to Board approval.
B. In this review, the Planning Board may request recommendations from
the committees, boards, commissions or authorities or any local,
county, state or federal agency which may have an interest in the
particular development for which site plan approval is being sought. It
is desirable to obtain County Planning Board review or waiver on all site
plan applications, and the Local Board should not approve any plan
until receipt of County Planning Board approval or after the lapse of 30
§ 212-23 STORM SEWERS § 212-24
207:453
§ 212-25. Action by Construction Code Official.
The Construction Code Official shall not act until the applicant has complied
with the written recommendations of the Planning Board regarding the site
plan. As soon as site plan approval is obtained, such approval shall be sent
to the Construction Code Official.
§ 212-26. Changes to approved plan; duration.
days from date such plan was submitted to the county and not returned
to the Board.
C. At its first public meeting following receipt of all required reports, the
Planning Board shall take one of the following actions:
(1) Approve or deny the application.
(2) Withhold action, pending modifications by the applicant. Any
required modifications shall be made within 60 days of such action,
which period may be extended by the Planning Board for an
additional period not to exceed 30 days.
D. In the event that a determination cannot be made with respect to
required data or information at the time of the submittal of a site plan,
the Planning Board may make compliance with the particular
requirement a condition to approval for a certificate of occupancy and
not require it prior to the issuance of a building permit.
E. If the Board takes no action within 95 or 45 days following the
submission of a completed site plan application, the Planning Board
Secretary will endorse on the site plan:
"Site plan automatically approved for failure of the Planning Board to
act within required time per Borough Code § 212-24."
A. The site plan as approved by the Planning Board shall be binding upon
the applicant. Any changes from the approved plan shall require
resubmission and reapproval by the Planning Board.
B. The approved site plan shall remain effective for a period of two years
from the date of approval, and all improvements shall be installed
within that time period. Any change from the approved site plan shall
require a reapplication, with appropriate fees.
§ 212-24 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-26
207:454
ARTICLE V
Improvements
§ 212-27. Installation or guaranty required prior to approval.
[Amended 3-21-1978 by Ord. No. 2-78; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-1;
4-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-7]
A. Before filing of final subdivision plats or recording of minor subdivision
deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to
the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to Subsection d of Section 52
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65), the Borough requires and shall
accept in accordance with the standards adopted by ordinance and
regulations adopted pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53a), for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of certain on-tract improvements, the furnishing of a
performance guarantee, and provision for a maintenance guarantee in
accordance with Subsection A(1) and (2) as follows:
(1) Performance guarantee.
(a) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor
of the Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation of only those improvements required by an
approval or developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to
be dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been
installed, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
engineer, according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4), for the
following as shown on the approved plans or plat: streets,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, street
trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 or N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 through 46:26B-8, water mains, sanitary sewers,
community septic systems, drainage structures, public
improvements of open space, and any grading necessitated by
the preceding improvements.
(b) The Borough Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate
of the improvements covered by the performance guarantee,
which itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each
performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
(c) The developer shall be required to furnish a performance
guarantee to include, within an approved phase or section of a
development, privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as
required by Borough ordinance or imposed as a condition of
approval. At the developer's option, a separate performance
guarantee may be posted for the privately owned perimeter
buffer landscaping.
§ 212-27 STORM SEWERS § 212-27
207:455
(d) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a development, unit, building, or
phase of development, as a condition of the issuance thereof,
the developer shall furnish a separate guarantee, referred to
herein as a "temporary certificate of occupancy bond," in favor
of the Borough in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of
installation of only those improvements or items which remain
to be completed or installed under the terms of the temporary
certificate of occupancy and which are required to be installed
or completed as a condition precedent to the issuance of the
permanent certificate of occupancy for the development, unit,
building or phase of development. Upon posting of a temporary
certificate of occupancy bond, all sums remaining under a
performance guarantee, required pursuant to Subsection A(1)
of this section, which relate to the development, unit, building,
or phase of development for which the temporary certificate of
occupancy is sought, shall be released. At no time may a
borough hold more than one guarantee or bond of any type
with respect to the same line item. The temporary certificate of
occupancy bond shall be released upon the issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy with regard to the
development, unit, building, or phase as to which the
temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
(e) In addition to a performance guarantee required pursuant to
Subsection A(1) of this section, a developer shall furnish to the
Borough a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a "safety
and stabilization bond," in favor of the Borough, to be available
to the Borough solely for the purpose of returning property
that has been disturbed to a safe and stable condition or
otherwise implementing measures to protect the public from
access to an unsafe or unstable condition, only in the
circumstance that: (i) site disturbance has commenced and,
thereafter, all work on the development has ceased for a period
of at least 60 consecutive days following such commencement
for reasons other than force majeure, and (ii) work has not
recommenced within 30 days following the provision of written
notice by the Borough to the developer of the Borough's intent
to claim payment under the bond. The Borough shall not
provide notice of its intent to claim payment under a safety and
stabilization bond until a period of at least 60 days has elapsed
during which all work on the development has ceased for
reasons other than force majeure. The Borough shall provide
written notice to a developer by certified mail or other form of
delivery providing evidence of receipt.
(f) The amount of a safety and stabilization bond for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000. The amount of a safety
and stabilization bond for a development with bonded
§ 212-27 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-27
207:456
improvements exceeding $100,000 shall be calculated as a
percentage of the bonded improvement costs of the
development or phase of development as follows: $5,000 for
the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs, plus 2 1/2%
of bonded improvement costs in excess of $100,000 up to
$1,000,000, plus 1% of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
(g) The time allowed for installation of the improvements for
which the performance guarantee has been provided may be
extended by the governing body by resolution. As a condition
or as part of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the
case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the
time of the passage of the resolution.
(2) Maintenance guarantee.
(a) The developer shall post with the Borough, prior to the release
of a performance guarantee required pursuant to Subsection
A(1) above, a maintenance guarantee in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the improvements
which are being released.
(b) The developer shall post with the Borough, upon the inspection
and issuance of final approval of the following private site
improvements by the Borough Engineer, a maintenance
guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
installation of the following private site improvements:
stormwater management basins, inflow and water quality
structures within the basins, and the outflow pipes and
structures of the stormwater management system, if any,
which cost shall be determined according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4).
(c) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period
not to exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the
end of the established term.
(d) In the event that other governmental agencies or public
utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or
the improvements are covered by a performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, then
the Borough shall not require any performance or maintenance
guarantee, as the case may be, for such utilities or
improvements.
§ 212-27 STORM SEWERS § 212-27
207:457
§ 212-28. Installation prior to building permit; grading plan.
§ 212-29. Required improvements.
B. Successor developer. Any party who succeeds to the interest of an
original developer shall be obligated to the same degree as the original
developer. If any such successor developer has furnished a replacement
performance guarantee, as a condition to the approval of a permit
update under the State Uniform Construction Code, for the purpose of
updating the name and address of the owner of property on a
construction permit, the Borough requires and shall accept the
furnishing of a performance guarantee and provision for a maintenance
guarantee which satisfies the requirements of this section with respect
to original developer guarantees.
C. Guarantee liability and guarantee closeout procedures. The liability of
the obligor on the performance guarantee, and the procedure to seek a
reduction or closing out of the performance guarantee, shall be as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 et seq.
D. Dedication of Improvements to the Borough. To the extent that any of
the improvements have been dedicated to the Borough on the
subdivision plat or site plan, the Borough governing body shall be
deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required
pursuant to this section, to accept dedication for public use of streets or
roads and any other improvements made thereon according to site
plans and subdivision plats approved by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, provided that such improvements have
been inspected and have received final approval by the Borough
Engineer.
E. Developer's agreement. Prior to the issuance of building permits for
any buildings in a subdivision or site plan approved under this chapter,
a fully executed developer's agreement approved by the Borough and
an appropriate performance bond in accordance with the terms of the
developer's agreement must be submitted to the Borough.
A. Completion of improvements. Prior to the issuance of building permits
for any buildings in a subdivision approved under this chapter, all
improvements shall have been installed, except monuments, sidewalks
and the top course of paving on the street, except that this requirement
may be varied by the Planning Board in the case of a model or display
house.
B. Submission of grading plans. Before the issuance of a building permit, a
grading plan shall be submitted and shall be approved by the Borough
Engineer. This plan shall include the designations of trees which are to
remain and special measures for the protection of those which may be
affected by grading operations.
§ 212-27 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-29
207:458
A. The following improvements shall be required in addition to such other
items as the Planning Board may require in the public interest:
(1) Streets. Streets shall be graded and constructed in accordance
with the construction standards and specifications of the Borough.
(2) Street signs. Street signs shall be of the same type and design as
the street signs then currently in use and shall be installed in
accordance with this Code or other applicable ordinances and
statutes in such a manner that the name of each intersecting street
is clearly visible to approaching traffic.
(3) Curbs and gutters. Belgian block curbs and gutters shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction standards and
specifications of the Borough.
(4) Catch basins. Catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with
the construction standards and specifications of the Borough.
(5) Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be on both sides of each street,
unless a variation for cause is allowed by the Planning Board and
shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the maximum
pedestrian traffic, but in no case less than four feet in width and
constructed in accordance with the construction standards and
specifications of the Borough.
(6) Shade trees. Where required by the Shade Tree Committee, not
fewer than two new shade trees shall be installed on each lot, a
minimum distance of 15 feet inside the curbline, not closer than 40
feet to the street intersection, not closer than 25 feet to any
existing or proposed streetlight and installed so as to not interfere
with utilities, roadways, school ways or sidewalks.
(7) Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the
subdivision or site or used as spoil or fill. Topsoil removed during
the course of construction shall be redistributed in the subdivision
so as to provide equal distribution of cover to all areas of the
subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding and planting. At least
six inches of topsoil shall be provided on all portions of lots not
occupied by buildings or walks.
(8) Earth removal. No permanent change shall be made in the
elevation or contour of any lot or site by the removal of earth either
to another lot or site or to another part of the same site, other than
that resulting from changes in elevation and contours approved by
the Board, as shown on the preliminary and final plat and profiles
and grading plans.
(9) Monuments. Monuments are to be of the size and shape required
by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and shall be placed in accordance with the
requirements of such statute and specifications of the Borough.
§ 212-29 STORM SEWERS § 212-29
207:459
§ 212-30. Off-tract improvements; determination and allocation of
costs. [Amended 3-20-2001 by Ord. No. 3-01]
Where the need for off-tract improvements for water, sewer, drainage and
street improvements and for other improvements as provided by law are, in
(10) Culverts, storm drains and sewers and utilities. Provision shall be
made for culverts, stormwater drains, sanitary waste disposal and
utilities. All such installations shall be connected with an approved
system which shall be adequate for all present and future
development of the subdivision and surrounding areas and shall be
made in accordance with the construction standards and
specifications of the Borough, county and Sewerage Authority,113
where applicable.
(11) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with
the standards and specifications of the Water Department and Fire
Department. All hydrants shall be placed at or near street
intersections or at property lines in such a manner as to least
interfere with the use of road and property.
(12)Water mains. Water mains shall be installed in accordance with the
standards and specifications of the Borough.
(13) Disposal of dead trees, etc. All stumps, litter, rubbish, brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, roots and debris shall be removed
from the site. Burying is prohibited.
(14) Grades. All construction stakes and grades shall be set by a
licensed surveyor employed by the subdivider.
(15) Construction standards. All standards and specifications of the
Borough shall govern the construction and installation of all
improvements.
(16)Common areas. For areas not proposed for Borough ownership,
provisions shall be made for grading and topsoil, and seeding or
planting shall be provided, as appropriate, to put the areas in a
condition, excluding structures and other such improvements, for
the intended use; or for areas to be kept in their natural state, any
necessary conservation measures shall be taken. Plans for such
improvements or conservation measures shall be submitted with
the final plat. Sidewalks or walkways, as necessary to provide
pedestrian connections between different sections of the
subdivision, shall also be included.114
113. Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer Utility.
114. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding off-tract improvements, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-20-2001 by Ord. No. 3-01. See now § 212-30.
§ 212-29 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-30
207:460
whole or in part, made necessary by the application, a determination of the
contribution of the applicant for said off-tract improvements shall be made.
A. Allocation of costs; criteria in determining allocation. The allocation of
costs for off-tract improvements as between the applicant, other
property owners and the Borough or any one or more of the foregoing
shall be determined by the Planning Board, with the assistance of the
appropriate Borough agencies, on the basis of the total costs of the offtract
improvements, the needs created by the application, population
and land use projections for the general area of the applicant's property
and other areas to be served by the off-site improvements, the
estimated time of construction of the off-site improvements and the
condition and periods of usefulness, which periods may be based upon
the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22. Requirements for off-tract
improvements shall be consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42. In addition,
the following criteria may also be considered, as well as any other
reasonable criteria the Board feels is necessary to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the Borough:
(1) Streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, streetlights, street signs and
traffic light improvements may also be based upon the anticipated
increase of traffic generated by the application. In determining
such traffic increase, the Planning Board may consider traffic
counts, existing and projected traffic patterns, quality of roads and
sidewalks in the area and other factors related to the need created
by the application and the anticipated benefit thereto.
(2) Drainage facilities may also be based upon or be determined by the
drainage created by or affected by a particular land use based on:
(a) The rate, quality and volume of water discharged from the site
post development.
(b) The use, condition or status of the remaining area in the
drainage basin.
(3) Water supply and distribution facilities may also be based upon the
added facilities required by the total anticipated water use
requirements of the applicant and other properties in the general
area benefiting therefrom.
(4) Sewerage facilities may be based upon the proportion that the total
anticipated volume of sewage effluent of the applicant's property
and other properties connected to the new facility bears to the
existing capacity of existing sewerage facilities, including but not
limited to lines and other appurtenances leading to and servicing
the applicant's property. Consideration may also be given to the
types of effluent and particular problems requiring special
equipment or added costs for treatment. The Florham Park
Sewerage Authority115 will make this assessment as a condition of
any approval.
§ 212-30 STORM SEWERS § 212-30
207:461
B. Determination of cost of improvements. The cost of installation of the
required off-tract improvements shall be determined by the Planning
Board with the advice of the Borough Engineer and appropriate
Borough agencies.
C. Manner of construction. When those estimates are received, the Mayor
and Borough Council shall then decide whether the off-tract
improvement is to be constructed:
(1) By the Borough as a general improvement.
(2) By the applicant at its sole cost and expense.
(3) By the applicant under a formula providing for partial
reimbursement by the Borough for benefits to properties other
than the subject property.
D. Amount of contribution.
(1) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a
general improvement, the applicant shall be required to provide a
cash deposit to the Borough equal to the applicant's pro-rata fair
share of the improvement.
(2) If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant, then it
shall be consistent with the developer's agreement.
E. Payment of allocated cost.
(1) The estimated costs of the off-tract improvement allocated to the
applicant if deposited in cash shall be paid by the applicant to the
Borough Treasurer, who shall provide a suitable depository
therefor, and such funds shall be used only for the off-tract
improvements for which they are deposited or improvements
serving the same purpose, unless such improvements are not
initiated by the Borough within a period of 10 years from the date
of payment, after which time said funds so deposited shall be
returned, together with accumulated interest or other income
thereon, if any.
(2) In the event that the payment by the applicant to the Borough
Treasurer provided for herein is less than its share of the actual
cost of the off-tract improvements, and the developer has not
completed its development, then it shall be required to pay its
appropriate share of the cost thereof.
(3) In the event that the payment by the applicant to the Borough
Treasurer provided for above is more than its appropriate share of
the actual cost of installation of the off-tract improvements, it or its
115. Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority was dissolved 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2, and its
operations and activities were transferred to the Borough. See also § 2-34, Sewer Utility
Committee, and Ch. 193, Sewers, Art. II, Sewer Utility.
§ 212-30 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-30
207:462
§ 212-31. Payments.
successor or assigns shall be repaid an amount equal to the
difference between the deposit and its share of the actual cost.
(4) If the applicant shall deem that any of the amounts so estimated by
the Planning Board are unreasonable, it may challenge them and
seek to have them revised in appropriate proceedings brought to
compel subdivision or site plan approval.
(5) If the applicant and the Planning Board cannot agree with respect
to the applicant's fair share of the actual cost of the off-tract
improvement or the determination made by the officer or Board
charged with the duty of making assessments as to special benefits,
if the off-tract improvement is to be constructed as a local
improvement, no approval shall be granted; provided, however,
that the applicant may challenge such determination and seek to
have it revised in appropriate judicial proceedings in order to
compel subdivision or site plan approval.
F. Installation of improvements by applicant. At the discretion and option
of the Borough and with the consent of the applicant, the Borough may
enter into a contract with the applicant providing for the installation
and construction of the off-tract improvements by the applicant upon
contribution by the Borough of the remaining unallocated portion of the
cost of the off-tract improvement.
G. Compliance with design criteria. Should the applicant and the Borough
enter into a contract for the construction and erection of the off-tract
improvements to be done by the applicant, it shall observe all
requirements and principles of this chapter in the design of such
improvements.
A. Where the applicant is to install, the estimated proportionate costs of
the off-tract improvements, as allocated to the applicant, shall be paid
to the Borough. The funds will be deposited in an interest-bearing
account created solely for off-tract improvement moneys. The Borough
shall, from time to time, review such account and, where sufficient time
has passed to warrant the return of these moneys, it shall rescind all
prior approvals and return, with interest, those prior-deposited moneys
which have not in whole or part been used because of the failure to
proceed with the improvement.
B. If it becomes apparent that the applicant has paid either more or less
than the actual allocable cost of the improvement, the Borough shall
repay or seek payment of the actual difference between the cost and the
moneys already paid.
C. Where it has been determined that the improvements will be installed
as a general or local Borough improvement by the Borough, the
§ 212-30 STORM SEWERS § 212-31
207:463
§ 212-32. Resolution of cost-assessment conflicts.
Where the applicant or any property owner cannot agree with the Planning
Board and the governing body as to the appropriate share of the cost of any
off-tract improvement or the manner in which it was assessed as a local or
general Borough improvement, that dispute shall be resolved in a court of
appropriate jurisdiction.
§ 212-33. Maintenance guaranty.
financing and payment thereof shall be in accordance with state
statutes.
D. In all other instances, the Borough may contract with the applicant for
both installation and payment to the applicant.The Borough's
contribution shall be in an amount and shall be paid pursuant to the
terms of the contract. This contract, however, shall in no way relieve the
applicant or the Borough from compliance with Planning Board
approvals not otherwise legally overruled by the Borough or local,
county or state laws.
A. Before any improvements are accepted by the Borough, the applicant
shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a maintenance guaranty in the
amount of 10% of the estimated cost of the improvements, as estimated
by the Borough Engineer, but in no event in an amount less than $1,000.
The maintenance guaranty shall be for a period of two years and shall
provide for the proper repair or replacement, if necessary, of any such
improvements during a two-year period. The two-year period shall be
from the date of the acceptance of the guaranty by the Borough. Every
maintenance guaranty shall contain the following clause: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that in the event the principal shall default in
the performance of this obligation under this obligation, then surety
shall perform the principal's obligation at the option of the obligee."
B. The maintenance guaranty shall also guarantee the replacement of any
shade trees found to be unhealthy within two years after acceptance. In
the event that the applicant has completed all of the improvements
prior to the granting of final approval by the Planning Board of the final
plat of any such subdivision or site plan, the maintenance guaranty
shall be posted before the final approval of the final plat by the Planning
Board. This requirement may be waived by the governing body, at its
discretion, when the improvements have been installed for at least two
years prior to acceptance.
§ 212-31 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-33
207:464
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 212-34. Conformance required. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No.
08-24]
§ 212-35. Streets.
A. The subdivision plat and site plan shall conform to design standards
that will encourage good development patterns within the Borough.
Where an Official Map or Master Plan has been adopted, the
subdivision and site plan shall conform to the proposals and conditions
shown thereon. The streets, drainage, rights-of-way, school sites, public
parks and playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or
Official Map shall be considered in approval of all plats.
B. Subdivisions and site plans for properties located within the B-1 and
PB-2 Zoning Districts and/or as specified in the map116 attached to and
made a part of Chapter 60, Town Center Task Force, shall be in
conformance with the Town Center Task Force’s standards and
guidelines, which are hereby adopted, approved and incorporated
herein. A copy of such standards and guidelines shall be kept on file in
the Offices of the Borough Clerk and the Planning Board Secretary.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine appropriate.
D. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than 50 feet unless otherwise shown on the Master
Plan.
E. No subdivision showing reverse strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved, except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the governing body under conditions
approved by the Planning Board.
F. Subdivisions or site plans that adjoin or include existing streets that do
not conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or
the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional
width along either one or both sides of the road. If the subdivision or
116. Editor's Note: Said map is attached to Ord. No. 07-12 and on file in the Office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 212-34 STORM SEWERS § 212-35
207:465
§ 212-36. Blocks.
§ 212-37. Lots.
site plan is along one side only, 1/2 of the required area shall be
dedicated.
G. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1/2%, unless specifically approved by the Planning
Board.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the property line with a curve radius of not less than
25 feet.
I. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
J. A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
K. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
L. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end, with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. If a
dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
M. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the name of an existing street. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name as the existing street.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning
regulations117 and to provide for convenient access, circulation control
and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
zoning regulations.118
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-35 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-37
207:466
§ 212-38. Utility easements; stormwater easements; natural
features.
§ 212-39. Common open spaces.
Areas of land in residential developments normally having a total area of
five acres or more, but in special cases less, may be dedicated for use
as neighborhood recreation areas, conservation areas or public facilities
serving the neighborhood, provided that the individual lots to be used for
dwelling purposes conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough,120 which allows an alternate of a reduced lot size where such
common areas are provided. These areas shall incorporate natural features,
such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, where they exist, wherever
possible.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot shall front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width,
except lots fronting on streets described in § 212-35F.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra line, and all setbacks shall be measured
from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot for its intended
used due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions, high
water table or where percolation tests or test borings show the ground
conditions to be inadequate for proper sewage disposal or similar
circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate investigation,
withhold approval or such lots.
A. In any development, easements along rear property lines or elsewhere
for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall be at least
15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies or
municipal departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage-way
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.119
C. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved wherever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-37 STORM SEWERS § 212-40
207:467
§ 212-40. Floodways.
Those lands located in the flood way may be included in all calculations
relating to minimum lot size and building coverages.
§ 212-40 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-40
207:468
ARTICLE VII
Surface Water Management
§ 212-41. Compliance required.121
No application for development required by the provisions of this chapter
shall be approved until the applicant has complied with the surface water
management provisions of Chapter 250, Zoning.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 212-41 STORM SEWERS § 212-41
207:469

ARTICLE VIII
Appeals
§ 212-42. Appeals to Board of Adjustment.
A. Right to appeal; filing procedures generally. Appeals to the Board of
Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer,
department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any
decision of the administrative officer. Each appeal shall be taken within
the 20 days prescribed by statute, by filing a notice of appeal with the
officer from whom the appeal was taken and three copies of such notice
with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Such notice of appeal
shall specify the grounds for such appeal. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.122
B. Special filing procedures. Applications addressed to the original
jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment without prior application to an
administrative officer shall be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. Three copies of the application shall be filed. At
the time of filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10
days prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot
plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of
the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting
dates of the Board.
C. Effect. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him,
that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior
Court of the state on application or notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
D. In exercising the power mentioned in Subsection E, the Board of
Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 291 of the
Laws of 1975, or amendments thereto or subsequent statutes
applying,123 reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such
other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and,
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
123. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 212-42 STORM SEWERS § 212-42
207:471
§ 212-43. Appeals from decision of Board. [Amended 4-15-1980 by
Ord. No. 9-80]
to that end, shall have all of the powers of the administrative officer
from whom the appeal was taken.
E. Termination of variance. Any variance from the terms of this chapter
hereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment permitting the erection
or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a specified use
of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such construction or
alteration shall have been actually commenced on every structure
permitted by such variance or unless such permitted use has actually
been commenced within one year from the date of entry of the
judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except,
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided
shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the
Board of Adjustment to the governing body or to a court of competent
jurisdiction until the termination, in any manner, of such appeal or
proceeding.
A. Any interested party desiring to appeal the decision of the Board of
Adjustment shall appeal to the governing body any final decision of the
Board of Adjustment with regard to use variances.124
B. The appellant shall, within five days of service of notice of the appeal,
arrange for a transcript for use by the governing body and pay a deposit
of $50 or the estimated cost of such transcription, whichever is less, or
within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal submit a transcript as
otherwise arranged to the Borough Clerk; otherwise, the appeal may be
dismissed for failure to prosecute.
C. The governing body shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than 95 days from the date of publication of notice of the decision
below unless the applicant consents, in writing, to an extension of such
period. Failure of the governing body to hold a hearing and conclude a
review of the record below and to render a decision within such
specified period shall constitute a decision affirming the action of the
Board.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 212-42 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-43
207:472
ARTICLE IX
General Development Plans
[Added 3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 4-02; amended 12-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 22-02A; 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06]
§ 212-44. General development plans.
A. References; objectives.
(1) Statutory reference. These procedures are established pursuant to
the authority of the Municipal Land Use Law. Prior to approval of a
planned development, the Planning Board shall make such findings
and conclusions as are required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
(2) Objectives. The purpose of this section is to establish procedures
for approval of all general development plans.
B. General development plan procedures. Any developer of a property
within the POD Zone Districts for which the developer is seeking
approval of a planned development shall submit a general development
plan to the Planning Board prior to the granting of preliminary approval
of that development by the Planning Board as provided by this section.
In addition to the procedures for filing, completeness determination
and review provided by this section, the following provisions shall apply
to general development plans:
(1) The term of the effect of the general development plan approval
shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set
forth in Subsection B(2) below, provided that the term of the effect
of the approval shall not exceed 10 years from the date upon which
the developer receives final approval of the first section of the
planned development pursuant to this chapter.
(2) In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the general development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the number of dwelling units or the amount of
nonresidential floor area to be constructed, prevailing economic
conditions, the timing schedule to be followed in completing the
development and the likelihood of its fulfillment, the developer’s
capability of completing the proposed development, and the
contents of the general development plan and any conditions which
the Planning Board attached to the approval thereof.
(3) In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of that general development plan
approval within five years of the date upon which the general
development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, the
Planning Board shall have cause to terminate the approval. This
limitation shall not apply to portions of the general development
plan requiring completion of the Route 24 Interchange.
§ 212-44 STORM SEWERS § 212-44
207:473
(4) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the Municipal Land
Use Law,125 or any ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto after the effective date of the approval, the planned
development shall be developed in accordance with the general
development plan approved by the Planning Board.
(5) Upon the completion of each section of the development as set
forth in the approved general development plan, the developer
shall notify the Planning Board Secretary, by certified mail, as
evidence that the developer is fulfilling his obligations under the
approved plan. For the purpose of this subsection, “completion” of
any section of the development shall mean that the developer has
acquired a certificate of occupancy for every residential unit or
every nonresidential structure, as set forth in the approved general
development plan and pursuant to Section 15 P.L. 1975, c. 217.126 If
the Planning Board does not receive such notification at the
completion of any section of the development, the Planning Board
shall notify the developer, by certified mail, in order to determine
whether or not the terms of the approved plan are being complied
with.
(6) If a developer does not complete any section of the development
within eight months of the date provided for in the approved plan,
or if at any time the municipality has cause to believe that the
developer is not fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved
plan, the Planning Board shall notify the developer, by certified
mail, and the developer shall have 10 days within which to give
evidence that he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the
approved plan. The Planning Board thereafter shall conduct a
hearing within 30 days to determine whether or not the developer
is in violation of the approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the
Planning Board finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall
provide written notice of same to the developer and the approval
shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
(7) In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved
general development plan is completed before the end of the term
of the approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of
the development. For the purposes of this subsection, a
development shall be considered complete on the date upon which
a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the final residential
unit or nonresidential structure in the last section of the
development in accordance with the timing schedule set forth in
the approved general development plan and the developer has
fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the approval.
(8) The following provisions shall apply to the modification of an
approved general development plan:
125. Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
126. Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133.
§ 212-44 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-44
207:474
§ 212-45. Submission requirement.
The following information shall be submitted for all general development
plans:
(a) Except as provided hereunder, once a general development
plan has been approved by the Planning Board, it may be
amended or revised only upon application by the developer and
approval by the Planning Board after a new hearing.
(b) A developer, without violating the terms of the general
development approval, may, in undertaking any section of the
planned development, reduce the number of residential units
or the amount of nonresidential floor space by no more than
15% or reduce the residential density or nonresidential floor
area ratio by no more than 15%.
(c) In the event that the developer seeks to vary the location of
land uses within the planned commercial development in any
section of the planned commercial development, such
modification shall require the approval of the Planning Board.
(d) In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed
timing schedule of the approved general development plan,
such modification shall require the approval of the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to
grant approval of the modification, take into consideration
prevailing economic and market conditions, anticipated and
actual needs for residential units and nonresidential space
within the Borough and the region, and the availability and
capacity of public facilities to accommodate the proposed
development.
A. A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general locations
of the land uses to be included in the planned development. The total
number of dwelling units and amount of nonresidential floor area to be
provided and proposed land area to be devoted to residential and
nonresidential use shall be set forth. In addition, the proposed types of
nonresidential uses to be included in the planned development shall be
set forth, and the land area to be occupied by each proposed use shall
be estimated. The density and intensity of the use of the entire planned
development shall be set forth and a residential density and a
nonresidential floor area ratio shall be provided. The land use plan shall
be at scale consisting of no more than 200 feet per inch. Except in the
case of a planned unit development, the impervious coverage of a tract
area including the entire POD-S and POD-N Zones shall not exceed 25%
and the impervious coverage of a tract consisting of the POD-S Zone
alone shall not exceed 40%, and these calculations shall be provided.
Improved lot coverage for planned unit development shall be regulated
by § 250-123 of Chapter 250.
§ 212-44 STORM SEWERS § 212-45
207:475
B. A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access within
the planned development and any proposed improvements to the
existing transportation system outside the planned development.
C. An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land areas to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description of
improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for the
operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
D. A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed location
of sewage and water lines, any drainage facilities necessitated by the
physical characteristics of the site, proposed methods for handling solid
waste disposal, and a plan for the operation and maintenance of
proposed utilities.
E. A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method of
controlling and managing stormwater on site. The plan shall reflect
stormwater management standards in conformance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-1.1 et seq., any Borough ordinance implementing those standards,
and, where applicable, the Residential Site Improvement Standards,
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
F. An environmental inventory, including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate and
cultural resources of the site, existing man-made structures or features,
and the probable impact of the development on the environmental
attributes of the site.
G. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of supporting
community facilities which may include, but not be limited to,
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals,
firehouses, EMS facilities and police stations.
H. A local service plan indicating those public services which the applicant
proposes to provide and which may include, but not be limited to, water,
sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
I. A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on Borough services
to be generated by the planned development and any other financial
impacts to be faced by the Borough or applicable school districts as a
result of the completion of the planned development. The fiscal report
shall also include a detailed projection of property tax revenues which
will accrue to the county, municipality and school district according to
the timing schedule provided under Subsection J of this section, and
following the completion of the planned development in its entirety.
J. A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years, including
any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the interests of
the public and of the residents who occupy any section of the planned
§ 212-45 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-45
207:476
§ 212-46. Site plan and subdivision review for planned unit
development or planned commercial development. [Added
3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4]
Site plans and subdivisions for any planned unit development or planned
commercial development included within a general development plan shall
comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 250, Article XVIII, all
applicable provisions of this chapter, and the following:
development prior to the completion of the development in its entirety.
The timing schedule shall indicate the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area proposed to be constructed in each section
of the development, and shall detail how the sub-plans and impacts
described in Subsections A through I above will be implemented and
affected for each section of the development.
K. The location and identification of any subdivision proposed for lands
within the general development plan shall be indicated. Any subdivision
within the planned development shall be pursuant to the GDP. Changes
to proposed subdivisions shall be incorporated into the approved
general development, but such subdivision changes shall not be
deemed to be amendments of the GDP and shall not require the
payment of new GDP application or escrow fees. Floor area ratio limits
shall not apply to individual lots in the POD Zones, but shall apply to the
total floor area (other than excluded floor area as defined in § 250-122)
within a planned commercial development, and/or the commercial use
component of a PUD.
L. If the planned commercial development is to be constructed in phases,
the general development plan shall show a minimum contiguous lot
area of not less than 100 acres for the initial phase of development. The
initial phase of development may also include other, smaller,
noncontiguous tracts for sewer, water, or other utility facilities intended
to serve the initial phase of development.
A. Any common open space created as part of a planned unit development
or planned commercial development that is not dedicated to and
accepted by the Borough of Florham Park pursuant to § 250-123A(1)
shall be permanently deed restricted to open space use for the benefit
of the owners and/or residents of the planned unit development or
planned commercial development, as the case may be.
B. The developer shall establish an organization to own and maintain any
such open space not dedicated to and accepted by the Borough of
Florham Park. This organization, and its responsibilities for
maintenance of open space, shall be subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 shall be administered
on behalf of the Borough of Florham Park by the governing body.
C. Prior to the granting of preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision
approval to any development included within a planned unit
§ 212-45 STORM SEWERS § 212-46
207:477
development or planned commercial development included within a
general development plan, the Planning Board shall make the following
findings and conclusions:
(1) That any departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning standards for planned unit development or planned
commercial development, as the case may be, under Article XVIII of
Chapter 250 of the Code of the Borough of Florham Park;
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of common
open space are reliable and that the amount, location and purpose
of the common open space are adequate and in conformance with
the requirements of Article XVIII of Chapter 250;
(3) That the provision, through the physical design of the proposed
development, for public services, control of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate;
(4) The proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established; and
(5) If the proposed development contemplates construction over a
period of years, that the terms and conditions to protect the
interest of the public and the residents, occupants and owners of
the proposed development in the total completion of the
development are adequate.
§ 212-46 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 212-46
207:478
ARTICLE X
Recycling Requirements
[Added 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
§ 212-47. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional, or industrial properties.
A. Any application to the Planning Board, for subdivision or site plan
approval for the construction of multifamily dwellings of three or more
units, single-family developments of 50 or more units or any
commercial, institutional, or industrial development for the utilization
of 1,000 square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This
plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the municipal Recycling Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the borough, the
owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial, institutional, or
industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract
with a hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of
source-separated recyclable materials, in those instances where the
municipality does not otherwise provide this service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 212-47 STORM SEWERS § 212-47
207:479
Chapter 213
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Hazardous or toxic substance
discharge — See Ch. 144.
Illicit connections — See Ch. 146.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 215.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 216.
Sewage disposal systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 278.
§ 213-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 213-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 212-47 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-1
213:480
§ 213-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 213-1 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-2
213:481
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of Florham Park, or political subdivision of this state
§ 213-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-2
213:482
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
§ 213-2 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-2
213:483
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 213-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
C.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 213-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge.
§ 213-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-4
213:484
§ 213-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 213-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
§ 213-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-4
213:485
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post-construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
§ 213-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-4
213:486
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
§ 213-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-4
213:487
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 213-7, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
§ 213-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-4
213:488
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 213-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] Although the Borough of Florham Park is located in the
urban redevelopment area, groundwater recharge will be
required for all development and redevelopment. It is
required that 100% of roof runoff be recharged. This
groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
§ 213-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-4
213:489
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; byproducts; industrial machinery and
fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are
related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial
activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 213-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to post-
§ 213-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-4
213:490
construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 213-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
§ 213-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-4
213:491
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 213-7, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 213-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
§ 213-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-4
213:492
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 213-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 213-7.
§ 213-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-4
213:493
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or centerline of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
§ 213-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-4
213:494
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
§ 213-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-4
213:495
§ 213-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Method at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
§ 213-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-5
213:496
§ 213-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge should be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587. The New Jersey Groundwater
Recharge Spreadsheet, based on GSR-32, is located in the BMP
Manual.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
§ 213-5 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-6
213:497
§ 213-7. Sources for technical guidance.
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 213-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 213-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 213-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 213-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed in Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
§ 213-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-7
213:498
§ 213-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
§ 213-7 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-8
213:499
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
be removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 213-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-8
213:500
§ 213-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this chapter.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements.
(1) The following information shall be required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
§ 213-8 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-9
213:501
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high ground water elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
§§ 213-3 through 213-6 are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
§ 213-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-9
213:502
§ 213-10. Maintenance and repair.
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in
§ 213-4 of this chapter.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 213-10.
(2) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsections C(1)(a) through (f) of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 213-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
§ 213-9 STORMWATER CONTROL § 213-10
213:503
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility
for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner/tenant owns or leases
the residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and
future revisions based on Subsection B(7) shall be recorded upon
the deed of record for each property on which the maintenance
described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development,
including a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenancerelated
work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance
plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as
needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) shall retain and make available, upon request by
any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and
documentation required by Subsections B(6) and B(7).
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
§ 213-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 213-10
213:504
§ 213-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by any court authorized by law to hear and determine the
matter, be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000, or to imprisonment for a
term of not more than 90 days, or both, as such court in its discretion may
impose. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 214
PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Illicit connections — See Ch. 146.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 207.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 213.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 215.
§ 214-1. Purpose.
A chapter requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Borough of Florham Park so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 214-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 213-10 STORMWATER CONTROL § 214-2
213:505
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Florham Park, and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 214-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 214-4. Design standard.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 214-4 below prior to
the completion of the project.
A. Storm drain inlets identified in § 214-3 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection D below.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
§ 214-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 214-4
213:506
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
B. Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and
grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
C. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
D. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 214-4 STORMWATER CONTROL § 214-5
213:507
§ 214-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Florham Park.
§ 214-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250 for each storm drain inlet that is
not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
Chapter 215
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 215-1. Title.
The ordinance establishing this chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the "Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the Borough of Florham Park"
§ 215-2. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 215-3. Findings of fact.
§ 215-4. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Florham Park are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property; health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health.
§ 214-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-4
215:508
§ 215-5. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 215-6. Definitions and word usage.
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard.
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood
waters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Word usage. Unless specifically defined below or by Article I of Chapter
250, words or phases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as
to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
ordinance its most reasonable application.
§ 215-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-6
215:509
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Borough Engineer's
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an avenge depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — That elevation or locations at which there
is a one-percent chance of annual flood occurrence. Base flood
elevations are posted at cross sections on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CLUSTERED — The arrangement of lots or structures in such a way as
to minimize the total land coverage area and to minimize the total open
space area.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) — The New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials, located within the
area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in a coastal high hazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the
§ 215-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-6
215:510
base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — That portion of the special flood hazard area
outside the floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in
which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
§ 215-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-6
215:511
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
useable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality
PEAK FLOW DISCHARGE — The highest value or stage of discharge
attained during a flood event, expressed as a design discharge in cubic
feet per second.
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other organized group of persons,
including state and local governments and agencies thereof.
RATIONAL METHOD — The method accepted by the engineering
profession in determining surface water hydrology which requires the
determination of watershed area, runoff coefficients and rainfall
intensity based on time of concentration.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior, or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 215-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-6
215:512
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE METHOD — The method of
determining surface water hydrology developed by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, as outlined in the
United States Department of Agriculture Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices, as revised.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — The plan
prepared indicating any temporary or permanent measures to be taken
to prevent erosion and/or sediment damage to the site in conformance
with applicable state and Borough laws.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and the flood fringe
area as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. This is the
area which has a one-percent chance of being inundated; it is further
delineated by the base flood elevations and floodway widths as posted
at the cross sections on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. Its precise
boundary for any specific location must be fixed by field survey. This
area must be at a minimum the same as the Flood Insurance Study.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(P.L. No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement
or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings or piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
§ 215-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-6
215:513
§ 215-7. Lands to which this ordinance applies.
This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Florham Park
§ 215-8. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 20-02]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood
Insurance Study for the Borough of Florham Park," dated December 20,
2002, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance
Study is on file in the Office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 215-9. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of
this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,500 or imprisoned for not
more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan consistent with the
purposes and policies of this chapter which fully indicates all necessary
land treatment measures and techniques, including a schedule for
implementation and maintenance.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this ordinance.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of the state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
(2)
§ 215-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-9
215:514
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Borough of Florham Park from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 215-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 215-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 215-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Borough of Florham Park, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 215-13. Establishment of development permit.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. A surface water management plan, hereafter termed "SWMP," shall be
submitted to and be approved by the Planning Board prior to issuance
of any site plan or subdivision approval, variance, building permit, soil
removal permit or soil erosion and sediment control permit and before
any landfill is commenced.
B. A development plan shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in Section 215-8. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the Borough Engineer and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials and drainage facilities;
and the location of the foregoing.
§ 215-9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-13
215:515
§ 215-14. Administrative official.
§ 215-15. Use of other base flood data.
When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with
Section 215-8, the Borough Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other
source in order to administer § 215-20D(1) and (2).
§ 215-16. Information to be obtained and maintained.
The following information is to be obtained and maintained:
C. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all structures.
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
(3) Certificate by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria as required by § 215-20C.
(4) Description to the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. The Borough Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
B. Duties of the Borough Engineer shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Reviewing all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Reviewing all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Reviewing all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; if located in the floodway,
assuring that the encroachment provisions of § 215-21 are met.
A. Obtain and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the lowest habitable floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures, and note whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
B. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
§ 215-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-16
215:516
§ 215-17. Alteration of watercourses.
§ 215-18. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
Interpretations shall be made, where needed, as to the exact location of
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard; for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§ 215-19.
§ 215-19. Variance procedure.
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level;
and
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 215-13C(3).
C. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and evidence of such notification shall be
submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration.
B. It shall be required that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by the Borough of Florham Park
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Borough Engineer in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the governing body. Such
appeal shall be made in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
§ 215-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-19
215:517
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) of this section
and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Borough Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variance.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvement to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items
listed in Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) of this section have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
§ 215-19 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-19
215:518
§ 215-20. Standards for flood hazard reduction.
(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if an
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the
flood hazard.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4) of
this section or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. General.
(1) Each SWMP shall contain the following:
(a) Lot and block numbers of the site as shown on the current Tax
Map of the Borough.
(b) The name and addresses of the owner of the land. If the
applicant is not the owner, he shall provide his address and his
interest in the property.
(c) A key map showing the size of subwatershed and the location
of the site within the subwatershed of the drainage basin.
(d) The location and description of significant natural and manmade
features on and surrounding the site, including
topography, all impervious surfaces, soil and drainage
characteristics, with particular attention to the location and
description of presently existing surface water runoff control
§ 215-19 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-20
215:519
devices, mechanisms or areas, swamps, floodplains, swales,
woods and vegetation, steep slopes and other features critical
to the purposes of this chapter.
(e) The size of the nearest culvert or bridge downstream of the
discharge area, profiles and cross sections of the stream
channel upstream of that structure, as well as profiles and
cross sections of the stream channel at all points of proposed
surface water discharge from the site, as required by the
Municipal Engineer.
(f) The location and description of proposed changes to the site,
whether of a permanent or temporary nature, with particular
attention to impervious surfaces and interception of presently
dispersed flow which may impact upon the capacity of the soil,
vegetative cover and drainageways to absorb, retard, contain
or control surface water runoff.
(g) Designation of the critical or other areas to be left undisturbed
shall be shown in sufficient detail to be accurately marked on
the land.
(h) Computation of the total surface water runoff before and after
the disturbance of land and/or construction of impervious
surfaces.
(i) Proposed measures for surface water management.
(j) A schedule of the sequence of installation of the SWMP related
to the starting and completion dates of the project.
(2) Whenever practicable and where permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance, development shall be clustered or arranged so as to
reduce the total area of impervious surfaces and preserve the
maximum possible open space, including those topographic
features critical to surface water management.
(3) Surface water runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed
basin to another.
(4) The plan shall avoid the concentration of flow and shall provide,
wherever possible, for the dissipation of velocities at all discharge
points.
(5) The plan shall be compatible with the soil erosion and sediment
control plan, wherever applicable, and shall reestablish vegetative
cover in accordance with Standards and Specifications for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, adopted by the Morris
County Soil Conservation District, as revised.
(6) The rate of peak flow discharges from the site following the
completion of the proposed use or development of the subject area,
§ 215-20 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-20
215:520
wherever possible and practicable, shall not exceed that which
would prevail under existing conditions as found on the site.
B. Areas outside special flood hazard area.
(1) In order to provide uniform engineering review by the Borough
Engineer for runoff and storage requirements, two methods may be
used in computing runoff for drainage basins of less than 10 square
miles. They are the rational method and the Soil Conservation
Service method. For computing runoff from drainage basins of
greater than 10 square miles, the Soil Conservation Service
method or the Department of Environmental Protection Method
using New Jersey Technical Report No. 38 may be used.
(2) The SWMP shall include an inventory of the site showing all
existing natural and man-made drainage-related features,
including such items as berms, terraces, waterways, swales, types
of soil, swamps, woodlands, floodplains, floodways, etc. These
natural features shall be incorporated into the plan to the greatest
possible extent.
(3) Surface water runoff controls shall be designed to assure that the
land in question does not discharge more than its proportionate
share of surface water as determined by comparative before and
after computations.
(4) Innovative surface water runoff control and recharge devices may
be proposed, such as rooftop storage, dry wells, porous pavements,
infiltration trenches, etc., provided that they are accompanied by
detailed engineering plans and performance capabilities.
C. Areas within special flood hazard area.
(1) The items listed in Subsection B(1) through (4) above shall be
applicable in this subsection also.
(2) Due consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the flood hazard area as delineated on the map entitled
the "Flood Insurance Rate Map." Flood elevations as established by
said map shall be clearly marked on the applicant's map. Any
proposed structures, fill, excavation, grading or disturbance of any
kind as allowed by this chapter within the flood hazard area shall
be clearly delineated.
(3) Each plan shall contain a certification by a New Jersey licensed
surveyor as to the lowest ground floor elevation, including
basement, and attendant utilities of all proposed new construction.
All portions of residential buildings must be one foot above the base
flood elevation. Where any portion of a nonresidential building or
structure is below a level of one foot above the base flood elevation,
a further certificate per § 215-13C(3) shall be filed with the
Borough Engineer.
§ 215-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-20
215:521
(4) The plan must include evidence of coordination with adjacent and
downstream communities and with the Department of
Environmental Protection by any development, fill, encroachment,
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, or stream water runoff
therefrom. In the event of an objection by the governing body or by
the Planning Board of any such adjacent community the applicant
must either obtain the eventual concurrence of the objector or
must establish proof that he has taken adequate precautions to
ensure that his development will not discharge stormwater in
excess of the maximum peaks that the objector has experienced.
(5) The plan must provide and furnish calculations to establish that all
watercourses affected by the proposed construction shall maintain
adequate carrying capacity:
(6) Developers of 50 lots or of five acres, whichever is less, shall post
base flood elevations on all maps or plats. [Amended 7-17-2001
by Ord. No. 15-01]
(7) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be:
(a) Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(c) Constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(d) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(8) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(9) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into the floodwaters.
(10) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(11) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. [Amended
7-17-2001 by Ord. No. 15-01]
§ 215-20 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-20
215:522
§ 215-21. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 215-8 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
(12) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage. [Amended 7-17-2001 by Ord. No.
15-01]
(13) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage. [Added 7-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 15-01]
(14) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage. [Added 7-17-2001 by Ord. No.
15-01]
D. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 215-8 or in § 215-15,
the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above base
flood elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of at least one foot above the base flood
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certifications shall be provided to the Borough Engineer as set
forth in § 215-13C(3).
(3) Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in
accordance with § 215-20C(7)(d). All manufactured homes to be
placed or substantially improved within an area of special flood
hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.
§ 215-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-21
215:523
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 215-22. Exemptions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following uses and activities are
permitted without the requirement for submission of SWMP. However, a
development permit is required to ensure that the proposed use does not
result in an adverse impact on adjacent properties.
§ 215-23. Deposits.
A. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, shall be prohibited unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result
in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
B. If Subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 215-20.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
A. Recreational uses or facilities which do not entail substantial clearing,
grading, fill excavation or alteration of existing surface soils, including
but not limited to footpaths, bikeways, bridle paths, playing fields,
playgrounds and picnic areas.
B. Agricultural uses, when maintained in accordance with farm
conservation practices approved by the local soil conservation district.
C. General improvements to single lots containing existing single-family
residences, such as but not limited to paving existing driveways,
landscaping gardening and the construction of swimming pools which
will not discharge water beyond the property containing the pool.
A. Where the consideration and acceptance of a SWMP is required as a
condition for the approval of a site plan or subdivision application, the
SWMP shall be a part of the plans required therefor, and no deposit is
required. Where a SWMP is required for any other purpose, the
applicant shall pay a deposit to cover the cost of reviewing his
application and for an on-site inspection. The Treasurer shall credit said
deposit to a trust account and charge thereto direct and indirect
expenses incurred in reviewing said plans. If the charges exceed the
deposit, the applicant shall pay the balance prior to receipt of the
§ 215-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 215-23
215:524
Chapter 216
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
approval; the Treasurer shall refund any balance remaining in the
account at the time the approval is given.
B. The deposit schedule for SWMP within the special flood hazard area is
$100 per acre or part thereof, plus 1 1/2% of the Borough Engineer's
estimated cost of any improvements (grading, stabilizing, construction),
plus the cost of a survey, if required.
C. The Borough Engineer shall maintain a record of all certificates filed
per § 215-13C(3) and shall forward authenticate certificates to the
Borough Construction Code Official to be filed in the corresponding
building permit file. The Construction Code Official shall not issue a
building permit without having received Planning Board approval in
accordance with § 250-8 of the Borough Code and with § 215-13 herein
and unless he shall have received, where required, the certificate of
§ 215-13C(3).
§ 215-23 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 215-23
215:525

ARTICLE I
Private Pools
§ 216-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PERMANENT PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any type of private swimming
pool not otherwise defined in this section.
PORTABLE PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any above-surface-type private
swimming pool made of permanently pliable plastic or plastic-coated
material, canvas, pliable rubber or other permanently pliable material
designed to be removed and stored.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any artificial or semiartificial container or
receptacle for the containment of water having an inside depth at any point
greater than 12 inches, located outdoors and used or intended to be used
for swimming or bathing by the owner or lessee of the property on which
it is situated or by the family or guests of such owner or lessee, as an
accessory to a residence, except aboveground pools, the top of which is four
feet or more from natural ground level, which are straight-sided and have
no bridge construction, protrusion, abutments or other means by which
access to the top of the pool can be gained by climbing. The discretion of the
Building Inspector shall govern within the limits prescribed as to whether
the aboveground pool shall come within the aforementioned exception.
§ 216-2. Permit required; fee.
§ 216-3. Compliance with zoning regulations. [Amended 2-26-2008
by Ord. No. 08-2]
Any private swimming pool shall comply with the detached accessory
building location requirements of the zoning regulations (see Chapter 250,
Zoning). No swimming pool may be located in a side yard. This restriction
applies equally to portable and permanent private swimming pools.
A. No person shall install, construct, erect or make any alteration, addition
or other improvement to any permanent private swimming pool until he
shall have obtained a building permit issued by the Construction
Official as in the case of any other structure.
B. No person shall install, construct, erect or maintain a portable private
swimming pool in any calendar year until he shall have obtained from
the Construction Official a portable swimming pool permit for which the
fee of $35 shall be charged. The application for the permit shall show
the dimensions of the pool.
§ 216-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 216-4
215:527
§ 216-4. Enclosures. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-2]
Every private swimming pool within the Borough, including all pools
erected, installed or constructed above ground, shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height which shall
be so constructed as to not have openings, holes, or gaps larger than three
inches in any dimension except doors and gates, and if a picket fence is
erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall not exceed three
inches. The fence or wall shall be so constructed a distance of at least
three feet from the outside edge of the swimming pool. A dwelling house
or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates and
doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing
and self-latching device for keeping the gates or doors securely closed at all
times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which
forms part of the enclosures need not be so equipped. Any existing private
swimming pool shall be provided with an enclosing fence or wall and gate
within 45 days of the date of final adoption of this chapter.
§ 216-5. Lighting.
Lights used above the surface of the water to illuminate any private
swimming pool shall be so arranged and shielded that the light will be
reflected away from the adjoining premises.
§ 216-6. Enforcement.
The Construction Official and/or Health Officer of the Borough shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this article.
§ 216-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 216-6
215:528
ARTICLE II
Public and Semipublic Pools
§ 216-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANNUAL ELECTRICAL CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certificate
issued upon successful visual inspection of the electrical equipment and
wiring by an electrical subcode official/inspector to ensure that the
installation is safe and meets applicable requirements of the most-current
version of the adopted electrical subcode and receipt of a copy of the
valid bonding and grounding certificate. [Ref. N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.18c and
2.20(d)][Added 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 3-06; amended 12-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-23]
SWIMMING POOL — Includes any single tank, plunge or other artificial or
natural body of water, wading pool, hot tub (Jacuzzi) and spa or adjacent
multiples thereof on the same licensed premises, located indoors or
outdoors, used or intended to be used for public, semipublic or recreational
swimming, operated and maintained by any person or common interest
community whether as owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire,
whether or not any charge or fee is imposed, and shall include all
structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities
appurtenant to and intended for use in the operation and maintenance of
a swimming pool. This article shall not be construed to apply to swimming
pools which are private bathing places as defined in N.J.A.C.
8:26-1.3.[Amended 8-19-1997 by Ord. No. 11-97]
§ 216-8. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate a swimming pool within the Borough
without first having obtained a license for such purpose from the Mayor and
Council of the Borough. (See § 216-10.)
§ 216-9. Application for license; term.
A. The Mayor and Council shall grant a license by resolution to any person
to operate a swimming pool for a term not exceeding one year from the
date of such license.
B. A license shall not be granted until there shall first be presented and
filed in writing an application therefor. Such application shall contain
the following information:
(1) The location of the swimming pool(s) and hours of operation.
(2) The size of the swimming pool(s).
(3) The source of the water supply.
(4) A description of provisions available for purification of water.
§ 216-7 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 216-9
215:529
§ 216-10. Fee; issuance; other activities; inspections. [Amended
2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 3-06; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. BH 05-07]
(5) The number of lifeguards to be present and lifesaving facilities
available, if required by N.J.A.C. 8:16, Public Recreational Bathing.
(6) The charge to be made for use of the swimming pool(s).
(7) A diagram of the location of the premises showing distances from
the nearest buildings and streets.
(8) A description of parking lots available for off-street parking,
showing the number of cars that can be accommodated.
(9) A description of the other activities to be carried on on the property
surrounding the swimming pool(s).
(10) The name of the owner of the premises.
(11) The name of the operator of the swimming pool(s).
(12) If either Subsection B(10) or (11) of this section is a corporation,
the names and addresses of the officers, directors and trustees, if
any, and the name and address of the statutory agent and office.
(13) The date of incorporation and whether a profit or nonprofit
corporation.
C. All swimming pool, spa and hot tub license applications must be
completed, have a Health Department inspection, verification of
compliance with the Building Department requirements (see N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.18c and 2.20(d), current and valid annual electrical certificate of
compliance, and be received by the Building Department by May 1 of
the licensing year. [Added 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 3-06]
A. Upon the filing of a written application for a license under this article,
the applicant shall tender the annual basic pool license fee, which shall
be $500 per year, plus $100 for each additional pool, spa or hot tub per
year. No license will be granted by the Mayor and Council for part of the
year.
B. Any application that is not complete, does not meet the Building
Department and the Health Department requirements or is not received
by May 1 of the licensing year will be subject to a late fee equal to the
license fee.
C. Upon authorization by the Mayor and Council, the Clerk shall issue a
license for the swimming pool(s) which shall be subject to the terms and
conditions of this article.
D. No other activity shall be carried on except as described in the
application or expressly permitted by the Mayor and Council. The
§ 216-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 216-10
215:530
§ 216-11. Revocation.
Any license or special permit granted pursuant to this article may be
revoked, without refund of fees, by the Borough Council for failure to
comply with this article or whenever, in the determination of the Borough
Council, further operation under such license or permit creates or will
create a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the users of the
swimming pool, the residents of the Borough or others.
§ 216-12. Noise and disturbance.
All activities on the premises on which a swimming pool is situated shall be
conducted so that they do not cause noise or other nuisance so unusual or
loud that such noise or nuisance shall annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others.
§ 216-13. Sound amplification; peddling and soliciting; hours of
operation.
§ 216-14. Sanitary conditions required.
annual license fee(s) shall include the registered health environment
specialist (RHES) inspections.
E. The fee does not cover the required bonding and grounding
certification, which must be performed by a licensed electrical
contractor or testing facility. The bonding and grounding certification
may be valid for up to five years.
F. The fee for plan review of a pool shall be $300. Pool alteration and
renovation plan review fees shall be $150.
G. The fee for plan review of a hot tub and/or spa shall be $200. Hot tub
and/or spa alteration and renovation plan review fee shall be $100.
A. No manual, mechanical or electrical means of amplifying sound shall be
used upon the licensed premises, except for intermittent
announcements or instructions made or given only for the safety of
persons during the permitted swimming hours.
B. No hawking, peddling, soliciting or canvassing shall be permitted on
the licensed premises.
C. No swimming shall be permitted after sunset or before 10:00 a.m. on
weekdays or 12:00 noon on Sundays. A swimming pool shall be cleared
of all persons and all gates to it locked between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 10:00 a.m. (outdoor pools).
A. All swimming pools licensed under this article shall be equipped with
chlorinating equipment of acceptable capacity and design which will
provide in the water at all times when the pool is in use a residual of
excess chlorine of not less than 1.0 part per million or more than 3.0
§ 216-10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 216-14
215:531
§ 216-15. Bacteriological analysis; pH and chlorine residue
readings.
§ 216-16. Operation.
All swimming pools, wading pools, hot tubs and spas shall be operated
in compliance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:26, Public Recreational
Bathing, and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 216-17. Proximity to residences.
No swimming pool shall be erected, conducted or maintained within 500
feet of any residence. The Municipal Pool is exempt from this requirement.
parts per million indoor and 4.0 parts per million outdoor. No pool shall
have, when in use, a residual of excess chlorine or chloramine in the
water above the maximum or below the minimum above set forth. (See
New Jersey State Recreation Bathing Code, N.J.A.C. 8:26-7.9)
B. All swimming pools shall be properly equipped with filtering or
clarifying devices in satisfactory operating condition so that the water
of such pools shall be continuously and regularly filtered and clarified
and kept at all times in a sanitary and safe condition for bathing
purposes.
C. All swimming pools will have microbiological water quality standards in
accordance with the New Jersey Recreational Bathing Code, N.J.A.C.
8:26-7.6.
D. Locker rooms, shower rooms, toilets, runways and all other physical
facilities or equipment incident to the operation of the swimming pool
shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at all times.
E. Whenever any swimming pool, by reason of mechanical defects, lack of
proper supervision or failure to comply with the requirements of this
article, is a hazard to public health or safety, the Swimming Pool
Inspector is authorized to order such pool immediately closed until no
further hazard exists.
A. A bacteriological analysis of the water in swimming pools shall be made
at least once a week by the pool owner, during the swimming season,
and more often at the discretion of the Swimming Pool Inspector, by an
independent laboratory approved by the Board of Health. A written
report of each analysis shall be submitted to the Swimming Pool
Inspector.
B. The chief lifeguard or pool manager shall make or cause to be made a
pH and chlorine residue reading hourly on each day the pool is used for
swimming and shall keep an accurate log of such readings for each
entire swimming season. The first reading for each day shall be made
before the pool is opened for use.
§ 216-14 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 216-18
215:532
§ 216-18. Parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate all automobiles of
the persons using the pool. No parking shall be permitted on the streets
adjoining or adjacent to the swimming pool.
§ 216-19. Fencing.
All swimming pools shall be surrounded by chain link fence, at least six feet
in height. Fencing as aforesaid of the entire premises on which a swimming
pool is situate shall be deemed to comply with this provision.
§ 216-20. Permission for premises to remain open after hours.
Special permission may be granted by the Borough Council for the premises
on which a swimming pool is situated, other than the pool itself, to remain
open other than permitted hours, for a specific purpose on a specific date if
such permission is applied for at least 60 days in advance, in writing, with
the reason for the request given in detail. Permission may be denied if, in
the judgment of the Borough Council, such denial will promote the health,
welfare or safety of the residents of the Borough.
§ 216-21. Noncompliance; closing of premises; hearings.
A. When a violation of this Article has been determined by the persons
responsible for enforcement of the same, on the grounds of failure of
compliance with its terms, a notice shall be sent by certified mail to the
licensee at the address of the licensed premises requiring compliance
within five days. Notice shall set forth the requirements for compliance,
and a copy of such shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
B. Failure of the licensee to respond to the notice within the five-day
period shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license. Upon
revocation of the license, the Police Department shall post a sign in
public view declaring the premises closed for failure to comply with this
article.
C. When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so inimical to
the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance
and thus give rise to an emergency, the Chief of Police or Swimming
Pool Inspector shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation
of business and close the premises or suspend or revoke the license. A
sign shall be posted on the licensed premises as set forth in Subsection
B of this section.
D. Upon written request by the licensee, his agent or employee, before
expiration of the five-day notice or within 10 days of action taken
pursuant to Subsection C above, the Mayor shall order a hearing before
the Borough Council. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the
licensee.
§ 216-18 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 216-21
215:533
§ 216-22. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by a Swimming Pool
Inspector and/or Health Officer to be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and by the Police Department of the
Borough.
E. Upon termination of the hearing, the Borough Council shall render its
decision by resolution and may suspend or revoke the license or take
such other action as shall be in the interest of the public's health,
welfare and safety.
F. No revocation or suspension of the license shall bar or prevent criminal
prosecution for each and every violation of this article. No fee paid
under this article shall be returnable in whole or part as the result of
any suspension or revocation.
§ 216-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 216-22
215:534
ARTICLE III
Swimming Pool Utility
§ 216-23. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
POOL AREA — The entire fenced area surrounding the pool.
POOL GROUNDS — The entire area occupied by the Swimming Pool Utility.
§ 216-24. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established by the Borough a municipal public
utility to be known and constituted as the "Swimming Pool Utility of the
Borough," pursuant to and for the purposes of Title 40A of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, particularly Chapters 2 and 4 thereof, and any other
applicable statutes of the state.
§ 216-25. Collection of rents and fees.
The Borough shall charge and collect for the use and operation of the
Swimming Pool Utility, and all fees, rents and other charges shall be placed
in a separate account of the Borough.
§ 216-26. Disposition of rents and fees.
All fees, rents and other charges received annually from the operation of
the Swimming Pool Utility shall be applied first to the annual payment of
principal and interest on any obligations issued for the Swimming Pool
Utility, then to the operation, maintenance and improvement of the Utility.
Any surplus resulting from the Utility shall be applied in accordance with
law.
§ 216-27. Annual budget.
The anticipated revenues from the operation of the Swimming Pool Utility
and the appropriations to be made therefor shall be set forth in a separate
section of the annual budget.
§ 216-28. Construal.
This article shall not supersede the specific dedication of receipts from
the Swimming Pool Utility as provided in any law which authorizes the
establishment or creation of such Utility.
§ 216-29. Determination of matters not covered under this article.
All matters with respect to the Swimming Pool Utility not determined by this
article shall be determined by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 216-23 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 216-30
215:535
§ 216-30. (Reserved)
§ 216-31. Registration. [Amended 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18]
The types of registration for use of the Swimming Pool Utility available are:
§ 216-32. Registration fees. [Amended 3-16-2004 by Ord. No. 3-04;
3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 3-05; 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18; 4-29-2008
by Ord. No. 08-13; 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-4; 6-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-5; 4-30-2012 by Ord. No. 12-6; 2-20-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2127;
3-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-2; 2-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-3; 12-15-2016
by Ord. No. 16-22; 3-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-4; 2-21-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-2; 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1]
A. Family: includes two-parent families, with membership including only
husband and wife, their unmarried dependent children under 23 years
of age and state ward children, who all reside within the same
household.
B. Single-parent family: includes one parent, and his or her unmarried
dependent children under 23 years of age and state ward children, who
all reside within the same household.
C. Resident relative: a relative of a family registrant who is a bona fide
resident in the same household.
D. Individual: any resident not eligible for registration under a family
registration or as a resident relative.
A. The seasonal fees for the Florham Park Municipal Pool utility are as
follows:
Description Fee
Resident family $435
(A husband and/or wife and/or
domestic partner and all children
permanently residing in the same
household who are under the age
of 23 and are fully dependent on
the head of the household for their
support and maintenance)
Resident couple $300
(A husband/wife and/or domestic
partner permanently residing in
the same household)
Resident individual (12-17) $175
127. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also stated in Section 2 that it allows for three separate
payments to be made on March 1, April 1 and May 1. Late payments will be subject to a
late fee.
§ 216-30 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 216-32
215:536
Description Fee
Resident individual (18+) $225
Resident senior citizen (62+) $80
Governing body member N/C
Volunteer fireman/First Aid
members
N/C
(An active/senior member in good
standing and their immediate
families with children under the
age of 23)
Active duty armed forces member N/C
Swim team membership $100; non-pool member: $300
Florham Park life guards
individual pool membership
$25
Nonresident family $600
(A husband and/or wife and/or
domestic partner and all children
permanently residing in the same
household who are under the age
of 23 and are fully dependent on
the head of the household for their
support and maintenance)
Nonresident individual (18+) $350
Nonresident couple $500
Nonresident senior $150
Nanny/au pair $175
Daily guest pass $20
Guest pass six-pack (6 passes) $75
Guest passes are good for the
2020 season only, no refunds for
unused passes; only pool members
can purchase
Lost or new badge $15
Returned check $20
Party reservations
Facility fee (30 participants or
less)
$75
Attendee/participant fee per
person
$10
B. This section allows for two separate payments to be made on April 8
and May 1.
§ 216-32 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 216-32
215:537
§ 216-33. Guest passbooks.
Registrants may purchase guest passbooks for a fee that will be adopted
annually by the Borough Council by resolution. Each book will contain 10
passes. Each pass is valid for one admission only, subject to the following
regulations:
§ 216-34. Identification badges.
§ 216-35. Dates of use.
The Borough Council shall annually determine by resolution the dates the
Swimming Pool Utility facilities may be used.
§ 216-36. Hours of use.
The hours during which the Swimming Pool Utility facilities may be used for
general swimming when the dates have been determined as aforesaid are:
C. This section allows for payment with a credit card. Payments made by
credit card will be the same price as cash/check payment.
A. No resident of the Borough will be admitted as a guest.
B. Guest passes will not be valid on Memorial Day, Independence Day and
Labor Day.
A. All registrants shall be issued identification badges which are not
transferable, which shall be displayed for admission and worn at all
times while using the facilities.
B. Badges shall not be defaced.
C. Lost badges shall be reported immediately to the pool manager.
D. Replacement badges may be obtained as follows:
(1) Upon deposit of $5, a temporary badge will be issued valid for three
days only. At the expiration of the three days, a new permanent
badge will be issued and $3 of the deposit refunded. Failure to
return the temporary badge within five days after issuance will
cause a forfeiture of the deposit.
(2) Persons not desiring to leave a deposit shall not be eligible for
admission for three days but thereafter may obtain a new
permanent badge upon payment of $2.
E. Defaced badges shall be promptly surrendered and a replacement fee
of $2 paid.
§ 216-32 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 216-36
215:538
Days Times
Monday through Friday 12:00 noon to sunset
Saturday 10:00 a.m. to sunset
Sunday 1:00 p.m. to sunset
Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor
Day
(except when on Sunday)
10:00 a.m. to sunset
§ 216-37. Rules and regulations.
The following are established as general rules and regulations of conduct
for the general welfare:
A. No child under 11 years of age shall be permitted in the pool area
unless accompanied by a person 18 years of age or older, who shall
remain in the pool area at all times.
B. Use of the wading pool shall be limited to children five years of age and
under. Supervision of a child in the wading pool shall be the
responsibility of such person bringing the child into the pool area. At no
time shall such child be left unattended by such person.
C. All bathers, including infants, shall wear bathing suits in both the
swimming and wading pools. No diapers are permitted in any pool.
D. All swimmers must wear bathing caps in the pool when their hair
length, as determined by the pool manager or assistant, is such that it
increases the probability of hair accumulating in and clogging the
water circulation system.
E. All persons using the pools shall take a shower using warm water and
soap prior to entering the pools.
F. Dressing and undressing shall be done in locker rooms only.
G. Any person showing evidence of skin diseases, sore or inflamed eyes,
colds, nasal or ear discharge, communicable disease, excessive
sunburn, open blisters, cuts or bandages shall be refused admittance to
the pool area.
H. The use of flotation devices and toys of all types are specifically
prohibited in the pool.
I. Wrestling, running, punching, pushing or pulling others into the pools is
prohibited.
J. Dogs or other pets are not permitted in the pool area.
K. No glass containers shall be permitted in the pool area.
§ 216-36 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 216-37
215:539
§ 216-38. Pool manager.
§ 216-39. Authority to close pool.
The Borough Council or pool manager may close or limit the swimming
facilities whenever, in the judgment of either, such action is deemed
necessary or desirable for the protection of the health, welfare or safety of
the persons entitled to use the facilities.
§ 216-40. (Reserved)
L. All foods and beverages shall be served and consumed within
designated areas only.
M. Alcoholic beverages are not permitted anywhere on the pool grounds.
N. No person of any age shall comb his or her hair or wear pin curlers or
the like within the pool area.
O. People in street clothing and footwear shall display their pool badges
and shall not be permitted beyond designated lines.
P. Vehicles shall be parked only in the designated areas.
Q. Only one person at a time will be permitted on the slide and may
descend only feet first facing forward.
A. The pool manager shall have the power to suspend the privileges
granted to the holder of a registration badge for transfer or defacement
thereof, destruction of property or violating any of the foregoing rules
and regulations and shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
article. Suspension of privileges by the swimming pool manager for
violation of the provisions of this article shall be based upon the
following schedule:
(1) First offense: one week of suspension.
(2) Second offense: two weeks of suspension.
(3) Third offense: suspension for the remainder of the season.
B. In the event that an identification badge is transferred and such badge
is part of a family membership, then the suspension shall apply to the
entire family membership.
§ 216-37 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 216-40
215:540
Chapter 220
TAXATION
§ 216-40 TAXATION § 216-40
220:541

ARTICLE I
Real Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 12-16-1969 as Ch. 22 of the 1969 Code]
§ 220-1. Exemption granted.
All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within
the Borough shall not be assessed and taxed.
§ 220-2. Exceptions.
This section shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property
and personal effects due and payable in the year 1962, and thereafter so
long as this section shall be in effect, and shall not affect the obligation,
lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest or penalties which have accrued or
may accrue by virtue of any assessment made or which may be made with
respect to taxes levied for any year prior to the year 1962, nor shall this
section affect the legal authority to assess and collect taxes which may be
or have been due and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such
interest and penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions
of law amended or repealed hereby; nor shall this section invalidate any
assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof pending
upon the effective date of this article or upon January 1, 1962, or during the
period between such dates.
§ 220-1 TAXATION § 220-2
220:543

ARTICLE II
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 9-16-2003 by Ord. No. 11-03]
§ 220-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy
on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3)
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 220-4. Tax established.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy Tax in the
Borough of Florham Park which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate
of 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Borough of Florham Park on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004,
and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in
the Borough of Florham Park on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms
in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L.
1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 220-5. Tax to be in addition to other tax or fee.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 220-6. Statutory requirements.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be
refunded by the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
§ 220-3 TAXATION § 220-6
220:545
§ 220-7. Tax collected on behalf of Borough.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Borough
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time,
provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall be joined as a
party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. Any person violating this article, whether as an individual, principal or
agent, employer or employee of another, shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the Borough, be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 220-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 220-7
220:546
Chapter 224
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
§ 224-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car used in the business of
carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity
of no more than 14 passengers, not including the driver, provided that
such a vehicle is certified by the manufacturer of the original vehicle and
the second-stage manufacturer, if applicable, to conform to all applicable
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards promulgated by the United States
Department of Transportation pursuant to 49 CFR Part 571 (49 CFR 571.1
et seq.) and 49 CFR Part 567 (49 CFR 567.1 et seq.), as defined in N.J.S.A.
48:16-13.
TAXICAB — Any automobile, taxicab or other vehicle propelled by motor
power engaged in the business of transportation of passengers for hire
or pay within the Borough whether operated from stands in the street
or only on telephone calls to garages or in any other manner. It is the
intention of this chapter to include in the definition of "taxicabs" any motordriven
vehicle, other than stages, omnibuses, and vehicles commonly called
"jitneys," which carries passengers for hire or pay for which public
patronage is solicited and the owner of which holds himself out as a carrier
of passengers.
§ 224-2. Types of licenses.
The following types of licenses are hereby established for the purposes of
this chapter.
A. Taxicab owner's license; filing of certificate.
(1) Each person engaged in the taxicab business and utilizing the
Borough as a principal place of business shall obtain an individual
license for each taxicab.
(2) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-7, any person engaged in the taxicab
business within the Borough whose principal place of business is in
another municipality shall file a certificate from the Clerk of that
§ 220-7 TAXATION § 224-2
220:547
§ 224-3. Taxicab owner's license.
municipality certifying that the owner has complied with the
insurance requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-3.
B. Limousine owner's license. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-17, each person
engaged in the limousine business whose principal place of business is
in the Borough shall obtain an individual license for such business.
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab
business utilizing the Borough as a principal place of business without
first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Application for license.
(1) No taxicab owner's license shall be issued for any vehicle required
to be licensed until the owner files an application for a taxicab
owner's license setting forth a description of the vehicle proposed
to be licensed including the model, serial number and registration
number, the correct name of the owner thereof, and the residence
or address of the principal office of such owner. A complete
application for a taxicab owner's license shall also set forth the
name, address and age of each driver who will be employed by the
owner to drive taxis within the Borough, as well as a certification by
the applicant as to each such driver that the driver is at least 20
years of age, has had at least one year of driving experience, is of
good moral character, has no criminal record and is physically able
to operate a taxicab. The applicant shall have an ongoing
responsibility to update the list of drivers with additions and
deletions as they occur.
(2) The applicant shall further certify that any driver who is convicted
of a crime or of being a disorderly person in this or any other
jurisdiction or who is convicted of a violation of Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall immediately be prevented
from operating any of the applicant's taxicabs within the Borough.
(3) The application for license shall be made to the Borough Clerk on
forms provided by the Clerk's office. Upon receipt of the license
application properly completed, the Borough Clerk shall forward
the application and other necessary documents to the Borough
Council which shall review the application for the purpose of
determining whether or not the applicant has complied with all of
the requirements and conditions of this chapter. Should the
Borough Council find that there has been compliance with the
terms of this chapter, it shall be in the form of a resolution ordering
the issuance of a license by the Borough Clerk.
(4) All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required
fee and shall be made to or through the Borough Clerk upon forms
provided by the Clerk's office. All application fees shall be
§ 224-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 224-3
220:548
nonrefundable, except that when the Borough Clerk shall deny
applicant a license or permit the applicant shall be refunded 50%
of his application fee. The nonrefundability of all application fees
shall be stated on all application forms. Applications may contain
information deemed necessary or specifically called for by
ordinance.
C. Approval of application. The Borough Clerk shall not issue any taxicab
owner's license until the application therefor is approved by the
Borough Council and the conditions precedent to the issuance of the
license as set out in this chapter are complied with. Where a taxicab
owner's license has previously been issued, the approval of the Borough
Council shall not be required as a condition for issuance of additional
vehicle licenses.
D. License fee. The annual fee for a taxicab owner's license shall be $50. A
fee of $35 shall be paid to add additional vehicles under the license.
E. License term. All taxicab owners' licenses shall expire on December 31
following the date of issue and shall be renewed annually on or before
January 1.
F. Posting of license and photo identification of driver. Each taxicab
owner's license issued shall bear a number and shall state the name of
the person to whom it is issued. It shall briefly describe the vehicle
licensed and indicate the motor vehicle license number. Each license
shall be signed by the Borough Clerk and shall have the Borough Seal
affixed thereto. The license shall be placed in a conspicuous location in
the taxicab along with a photo identification of the driver, which clearly
indicates the driver's name, address and driver's license number.
G. Inspections of vehicles. No taxicab owner's license shall be issued for
any vehicle which is not currently registered and inspected by the State
of New Jersey.
H. Liability insurance and power of attorney.
(1) No taxicab owner's license shall be issued for any vehicle required
to be licensed until there is submitted to the Borough Clerk at the
time application for a license is made and approved by the Borough
Clerk as to both form and sufficiency, an insurance policy with the
premium prepaid thereon issued by an insurance company duly
licensed to transact business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey with a policy limit of not less than $1,500,000 against loss
imposed by law, including but not limited to judgment or
settlement, upon such owner for damages on account of bodily
injury, including death, or property damage suffered by one or
more persons arising from or caused by any one accident, including
an act or omission, occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the vehicle so licensed within the Borough. A
combined single limit policy in the amount required by this Code
§ 224-3 TAXATION § 224-3
220:549
§ 224-4. Suspension and revocation.
section shall satisfy this Code section. The operator of each taxicab
shall be covered by the insurance requirements herein referred to.
(2) All taxicab owners' licenses shall be effective and operative only as
long as such insurance policy or policies remain in force and effect.
(3) Concurrently with the filing of the insurance policy referred to
herein, the applicant shall submit a power of attorney whereby the
owner shall appoint the Borough's Chief Financial Officer his true
and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of
any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served
upon the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the
insurance policy, as provided by N.J.S.A. 48:16-5.
I. Maintenance of records. The owner-licensee shall keep and maintain
records of all trips for a period of at least six months, which records
shall at all times be subject to inspection and audit by the Borough
Council.
J. Additional rules and regulations. The Borough Council may, by
resolution, make such rules and regulations in relation to the operation
of taxicabs and the conduct of the operators thereof as it may determine
to be necessary and proper in the best interests of the Borough. A
certified copy of any such resolution shall be forwarded to all licensees
within 10 days following adoption.
A. Any license issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter may be
refused or any license issued may be revoked or a renewal thereof
refused by the Borough Council after notice and hearing for any of the
following causes:
(1) If the license holder or applicant for any license has been
convicted:
(a) Of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction.
(b) Of being a disorderly person in this or any other jurisdiction.
(c) Of a violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
(d) Of a violation of any provision of this chapter.
(2) If the license holder or applicant has any judgment unsatisfied or
record against him arising out of an automobile accident.
(3) If the license holder or applicant has failed or fails to render
reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxicab service.
(4) If the license holder or applicant has failed to comply with all laws
of the State of New Jersey or ordinances of the Borough or rules
and regulations regarding the ownership and operation of taxicabs.
§ 224-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 224-4
220:550
§ 224-5. Taxicab stands.
Taxicab stands shall be established in accordance with Chapter 238,
Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 224-6. Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited.
No driver of any licensed taxicab shall refuse or neglect to carry in his
taxicab any orderly person upon request unless the driver is previously
engaged.
§ 224-7. Exceptions.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to a taxicab owner or
taxicab operator duly licensed by another municipality while such taxicab
is being operated in the Borough solely for the purpose of delivering to a
destination or destinations within the Borough a passenger or passengers
picked up by the taxicab at a point or points outside of the Borough.
§ 224-8. Cruising.
No person shall cruise on the streets of this Borough with any taxicab at any
time for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
§ 224-9. Refusal to carry passengers prohibited.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall not refuse to carry local fares
or passengers.
§ 224-10. Taxicab from outside Borough.
Owners and drivers of taxicabs licensed out of the jurisdiction of this
Borough may be allowed to enter their taxicabs in this Borough, but on
specific call only, whether transporting a passenger within this Borough or
from a point within the Borough, and the name of the passenger so calling
shall be given by the owner or driver when requested by the Borough police
or other lawful persons. Such taxicabs shall not be parked in this Borough,
nor shall the drivers thereof cruise on the streets of this Borough at any
time for the purpose of soliciting passengers, nor shall they, in the nighttime
or other periods of darkness, when in this Borough, permit any advertising
lights on the taxicab to remain lighted, provided that the same or similar
substantial reciprocal rights are granted to owners and drivers of taxicabs
licensed in this Borough by the municipalities in which the aforesaid owners
or drivers are licensed.
§ 224-11. Limousine owner's license.
B. Any contemplated hearing shall be held within 15 days following an
order of suspension upon notice, which notice shall set forth the
reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension.
§ 224-4 TAXATION § 224-11
220:551
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the limousine
business utilizing the Borough as a principal place of business without
first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Application for license.
(1) No limousine owner's license shall be issued for any vehicle
required to be licensed until the owner files an application for a
limousine owner's license setting forth the following:
(a) The owner's name and the address of the owner's principal
place of business in the Borough.
(b) The name of the company providing insurance coverage to the
owner as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 and the number and
expiration date of the required insurance policy.
(c) A description of every limousine insured under the required
policy, including the model and serial number.
(d) The registration number of every limousine insured under the
required policy.
(2) The application for license shall be made to the Borough Clerk on
forms provided. All applications shall be accompanied by the
required fee. All application fees shall be nonrefundable, except
that when the Borough Clerk shall deny an applicant a license, the
applicant shall be refunded 50% of the application fee. The
nonrefundability of application fees shall be stated on all
application forms. Applications may contain information deemed
necessary or specifically called for by ordinance.
(3) Where a limousine owner's license has previously been issued, the
approval of the Borough Council shall not be required as a
condition for issuance of additional vehicle licenses.
C. Approval of application. The Borough Clerk shall not issue any
limousine owner's license until the applicant has demonstrated
satisfactory compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 to
N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.7, and with the conditions precedent to issuance of
the license set forth in this chapter.
D. License fee. The annual fee for a limousine owner's license shall be $50
for the limousine service plus $10 for each limousine which is covered
under the insurance policy set forth in Subsection B(1)(b) of this
section.
E. License term. All limousine owners' licenses shall expire on December
31 following the date of issue and shall be renewed annually on or
before January 1.
F. Posting of license. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-17, each limousine license
shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number and date of
§ 224-11 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 224-11
220:552
expiration of the insurance policy, a description of the limousine insured
thereunder and the registration number of the limousine insured
thereunder. The original license or a copy thereof shall be retained
within the limousine and shall be available for inspection.
G. Liability insurance and power of attorney.
(1) No limousine owners' license shall be issued for any vehicle
required to be licensed until there is submitted to the Borough
Clerk at the time application for a license is made and approved by
the Borough Clerk as to both form and sufficiency an insurance
policy with the premium prepaid thereon issued by an insurance
company duly licensed to transact business under the laws of the
State of New Jersey with a policy limit of not less than $1,500,000
against loss imposed by law, including but not limited to judgment
or settlement, upon such owner for damages on account of bodily
injury, including death, or property damage suffered by one or
more persons arising from or caused by any one accident, including
an act or omission, occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the vehicle so licensed within the Borough. A
combined single limit policy in the amount required by this Code
section shall satisfy this Code section. The operator of each
limousine shall be covered by the insurance requirements herein
referred to.
(2) All limousine owners' licenses shall be effective and operative only
as long as such insurance policy or policies remain in force and
effect.
H. Inspection of vehicles. No limousine owner's license shall be issued for
any vehicle which is not currently registered and inspected in the State
of New Jersey.
I. Additional rules and regulations. In addition to the rules and
regulations set forth herein, the State of New Jersey and the Motor
Vehicle Commission have further statutes, rules and regulations with
regard to the operation of limousines and the conduct and licensing of
operators thereof. The Borough Council may, by resolution, make such
rules and regulations in relation to the operation of limousines and the
conduct of operators thereof as they may determine to be necessary
and proper in the best interests of the Borough. A certified copy of any
such resolution shall be forwarded to all licensees within 10 days
following adoption.
J. Penalties. Any person or persons, firms, corporations or other
organizations found to be in violation of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof in municipal court, in addition to the penalties
provided by N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3, pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $200 for the first offense and for each subsequent offense shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine not to exceed $1,000. The Municipal Court
Judge may also impose, if he or she so desires, a jail term not to exceed
§ 224-11 TAXATION § 224-11
220:553
Chapter 227
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, CELLULAR
(WIRELESS)
§ 227-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTENNA — A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves between earth and/or outer space based structures.
CELLULAR (WIRELESS) TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — An
antenna that is intended for commercial transmission or reception of
personal wireless telephone services communications, and including
commercial mobile services communications and common carrier wireless
exchange access services, and also including any other accessory structures
and equipment necessary for such transmission or reception. A
"freestanding cellular (wireless) telecommunications antenna" is such an
antenna supported by a tower, mast, pole or similar structure designed
primarily for supporting and raising the vertical elevation of such antenna.
§ 227-2. Requirements.
Cellular (wireless) telecommunication antenna are permitted as conditional
uses in the zones and locations set forth in Subsection A hereof, subject
to compliance with all other requirements in this chapter, Chapter 250,
Zoning, and Chapter 212, Subdivision and Site Plan Review, provided that
all of the following requirements are met.
90 days or community service not to exceed 90 days. In addition to
such penalties, every license granted pursuant to this section may be
revoked by the Borough Clerk upon evidence of failure to comply with
any provision of N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 et seq.
A. Permitted location; type of structure. Freestanding telecommunication
antennas are permitted as conditional use in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4
Zones and municipal property subject to Federal Communications
Commission requirements.
B. Proof of need and minimum impact. The applicant shall be required to
demonstrate that the development is the minimal necessary to provide
adequate communications as may be authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission. Included as part of this requirement, the
applicant shall demonstrate at least, but not necessarily limited to, the
following:
(1) That the technology proposed is the least visually intrusive of
various suitable technologies.
(2) That the height of the antennas is the minimum necessary.
§ 224-11 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 227-2
227:554
(3) That collocation of the antenna on other existing antenna
structures, or that location at a less visible location, or that the use
of microcells, providing more numerous antennas at lower heights,
either within or outside the Borough of Florham Park, is either not
practical in order to provide adequate communication or that the
visual impact to the community on the proposed site is less than
would exist at such alternative locations.
(4) That the use of digital technology for other existing and pending
antennas in the area would not eliminate the need for the proposed
antenna.128
C. Maximum height. Buildings shall be subject to the applicable height
limit in the zone district. The height of antennas and related structures
and equipment other than buildings, where permitted, shall be subject
to the following height restrictions:
(1) Freestanding antennas and related structures and equipment,
other than buildings, in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 zones and
municipal property in all zones shall not exceed 150 feet in height.
(2) Freestanding antennas and related structures and equipment,
other than buildings, when mounted on the roof of an existing
building, as permitted herein, shall not exceed the height of such
roof by more than 20 feet.
D. Required yard location and minimum setbacks. The following required
locations and minimum setbacks shall apply:
(1) Freestanding antennas shall not be located in the front yard.
(2) Antennas and related structures and equipment, when mounted on
an existing building roof as permitted herein, shall be located so as
to minimize any detrimental visual impact, as determined to be
appropriate by the Construction Official in the particular situation.
E. Site plan submission and approval.
(1) Cellular and wireless telecommunications antenna permitted as a
conditional use by this chapter are subject to the land development
procedures established by Chapter 212, Subdivision and Site Plan
Review, and Chapter 250, Zoning.
(2) Any application for site plan approval from the Planning Board
shall also be filed concurrently with the Construction Official, who
shall review and submit written comments to the Planning Board
for its consideration in reviewing the application.
F. Mitigation of visual and secured impact. The base of the antenna
support structure and any related structures and equipment shall be
128. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), regarding a site on municipal property, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 26-01.
§ 227-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 227-2
227:555
screened by a landscaped buffer and/or fencing material and secured
from the street and adjacent properties in a manner acceptable to
the Planning Board. If deemed necessary by the Planning Board to
reasonably mitigate the visual impact of the antenna and related
structures and equipment, the color, materials and design of the entire
antenna and related structures and equipment may be required to
be modified in appearance so as to blend in with the surroundings,
as determined by the Planning Board to be appropriate to the site
in the particular situation. The foregoing may include, but shall not
necessarily be limited to, such modifications as special paint treatment,
concealment through architectural means such as a bell tower, steeple,
etc., or the use of camouflage through simulated foliage so as to appear
as a tree. [Amended 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 26-01]
G. May be additional principal use on lot. Notwithstanding any provisions
of this chapter to the contrary, a cellular tele-communications antenna
or antennas are permitted on the same lot as any other permitted
principal use or structure in the permitted zones.
H. Design for future collocation.
(1) Any proposed cellular telecommunications antenna and related
structures shall be designed, structurally, electrically and in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the
antenna is over 100 feet high. The antennas and related structures
shall be designed for future rearrangement of antennas and to
accept antennas mounted at varying heights. If the foregoing
design for collocation requires additional antenna installation
beyond that permitted above, the Planning Board and Borough
Engineer, in determining the acceptable design, shall balance the
benefits and probability of collocation against any detriments
resulting from such additional antenna height.
(2) The foregoing requirements shall also include a letter of
commitment to the Borough Administrator by the applicant,
submitted prior to any application to the Planning Board, to lease
excess space on the facility to other potential users at reasonable
rental rates and on reasonable terms. The letter shall commit the
owner of the antenna and related structures and equipment, as
well as any successors in interest.
I. Abandonment; removal. The applicant shall annually notify the Borough
Administrator on behalf of the Borough of the number of users. Wireless
telecommunications towers and equipment which are not operated for
wireless telecommunications purposes for a continuous period of six
months shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the
owner, at the owner's expense. This removal shall occur within 90 days
at the end of such six-month period of inactivity. If such wireless
telecommu-nications tower is not removed within the ninety-day period,
the municipality may remove the tower and its structures at the owner's
§ 227-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 227-2
227:556
Chapter 227A
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OFWAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cellular (wireless) telecommunications
antennas — See Ch. 227.
§ 227A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTENNA and CELLULAR (WIRELESS) TELECOMMUNICATIONS
ANTENNA — Shall be as defined in Chapter 227, Telecommunications
Antennas, Cellular (Wireless).
EXISTING POLE — A utility pole that has been installed in the right-ofway
prior to the filing of an application hereunder for the installation of
telecommunications facilities, or installed by a utility company pursuant to
consent previously granted by the Borough.
NEW POLE — A utility pole that is not an existing pole and that is proposed
to be installed solely for the purpose of supporting telecommunications
facilities. For the avoidance of doubt, a replacement of an existing pole that
is of substantially similar height and appearance to the existing pole it is
replacing shall not be considered a new pole.
PARTY — An individual, a corporation, a limited-liability company, a general
or limited partnership, a joint venture, a business trust, or any other form
of business entity or association.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The space in, upon, above, along, across, and over the
public streets, roads, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, and places,
including all public utility easements and public service easements as the
same now or hereafter may exist, that are under the jurisdiction of the
expense. If the facility is to be retained, its owner shall provide proof
that the facility will be reused within one year of such discontinuation.
If the facility is not used within one year, a demolition permit shall
be obtained and the facility removed. Upon removal, the site shall
be cleaned, cleared, restored and landscaped to preconstruction
conditions. To ensure the removal of abandoned towers and related
telecommunications facilities, the facility owner shall be responsible to
post a bond at the time a construction permit is issued to cover the
costs of tower removal, disposal and site restoration.
J. Enforcement. This chapter is enforced by the Borough Construction
Official and/or Zoning Officer.
§ 227-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 227A-1
227:557
Borough of Florham Park or the jurisdiction of the County of Morris for
which municipal consent may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:16-6.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Antenna(s) and related and
ancillary structures and equipment.
UTILITY POLE — A vertical structure installed in the right-of-way, which
structure can support utility wires and cables, streetlights and related
ancillary equipment, and is also capable of supporting telecommunications
facilities.
§ 227A-2. Requirements for new telecommunications facilities
using existing poles.
A. Any party that is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) or authorized by the Board of Public Utilities (BPU) to provide
telecommunications services in the State of New Jersey shall be entitled
to submit to the Borough Construction Official (the Applicable Official)
an application to install a telecommunications facility within the public
right-of-way, utilizing an existing pole. Any such application shall be
submitted, in writing, to the Applicable Official, and shall include five
copies of each of the following documents:
(1) A narrative explanation of the proposed facility.
(2) A copy of the party's BPU authority or FCC license authorizing such
party to provide telecommunications services.
(3) A plot plan or detailed sketch depicting the proposed installation,
which shall include a key map depicting the site location relative to
the nearest cross street, overhead and elevation views, the pole
number (if applicable), the number of antennas, the model of the
antennas, the dimensions of the antennas, and any specific
information requested by the Applicable Official.
B. If requested by the Applicable Official, the party shall submit a
structural report, which shall be signed and sealed by a New Jersey
licensed engineer.
C. The Applicable Official shall submit a copy of the applicant's petition to
the Borough Council, together with all supporting documentation
supplied by the applicant, as well as any information deemed relevant
by the Applicable Official.
D. Upon receipt of the application package from the Construction Official,
the Borough Clerk shall schedule the matter for consideration by the
Borough Council during a Council meeting, and shall advise the
applicant of the scheduled Council meeting, and that the applicant shall
be present for such meeting. The Borough Clerk shall provide notice of
the hearing as required by law. At such time, the Council shall consider
the application.
§ 227A-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 227A-2
227:558
§ 227A-3. Requirements for new telecommunications facilities
using new poles.
If the application is for installation of a new pole with antennas to be
attached to the pole, within the Borough rights-of-way, the applicant shall
E. If the application is in compliance with all requirements of this
Ordinance, then the Council shall adopt a resolution to approve the
application and a related agreement. The resolution may be adopted at
the hearing at which the application was reviewed, or at the next
subsequent Council meeting. A form of agreement to be adopted is
attached hereto as Exhibit A.129 The agreement may be altered as
necessary to suit the appropriate circumstance and shall include as
exhibits sketches of the approved installations.
F. The applicant shall file for, pay any filing fees and obtain any necessary
permits required from the Borough pursuant to the applicable
Construction Code or other subcode.
G. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain any and all approvals
necessary from the owner and/or operator of the utility pole in question
to install antennas and related equipment on the pole. If the utility pole
is within the right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the County of Morris,
the applicant shall obtain the approval of the county to install its
facilities. Any resolution adopted by the Borough Council in this regard
shall indicate that the Borough's authority is limited to authorizing the
antennas and related equipment to be located within the public right-ofway,
and the Borough has no authority with respect to obtaining
approval from the utility pole owner and/or operator to permit any
antennas or related equipment to be located on the pole.
H. No antenna or attachment to an existing utility pole shall exceed the
height of that pole by more than five feet.
I. No antenna shall be attached to an existing utility pole that is located
less than 150 feet away from another utility pole that an antenna is
already attached to; provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the
collocation of two antennas on a single utility pole.
J. There shall be an initial application fee of $2,500 for an application to
install up to five telecommunications facilities within the public rightsof-
way. The application fee for subsequent or additional
telecommunications facilities by the same applicant shall be $500 per
telecommunications facility. Additionally, there shall be an escrow
deposit of $1,000 for said application(s), which escrow deposit shall be
used to reimburse Borough construction and inspection fees and shall
be subject to replenishment by the applicant upon request by the
Borough.
129. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 227A-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 227A-3
227:559
follow the process set forth in § 227A-2 herein, provided that the following
requirements are satisfied:
§ 227A-4. Board approval.
Any application for a new pole which does not satisfy these requirements
shall require approval from the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 as applicable.
Chapter 228
TOWING/WRECKER OPERATORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 235.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
§ 228-1. License required; number of licenses issued.
A. The new pole shall be no higher than 115% of the average height of the
existing poles within a radius of 500 feet.
B. The new pole shall have no antennas or attachments which extend more
than five feet above the pole.
C. The location of the new pole shall be in a zone where the use is
permitted as identified in § 227-2A; provided however, that if the
location is in a zone not identified in § 227.2A, but the new pole meets
the requirements of Subsections A and B above, and is in a
neighborhood where the new pole is consistent with the neighboring
streetscape, the Applicable Official shall have the discretion to
recommend to the Borough Council that the new pole be approved in
accordance with the process set forth in § 227A-2 herein, subject to the
additional requirement that the applicant give notice by certified mail
to all property owners located within 200 feet of the proposed location
at least 10 days prior to the hearing before the Borough Council.
A. No towing operator on or after June 1, 2005, shall operate within the
Borough of Florham Park for police-requested towing services and/or
storage services unless the towing operator has obtained a license
issued by the Borough of Florham Park.
B. The requirement for an initial license under this chapter shall
commence on December 1, 2001, and licenses shall be required to be
renewed each year thereafter.
C. There shall be no limitation on the number of licenses issued and in
effect at one time, so long as each licensee meets the requirements of
§ 227A-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 228-1
227:560
§ 228-2. Exceptions to license requirement.
Owner-requested service. No tow operator license shall be required for
the on-site repair, and/or the towing or storage of any vehicle when the
request is received by the towing operator from the owner/operator prior
to a police request, or if the owner/operator of a vehicle requests that the
police contact a tow company of his choice and on the owner's/operator's
behalf.
§ 228-3. Issuance of license; term; insurance; storage. [Amended
5-17-2005 by Ord. No. 19-05; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-3]
this chapter and complies with the Tow Operators Rules/Regulations
and Guidelines established by the Police Department of the Borough of
Florham Park.
D. The application for a license under this chapter shall be upon forms
made available through the Office of the Borough Clerk.
A. Applications for an annual license or the renewal thereof must be
received by the Borough Clerk before December 1 of each year for
processing before January 1 of the license year.
B. The Borough Clerk will forward all qualified applications (a completed
application with applicant fee paid) to the Chief of Police within five
days of receipt. The Chief of Police will conduct, or cause to be
conducted, an investigation of each application to determine the truth
and accuracy of the information contained in said application,
background check, survey of equipment, compliance with the New
Jersey State Police Application and Minimal Requirements for Vehicular
Towing (hereafter "NJ State Police Rules") and such other pertinent
matters related to potential licensing or renewal. Upon concluding his
review, the Chief of Police will return a copy of the application to the
Borough Clerk, along with his recommendation for approval or
disapproval of a license, and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. The
Borough Clerk shall issue a tow operator license to each qualified
applicant, and thereafter, the licensee's name shall be placed on the
Florham Park Police Department licensed tow operator's list. The Clerk
shall forward to any person rejected for a license, a copy of his
application with the reasons for disapproval noted thereon. There shall
be no refund of application fees.
C. The term of the license shall be for one calendar year commencing
January 1 and expiring on December 31 of that year. The license shall
list the name of the tow operator business and each employee licensed
thereunder. [Amended 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-36]
D. Each licensee shall be required to maintain, in full force and effect
during the term of its license, insurance coverage in accordance with
the NJ State Police Rules and provide proof of such coverages to the
Borough Clerk at the time of filing of its license application.
§ 228-1 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 228-3
227:561
§ 228-4. Application fees.
All application fees submitted to the Borough are nonrefundable and shall
be utilized to offset the cost of processing of the application and license.
Type Fee
Initial application fee $150
Renewal application fee $100
§ 228-5. Investigation and inspection. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-3]
§ 228-6. Suspension and revocation of license. [Amended 2-26-2008
by Ord. No. 08-3]
E. In the event of any revocation or termination of a license for failure to
comply with this chapter or the NJ State Police Rules, no refund shall be
given, and payment of another initial application fee shall be required
upon applying for reinstatement.
F. All operators will be required to store vehicles which are towed or
impounded in either the Boroughs of Florham Park, Chatham or
Madison or in the Townships of East Hanover, Hanover or Morris. The
proximity of these towns to the Borough of Florham Park will serve to
reduce the distance owners must travel to retrieve their vehicles and
will make all such vehicles readily available to the Florham Park Police
Department.
A. The Police Department of the Borough of Florham Park may conduct a
thorough background check of the licensee, its officers, principals, and
employees prior to granting a license. No applicant will be granted a
license unless found to be in compliance with the NJ State Police Rules.
A conviction for felony and/or a motor vehicle record evidencing unsafe
driving habits or a disregard for the New Jersey motor vehicle laws will
be considered ample reason to disqualify any applicant. Each
prospective licensee shall furnish, with its application, executed
background check waivers for all officers, principals and employees, in
the form provided by the Chief of Police.
B. Each licensee shall submit the names of all employees newly hired
during the term of the license for a background check which may be
performed by the Borough Police Department prior to such individual's
performing any services as described in this chapter. The license shall
be subject to termination for failure to submit employees to such a
background check.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the right, in his sole discretion, to
suspend any license issued under this chapter upon the determination
that there has been a violation of the NJ State Police Rules by the
licensee or its employees.
§ 228-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 228-7
227:562
§ 228-7. Rules and regulations; rates. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-3]
§ 228-8. Indemnification.
All licensees, by applying for and accepting a tow operator's license under
this chapter, agree to and shall indemnify and hold the Borough of Florham
Park and its officers and employees harmless from any liability, expense or
costs of suit, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs, arising out of
or resulting from any action of the tow operator in performing towing and
storage services in the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 228-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-16-2006 by Ord. No.
10-06]
Any person or entity who shall be found to have violated any section of
this chapter, or to have submitted a false or misleading application, shall,
in addition to penalties hereinafter provided in this chapter, be subject
to removal from the tow operators list and/or revocation of their license.
Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the person or entity shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 and/or by imprisonment for up to
90 days, and/or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in
the discretion of the Court.
Chapter 229
TREES
§ 229-1. Purpose.
A. The NJ State Police Rules are hereby adopted by the Borough as
constituting the rules and regulations of the Borough as to the licensing
and operational requirements for towing operators conducting business
in the Borough, except that where such NJ State Police Rules refer to
the New Jersey State Police, they shall be read to refer to the Florham
Park Police Department, and where the NJ State Police Rules refer to
the Station Commander, the Chief of Police shall be substituted
therefor. Such Rules shall be available for public inspection at the
offices of the Borough Clerk and Chief of Police.
B. Rates. The Borough hereby adopts the maximum rates allowed for
towing and storage by licensees established by the New Jersey State
Police. Such rate schedule shall be available for public inspection at the
offices of the Borough Clerk and Chief of Police.
A. The Borough of Florham Park has concern that indiscriminate,
uncontrolled and excessive destruction, removal and clear-cutting of
trees upon lots and tracts of land results in increased drainage control
costs, increased soil erosion and sedimentation, decreased fertility of
the soil, degradation of water resources, decreased groundwater
§ 228-7 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 229-1
227:563
§ 229-2. Applicability.
All applications to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for
approval of a major subdivision, minor subdivision or site plan requiring
tree removal shall include an application for a tree removal permit. All
applications for demolition permits for the purpose of tearing down a house
for reconstruction in the Borough shall also require a tree removal permit.
Any residential, commercial, business or industrial lot owner wishing to
remove trees upon said lot must comply with the § 229-8 of this chapter. The
application shall be submitted to the Engineering Department for review
and approval by the Borough Engineer or his/her designee. No tree that was
planted or preserved as part of any landscape plan or in accordance with
recharge, increased buildup of atmospheric carbon, increased dust and
decreased property values, all of which negatively affect the character
of the Borough of Florham Park and the aesthetic beauty.
B. The Borough of Florham Park realizes that excessive removal of trees
adversely affects the health, safety and general welfare of our residents
and desires to regulate and control indiscriminate and excessive cutting
of trees by preserving the maximum possible number of trees in the
course of development of a site and in the Borough as a whole, ensuring
that the health of trees preserved on a site is maintained throughout the
development process, protecting larger, older specimens of trees and
encouraging innovative design and grading to promote the preservation
of existing trees.
C. It is recognized that there is a strong relationship between the integrity
of the Borough of Florham Park and the region's water resources, the
development on steep slopes, tree removal, soil disturbance,
stormwater management and the general use of land resources.
Therefore, the appropriate management of these resources is an
important health, safety and general welfare concern. Managing the
Borough's tree resources is consistent with the Borough's stateapproved
Community Forestry Management Plan, as in P.L. 1996, c.
135.130
D. Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. The Borough's Community
Forestry Management Plan is intended to meet the objectives of
preserving, protecting, enhancing and maintaining trees and providing
opportunities for the continued use of forest resources which are
compatible with the maintenance of the environment. This will be
accomplished by ensuring proper management of forest and trees
through the application of sound management practices. To that end, it
shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison, or in any other manner
destroy or cause to be destroyed any trees covered by this chapter,
except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
§ 229-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 229-2
227:564
any subdivision or site plan approval shall be removed, except for such trees
directed to be removed pursuant to § 229-5F through I.
§ 229-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Florham Park Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
CALIPER — The standard measure of tree size for trees to be newly planted.
The measurement is taken six inches above the ground for trees four inches
in diameter or less and 12 inches above the ground for trees over four
inches in diameter.
CLEAR-CUTTING — The removal of all standing trees on a lot or a portion
of a lot.
COMMUNITY FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan developed by the
Borough outlining the goals and objectives for managing trees on municipal
property with the intent of minimizing liability to the municipality and
maximizing the useful life of the tree resource. The plan is approved by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Parks and
Forestry, New Jersey Forest Service.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT — The diameter of a tree measured 4 1/
2 feet (forestry method) above the ground level on the downhill side for
existing trees. "Diameter at breast height" may appear as the abbreviation
"DBH" (diameter breast height).
DRIPLINE — A limiting line established by a series of perpendicular drop
points marking the maximum radius of the crown of an existing tree, but not
less than six feet from the trunk, whichever is greater; and within which no
construction or disturbance shall occur.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A nursery-grown certified tree, properly balled,
marked with a durable label indicating genus, species and variety, and
satisfying the standards established for nursery stock and installation
thereof, as set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The removal of larger trees on an individual basis
while leaving trees of lesser size.
SILVICULTURE — The management of any wooded tract of land to ensure
its continued survival and welfare, whether for commercial or
noncommercial purposes, pursuant to a plan approved by the New Jersey
Bureau of Forestry.
THINNING — The removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased or
damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the development of remaining
trees on the lot.
TREE — Any self-supporting woody plant, deciduous or coniferous, which
reaches a typical mature height of 12 feet or more at maturity and has a
typical DBH of four inches or greater.
§ 229-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 229-3
227:565
TREE CANOPY — The top layer or crown of mature trees.
TREE FUND — A fund established by the governing body for the
administration and promotion of tree resource sustainability projects and
practices which may be consistent with the Community Stewardship
Incentive Program as outlined within the New Jersey Shade Tree and
Community Forestry Assistance Act, P.L. 1996, c. 135.131
TREE PLANTING PLAN — A specific plan adopted by the governing body
for the location and placement of trees on public property.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough Engineer, or
his/her designee, to remove or destroy a tree or trees.
TREE REPLACEMENT AND REFORESTATION PLAN — A specific plan for
replacement of removed trees in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
WOODED ACRES PERMITTED FOR DEVELOPMENT — The wooded lands
within a lot or tract which are not specifically excluded from development
by any federal, state, county or municipal law or ordinance, deed restriction
or covenant running with the lands. For purposes of this chapter, those
lands specifically eliminated from consideration as wooded acres permitted
for development include, but are not limited to, wetlands as defined by
N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 229-4. Tree cutting or removal restricted.
With the exception of the exemptions set forth in § 229-5, no person shall
cut or remove, or cause to be cut or removed, any existing tree with a
diameter at breast height (DBH) of 10 inches or greater upon any lands
within the Borough of Florham Park unless the cutting or removal can be
accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 229-5. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from this chapter:
A. Commercial nurseries and fruit orchards.
B. Christmas tree farms.
C. Residential lots that are located in the R-15 Zone where removal is no
more than three trees with a ten-inch DBH or less in any two-year
period.
D. Residential lots that are located in all other zones and are removing no
more than six trees with a ten-inch DBH or less in any two-year period.
E. Any tree which is part of a cemetery.
131. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
§ 229-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 229-5
227:566
§ 229-6. Tree removal requirements for major and minor
subdivisions and site plans.
Each application to the Planning Board for approval of a major or minor
subdivision or a site plan that requires the removal of trees shall include
an application for a tree removal permit. The application and development
proposal shall conform to the following provisions:
F. Trees directed to be removed by municipal, county, state or federal
authority pursuant to law.
G. Removal of trees which are dead, dying or diseased, or trees which have
suffered damage, or any trees whose angle of growth makes them a
hazard to structures, roads, or human life. Dead or diseased trees shall
not be turned into mulch and applied to the site, but shall be disposed of
in a manner so as not to disease other trees on the site.
H. Removal of trees which appear to cause structural damage to buildings
or foundations.
I. Any tree growing on or over a public right-of-way or public land.
J. Pruning or removal of trees within the right-or-way by utility companies
for maintenance of utility wires or pipelines and the pruning of trees
within sight easements.
K. Trees removed in conjunction with farmland greater than five acres in
size that will be actively devoted primarily to agricultural uses and that
yield a minimum annual income of $500 from said farming activities,
except that where the owner desires to remove any trees for the
purpose of expanding farmlands, an inventory of trees to be removed,
identified by size, species, and common name shall be prepared and
filed with the Engineering Department prior to any tree removal. In the
event the expanded farmlands are not actively devoted primarily to
farming activities for a period of seven years following tree removal, the
tree replacement provisions contained in § 229-7 shall apply.
L. Those projects which have received major subdivision or site plan
approval prior to the effective date of this chapter and amended major
subdivision and site plans shall be exempt from the provisions of
§ 229-6, but must still apply for a tree removal permit prior to cutting
pursuant to § 229-8.
A. Application form. The application form may be obtained from the
Construction Office and shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address (street, lot and block) of the owner of the
premises and status of legal entity (individual, partnership,
corporation of this or any other state, etc.);
(2) A description of the premises where removal is to take place,
including lot and block numbers, and street address as assigned;
§ 229-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 229-6
227:567
(3) A list of all trees to be removed with a DBH equal to or greater than
six inches identified by size and species, including total number of
each species to be removed;
(4) The purpose for tree removal (new construction, street or roadway,
driveway, utility easement, recreation areas, parking lot, etc);
(5) Proof that there are no delinquent property taxes or assessments
due on the property for which the application is submitted; and
(6) Such other information as may be deemed necessary in order to
effectively process and decide such application.
B. Landscape plan or tree replacement and reforestation plan. The
following information shall be provided on a landscape plan prepared
by a registered landscape architect or registered professional engineer
and submitted with the application for tree removal. Where
replacement of trees is required, the plan must depict that tree
replacement shall occur as provided in § 229-7. The landscape plan
must be submitted prior to tree removal permit approval.
(1) Base information.
(a) Location of existing tree canopy within the property
boundaries.
(b) Location of individual trees with a DBH equal to or greater
than six inches identified by size, species and common name
within the area of development/limit of disturbance.
(c) Location of individual existing trees and their driplines noted
for preservation within the area of development/limit of
disturbance identified by size and species. Where clusters of
trees exist on the site or are contiguous with adjacent sites,
fragmentation of the cluster shall be avoided where possible.
(d) Location of all required replacement trees.
(e) Clear labeling of the area(s) intended for tree/vegetation
removal.
(f) Tree protection material details and limit of disturbance line.
(g) Location of existing and proposed buildings/structures.
(h) All bodies of water and wetlands, including water retention
and detention areas.
(i) Location of all existing driveways and parking areas.
(2) Design requirements.
§ 229-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 229-6
227:568
(a) Only those trees necessary to permit the construction of
buildings, structures, streets, driveways, infrastructure and
other authorized improvements shall be removed.
(b) No more than 60% of the existing tree canopy within the
property boundaries shall be removed. The location of the
remaining 40% of the tree canopy to be preserved shall be
noted on the landscape plan. Steep slope limits of disturbance
shall supersede this section when appropriate.
(c) No more than 10% of existing trees with a DBH equal to or
greater than 10 inches within the area of development/limit of
disturbance shall be removed unless the applicant shall replant
trees removed in accordance with § 229-7.
(d) Input from a designated subcommittee of the Board and/or the
Environmental Commission shall be requested for
recommended areas of tree preservation.
(e) Landscape standards may be waived by the Board when trees
and/or shrub masses are preserved and/or relocated on site
that duplicate or essentially duplicate the landscape
requirements contained in this section.
(f) The appropriate reviewing authority shall have the option of
requiring a conservation easement to protect any or all trees or
tree canopy areas to remain on site.
C. Site protection.
(1) Tree protection measures and the limit of disturbance line shown
on the landscape plan shall be provided in the field with snow
fencing or other durable material and verified by the Borough
Engineer or other designated official prior to soil disturbance.
(2) Protective barriers shall not be supported by the plants they are
protecting, but shall be self-supporting. Barriers shall be a
minimum of four feet high and shall last until construction is
complete.
(3) Chain-link fencing may be required for tree protection if warranted
by site conditions and relative rarity of the plant.
(4) Snow fencing used for tree protection shall be firmly secured along
the dripline, but shall be no less than six feet from the trunk.
(5) The grade of the land located within the dripline shall not be raised
or lowered more than six inches unless compensated by welling or
retaining wall methods; and in no event shall welling or retaining
wall methods be less than six feet from the trunk of a tree.
§ 229-6 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 229-6
227:569
§ 229-7. Tree replacement and reforestation.
(6) No soil stockpiling, storage of building materials, construction
equipment or vehicles shall be permitted within the dripline or
within six feet of any remaining trees, whichever is greater.
(7) Any clearing within the dripline, or within six feet of the trunk of a
remaining tree, whichever is greater, shall be done by handoperated
equipment.
(8) Where a tree that has been noted for preservation is severely
damaged and unable to survive, tree replacement shall occur as
provided in § 229-7.
A. All replacement trees shall be planted on site in accordance with the
following tree replacement schedule. However, if the site in question
cannot physically accommodate the total replacement amount of trees,
then the applicant may plant tree replacements off site on private
property owned by the applicant; or may plant tree replacements off
site on Borough-owned property or rights-of-way pursuant to the
Borough's Tree Planting Plan and upon direction and supervision of the
Department of Public Works and/or Borough Engineer; or shall make
payment to the Tree Fund in accordance with the tree replacement
schedule below; or any approved combination thereof. The applicant's
tree replacement plan shall be submitted in writing to the Borough
Engineer for his or her approval.
B. A Tree Fund shall be established by the governing body of the Borough
of Florham Park to receive and disburse replacement tree
contributions. Appropriations from the Tree Fund shall be authorized
by the governing body with consideration of the Environmental
Commission's and/or Borough Engineer's recommendation in
accordance with the Borough's Tree Planting Plan. The primary
purpose of said fund is to provide for the planting of replacement trees
on public land. The Tree Fund will also cover administrative costs to
implement plans, specifications, and bid documents for planting
contracts on public lands only, in accordance with the Public Contracts
Law.132 The Tree Fund may also be used to disperse tree vouchers from
a tree nursery to residents who desire to obtain a tree for planting
within the front yard only of private property where planting in the
Borough's right-of-way is not possible due to the presence of utility
lines.
C. The replacement of trees shall occur as prescribed in the following
table:
132. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 229-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 229-7
227:570
§ 229-8. Tree removal and protection on lots zoned residential,
commercial, industrial and business, excluding major and minor
subdivisions and site plans.
Tree Replacement Schedule
DBH Caliper of Existing Tree
Removed
(inches)
Number of Replacement Trees
(3-inch DBH Caliper)
Between 10 and 12 3
Between 12 and 18 4
Between 18 and 24 5
Between 24 and 30 7
Between 30 and 36 10
36 or greater The equivalent of 3-inch caliper
trees or greater needed to equal
the DBH of the removed tree
D. The dollar amount paid to the Tree Fund per replacement tree shall be
$325 per required replacement tree.
E. Replacement trees shall be of nursery-grade quality, balled and
burlapped, and shall be in accordance with standards set forth in ANSI
Z60.1, American Standard for Nursery Stock.
F. The type of replacement tree(s) shall be the same as the species
removed from the site or other trees indigenous to the area as approved
by the Engineering Department in accordance with standards
developed by the Environmental Commission.
G. The planting of all replacement trees shall be done by or supervised by
a person with horticultural training in tree care and planting methods.
H. Newly planted replacement trees shall be monitored for a period of one
year to ensure the health of the trees. If the replacement trees die
within the one-year period, the developer/applicant shall replace the
dead tree.
A. Applicability. For any residential lot that is located in the R-15 Zone
with a tree removal rate of more than three trees with a ten-inch DBH
or greater in a two-year period, or any residential lot that is located in
all other residential zones with a tree removal rate of more than six
trees with a ten-inch DBH or greater in a two-year period, an
application for a tree removal permit shall be submitted to the
Engineering Department. The application and development proposal
shall conform to the provisions contained herein.
B. The provisions of this section shall also apply to all lots zoned
commercial, industrial and business.
§ 229-7 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 229-8
227:571
C. Application form. The application form shall be available from the
Engineering Department and shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address (street and lot and block) of the owner of the
premises and status of legal entity (individual, partnership,
corporation of this or any other state, etc.);
(2) A description of the premises where removal is to take place,
including lot and block numbers, and street address as assigned;
(3) A list of all trees to be removed with a DBH equal to or greater than
10 inches identified by size and species, including total number of
each species to be removed. No more than 10% of existing trees
with a DBH equal to or greater than 10 inches within the area of
development/limit of disturbance shall be removed unless the
applicant shall replant trees removed in accordance with § 229-7;
(4) The purpose for tree removal (construction, building addition,
street or roadway, driveway, utility easement, recreation area,
patio, parking lot, etc.);
(5) Such other information as may be deemed necessary in order to
effectively process the application.
D. Sketch data.
(1) Base information. A sketch shall be provided showing the location
of the tree(s) to be removed with a DBH of 10 inches or greater.
(2) Design requirements. Trees to be removed shall be only those trees
necessary to permit the construction of buildings or building
additions, structures, driveways, septic fields, decks and lawn
areas. The trees removed shall not constitute more than 1/2 acre or
shall be no more than 50% of the lot size, whichever is less.
E. Site protection. Site protection measures shall be provided in
accordance with § 229-6C.
F. Tree removal criteria. In addition to the design requirements stated
above, the Engineering Department may grant a tree removal permit
based upon one or more of the following circumstances:
(1) Where the location of an existing tree provides no other alternative
but to place a structure outside the permitted building setbacks.
(2) Where the location of an existing tree negatively impacts on an
existing septic field.
(3) Where no other alternative exists for the placement of a building,
building addition, structure, septic field, driveway, deck, patio or
lawn area, for the recreational use by the inhabitants of the
building or dwelling, or any other authorized improvements, but in
the vicinity of an existing tree.
§ 229-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 229-8
227:572
§ 229-9. Review standards.
In accordance with the design requirements provided in this chapter, unless
otherwise indicated herein, a tree removal permit may only be granted for
the following reasons and under the following terms and conditions:
(4) Where the location or growth of a tree inhibits the enjoyment of any
outdoor pool, patio or deck.
(5) Where the location, angle or growth of an existing tree makes it a
hazard to structures or human life.
G. Review by Planning Board. If the request for tree removal is rejected by
the Borough Engineer because, in his/her opinion, it does not satisfy the
above criteria or if, in his/her opinion, the proposed tree removal would
cause erosion, silting, soil instability, or drainage problems, then the
application may be forwarded to the Planning Board for action.
H. Tree replacement. Tree replacement shall be accordance with the
provisions in § 229-7 of this chapter.
A. Where the area proposed for tree removal is to be occupied by a
building or other structure; a street or roadway; a driveway; a parking
area; a patio; a swimming pool; a recreation area; a power, drainage,
sewerage or any other utility line, easement, or right-of-way; or where
the area of tree removal is 20 feet or less from either side of or around
the perimeter of any of the foregoing, whichever is applicable.
B. In areas proposed for tree removal which are not to be occupied by any
of the uses or facilities set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
Borough Engineer or his/her designee shall assess the following:
(1) That the continued presence of such tree or trees is likely to cause
danger to persons or property upon the property for which removal
is sought, or upon adjoining or nearby property.
(2) That the area where such tree or trees are located has a cut,
depression or fill of land, or the topography of the land is of such a
character as to be injurious or dangerous to such tree or trees, or to
a tree or trees located nearby.
(3) That the removal of trees is for the purpose of conducting forestry
activities, which activities include, but are not limited to, the
harvesting of trees in accordance with a forest management plan
and the thinning out of a heavily wooded area, with some trees to
be removed and other trees to remain.
C. Upon an express finding by the Borough Engineer or his/her designee
that the proposed tree removal will not result in or cause, increase or
aggravate any or all of the following conditions: impaired growth or
development of remaining trees or shrubs on the property of the
applicant or upon adjacent property, soil erosion, sedimentation and
§ 229-8 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 229-9
227:573
§ 229-10. Protection of trees.
Whenever an application for tree removal is granted under the terms and
conditions of this chapter, the following protective measures shall be
observed:
§ 229-11. Permit approval.
dust, drainage or sewerage problems, dangerous or hazardous
conditions, and depression in the land value of the subject property and
properties in the neighboring area.
D. The Borough Engineer or his/her designee shall have the power to affix
reasonable conditions to the granting of the permit for the removal of
trees. If the applicant does not agree with the existing tree assessment
or any conditions of the permit by the Borough Engineer or his/her
designee, the applicant may obtain the services of a certified tree
expert or arborist, at the applicant's cost, to prepare a report for the
Borough Engineer or his/her designee for reconsideration.
A. No material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within the
dripline of any existing tree to be preserved.
B. Except while engaged in tree removal, no equipment shall be operated
within six feet of any tree protected by this chapter, nor shall such
equipment be operated at any time in such a manner as to break, tear,
bruise, decorticate or otherwise injure any living or dormant tree.
A. Time limits for approval.
(1) Where the permit application is submitted as a part of an
application for major subdivision, minor subdivision or site plan
approval, the time for approval shall be governed by the timing
requirements applicable to major subdivision, minor subdivision or
site plans.
(2) Where the application is made in connection with a residential,
commercial, business or industrial lot that is not part of a major or
minor subdivision or site plan, the Borough Engineer shall act on
the application within 30 days of its receipt or within such
additional time as is consented to by the applicant. Failure to act
within 30 days, or any extension thereof, shall be deemed to be an
approval of the application and thereafter, a tree removal permit
shall be issued.
B. Approval by default with regard to major subdivision, minor subdivision
and site plan applications shall not be deemed to be a waiver of a tree
removal permit.
§ 229-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 229-12
227:574
§ 229-12. Duration of permits.
Permits granted for the removal of trees under the terms and conditions
of this chapter shall run with the land and shall remain in force and effect
for the following periods of time, and not thereafter. Once the permit has
expired, a new application must be submitted for review and a new permit
issued.
§ 229-13. Inspection.
§ 229-14. Notice of commencement of tree removal.
A. If granted for a lot or parcel of land for which no building permit is
required: one year from the date of issuance.
B. If granted for a lot or parcel of land for which a building permit is
required, but for which no site plan approval is required by the
Planning Board: until expiration of the building permit granted with
such tree removal permit.
C. If granted for a lot or parcel of land for which site plan approval from
the Planning Board is required as a condition precedent to obtaining a
building permit: until expiration of the site plan approval, or expiration
of the building permit issued after such site plan approval.
D. If granted for a lot or parcel of land for which minor subdivision is
sought: one year from the date of granting such minor subdivision.
E. If granted for a lot or parcel of land for which preliminary approval of a
major subdivision is sought: until expiration of such approval.
A. Prior to taking final action upon any application for tree removal, an
inspection of the site shall be made by the Borough Engineer or his or
her designee.
B. Prior to any tree removal, all trees planned for removal must be marked
and areas to be cleared identified for inspection by a municipal
representative.
C. The Borough Engineer or his or her designee shall periodically inspect
the site throughout the duration of construction in order to ensure
compliance with this chapter. Such inspection shall be made of the site
referred to in the application, and of contiguous and adjoining lands, as
well as of lands in the vicinity of the application, for the purpose of
determining drainage conditions and physical conditions existing
thereon.
A. The holder of a tree removal permit shall notify the Engineering
Department, in writing, by telephone or by a personal visit, of the intent
to remove trees before cutting them down. This shall be done at least
four business days in advance of when the tree removal activity will
commence.
§ 229-12 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, § 229-14
227:575
§ 229-15. Fees.
§ 229-16. Violations and penalties.
When regulated trees are removed without a tree removal permit, the
affected areas shall be replanted to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer. A fine of $250 will be imposed for failure to notify the Borough
Engineer of tree cutting within exception limits. Further, a fine per tree
for exceeding the limits of cutting within the exception limits for up to
and including the allowed number of trees in any and all zones in the
Borough will be subject to the following fines: $1,500 per tree for anything
beyond that number or for any tree cutting without a permit when a permit
is required. The removal of trees without a permit would also require
replanting trees in accordance with § 229-7 of this chapter.
Chapter 235
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
B. The notice shall also include information as to the manner of disposal of
the removed trees.
A. A review fee of $25 shall accompany the application for a tree removal
permit, if one is required. This fee is per event, not a fee for each tree.
This fee will be deposited into the Tree Fund.
B. The tree replacement fee will be in accordance with § 229-7.
C. Tree Fund. A Tree Fund shall be established by the governing body of
the Borough of Florham Park to receive and disburse replacement tree
contributions. Appropriations from the Tree Fund shall be authorized
by the governing body with consideration of the Environmental
Commission's and/or Borough Engineer's recommendation in
accordance with the Borough's Tree Planting Plan. The primary
purpose of said fund is to provide for the planting of replacement trees
on public land. The Tree Fund will also cover administrative costs to
implement plans, specifications, and bid documents for planting
contracts on public lands only, in accordance with the Public Contracts
Law.133 The Tree Fund may also be used to disperse tree vouchers from
a tree nursery to residents who desire to obtain a tree for planting
within the front yard only of private property where planting in the
Borough's right-of-way is not possible due to the presence of utility
lines.
133. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 229-14 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 229-16
235:576
§ 235-1. Storage and abandonment prohibited.
§ 235-2. Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply to an owner, possessor or occupant of lands in
the Borough who stores, keeps, places, parks or accumulates four or fewer
currently licensed motor vehicles, automobiles or machines not currently
being used for transportation or being in need of repair, or not more than
four unlicensed motor vehicles, kept in an enclosed building. This section
also does not apply to a new car dealer or used car dealer licensed by
the state to sell new or used cars. This section also does not apply to an
owner, possessor or occupant of lands in the Borough who operates a motor
vehicle, automobile or machine repair business, provided that the motor
vehicles, automobiles or machines are properly licensed and kept on the
premises for no more than 60 days.
§ 235-3. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer of the Borough shall be responsible for the enforcement
of this chapter.
§ 235-4. Violations and penalties.134
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-16, of this Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or occupant of lands in the
Borough to store, keep, place, park or accumulate upon such lands any
motor vehicles, automobiles or machines in need of repair so as not to
be readily operated under their own power, requiring substantial
repairs, not currently licensed or not being currently used for
transportation, except as provided in this section.
B. It shall be unlawful for any persons to park, leave standing or abandon
on the land of another any machines, motor vehicles or automobiles in
need of repair so as not to be readily operated under their own power,
which require substantial repair, which are not currently licensed or not
being currently used for transportation.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 229-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 235-4
235:577
Chapter 238
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police department — See Ch. 46.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Parking lots — See Ch. 167.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 235.
§ 238-1. Definitions.
§ 238-2. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 238-3. Tow-away.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
office may provide the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear the
reasonable cost of removal and storage which may result from such removal
before regaining possession of the vehicle.
A. Words and phrases. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this
chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title
39 of the Revised Statues of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
B. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
chapter, they shall mean either Eastern standard time or Eastern
daylight saving time as may be in current use.
A. The Chief of Police of this municipality is hereby authorized to provide
by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor
vehicle traffic on any day or days whenever he finds that such closing is
necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with Subsection A above shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated hereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 235-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-4
235:578
§ 238-4. Penalties.135
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement or attachment thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 238-5. Effect of ordinance.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 238-6. Repeal.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park are hereby
repealed, and all of the ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 238-7. Traffic controls for street and highway construction and
maintenance operations for roadways under municipal jurisdiction.
A. Adoption of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways.
(1) When the Borough of Florham Park Council finds and declares that
problems of traffic control occur when traffic must be moved
through or around street construction, maintenance operations and
utility work, above or below ground, which requires blocking the
street and obstructing the normal flow of traffic, and that such
obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled, in order to better promote the public health, safety,
peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of
traffic through and around construction and maintenance zones
and to provide safety for the work forces performing these
operations.
(2) The Borough of Florham Park, in the County of Morris, State of
New Jersey, does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform
Control Devices of Streets and Highways hereafter known as the
MUTCD, except as hereby supplemented and amended, as it
controls and regulates whenever construction, maintenance
operations or utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any
person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with the provisions
135. Editor's Note: For fines for parking in handicapped zones, see § 1-16.
§ 238-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-7
235:579
of the MUTCD while performing such work is in violation of this
section.
B. Preconstruction meetings. It shall be the responsibility of the person,
contractor, or in the case of the public utility as required under the
public utility agreement, Section 16:25-9.2, wishing to conduct work
on, under or above the street to contact the Police Department of the
Borough of Florham Park in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting
in order to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such
period of construction or work. Any person, contractor or utility who
fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work or those
whose plans are not approved by the Police Department of the Borough
of Florham Park is in violation of this section.
C. Hazardous conditions. The person, contractor or utility shall provide at
least two emergency phone numbers to be called in case of emergency
problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of
any work. If, for any reason, emergency contact be made, or if the
emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the Police
Department to correct such hazardous conditions, the Borough may
respond to correct the hazardous condition(s). The reasonable fees for
such emergency services by the Borough shall be charged to the
person, contractor or utility responsible for the condition.
D. Hours. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or
utility work on any roadway in the Borough before the hour of 9:00 a.m.
or after 4:00 p.m. The time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Township
Police Department. If it is determined by the officer in charge that the
construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard,
the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
E. Road closing. Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted
unless approved by the Borough Police Department.
F. Traffic directors. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or
maintenance sites when determined by the Borough Police Department
that same is necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious
movement of traffic.
G. Stop work. The Borough Police Department shall have the authority to
stop work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored
material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations
and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety
hazard or for any other violation of this section.
H. Site preparation. It is to be expressly understood that no materials,
vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk until
all construction signs, light devices and pavement markings are
installed.
§ 238-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-7
235:580
§ 238-8. Parking regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 238-9. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 238-10. Temporary parking prohibition for snowplowing and
removal.
I. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof for the first offense, pay the
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned
in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days. For a second
offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of no less then $250
and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for the term not exceeding
90 days.
(2) A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which violation occurs or continues.
A. Upon declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon the
streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are
displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police
officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather conditions,
accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations dictate or
require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with
the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING
signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Removal.
(1) Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers streets and highways, an emergency shall exist, and no
vehicle shall be parked on the streets or highways or portions
thereof indicated.
(2) The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow
has ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to
the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
§ 238-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-10
235:581
§ 238-11. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Briarwood Road Both All From Ridgedale Avenue to the
easterly curbline at the
Smithfield Lane intersection
Brooklake Road North All From the easterly curbline at
its intersection with Ridgedale
Avenue to a point 100 feet
southeasterly therefrom
Brooklake Road South All From the easterly curbline at
its intersection with Ridgedale
Avenue to a point 100 feet
southeasterly therefrom
Columbia Turnpike Both All Entire length within the
Borough of Florham Park
Crescent Road Both All From a point 150 feet north of
Columbia Turnpike and
extending southerly to a point
150 feet south of Columbia
Turnpike
Fernwood Road Both All From the northerly curbline of
Columbia Turnpike to a point
150 feet northerly therefrom
Hanover Road Both All From Brooklake Road to the
Florham Park/East Madison
municipal line
Jug-handle Both All From the northerly curbline of
Columbia Turnpike to the
easterly curbline of Crescent
Road
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic,
and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
Name of Street Side Location
All municipal and county
roads
Both Entire length
§ 238-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-11
235:582
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Jug-handle Both All From the northerly curbline
on Columbia Turnpike at the
easterly end of the jug- handle
to the northerly curbline at
the access of 325 Columbia
Turnpike
Jug-handle Both All From the westerly curbline on
Park Avenue at the entrance
to Campus Drive to the
westerly curbline at the
southerly end of the jughandle
Park Street East All From the northerly curbline of
Columbia Turnpike to a point
270 feet northwesterly
therefrom
Park Street East All From the southerly curbline of
Columbia Turnpike to a point
210 feet southeasterly
therefrom
Park Street North All From the westerly curbline at
its intersection with Ridgedale
Avenue to a point 200 feet
northwesterly therefrom
Park Street South All From the easterly curbline at
its intersection with Ridgedale
Ave to a point 250 feet
northwesterly therefrom
Park Street West All From the northerly curbline of
Columbia Turnpike to a point
190 feet northwesterly
therefrom
Park Street West All From the southerly curbline of
Columbia Turnpike to a point
260 feet southeasterly
therefrom
Ridgedale Avenue Both All From the northerly curbline of
Brooklake Road to the
southerly curbline of James
Street
Ridgedale Avenue East All From the easterly curbline at
its intersection with Brooklake
Road to a point 200 feet
southwesterly therefrom
§ 238-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-11
235:583
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Ridgedale Avenue East All From the easterly curbline at
its intersection with Brooklake
Road to a point 250 feet
northeasterly therefrom
Ridgedale Avenue West All From the westerly curbline at
its intersection with Park
Street to a point 200 feet
northeasterly therefrom
Ridgedale Avenue West All From the westerly curbline at
its intersection with Park
Street to a point 250 feet
southwesterly therefrom
Vreeland Road Both All From the northerly curbline of
Columbia Turnpike to a point
210 feet northerly therefrom
Vreeland Road Both All From Hanover Road to a point
80 feet east thereof
§ 238-12. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-13. Parking prohibited for street cleaning.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor any motor vehicle
upon any street between between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-14. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described:
Name of Street Side Location
Brooklake Road Both From Madison Borough line to Ridgedale
Avenue
Columbia Turnpike Both From the boundary line of the Township
of Hanover to the boundary line of the
Township of Livingston
§ 238-11 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-14
235:584
Name of Street Side Location
Crescent Road Both From Hanover Road to Columbia
Turnpike
Crescent Road
[Added 5-5-2009
by Ord. No. 09-6]
East From Brooklake Road to Columbia
Turnpike
East Madison
Avenue [Amended
12-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-21]
Both From Rockwood Road to Brooklake Road
Elm Street Both From Columbia Turnpike to Ridgedale
Avenue
Felch Road Both From Columbia Turnpike to Brooklake
Road
Fernwood Road Both From Columbia Turnpike on the south to
Vreeland Road on the north
Greenwood Avenue Both From the boundary line of the Borough
of Madison to Ridgedale Avenue
Hanover Road Both From the boundary line of East Hanover
to Brooklake Road
James Street South From Columbia Turnpike to Ridgedale
Avenue.
James Street North From Columbia Turnpike to Hanover
Road
Leslie Avenue East From the southwesterly corner of the
Borough-owned lot known as "Lot 2" in
Block 2011 to the northwesterly corner
of the same, being a distance of
approximately 500 feet
Park Avenue Both From the boundary line of Hanover
Township/Morris Township to the
boundary line of Madison
Park Street Both From Columbia Turnpike to Ridgedale
Avenue
Passaic Avenue Both From the boundary line of Millburn
Township to the boundary line of
Chatham Borough
Punchbowl Road Both Park Avenue to Morris Township line
Ridgedale Avenue Both Entire length
Vreeland Road Both From Columbia Turnpike to Hanover
Road
§ 238-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-15
235:585
§ 238-15. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All streets Both From 2:00
a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Briarwood Road
[Added
8-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-15]
Both School days 150 feet east and west of
the Briarwood School
entrance driveway
Lloyd Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Orchard Road to Briarwood
Road
Orchard Road South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Northern Avenue to Lloyd
Avenue
Tucker Street West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Orchard Road to Briarwood
Road
§ 238-16. Parking by permit during certain hours on certain days
on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as described
within the following sections unless an appropriate and current parking
permit as issued by the Borough of Florham Park is displayed on said
vehicle for those streets or parts of streets as described or listed within the
following sections.
Section Street Location Hours Days
(Reserved)
§ 238-17. Parking of certain trucks, vehicles and trailers prohibited.
No person shall park any truck or vehicle over three tons gross vehicle
weight (GVW), a school bus, any other type of bus, recreational vehicle,
camper, boat or trailer between the hours specified upon any of the streets
described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-18. Angle parking.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated for
angle parking at an angle so indicated:
§ 238-15 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-18
235:586
Name of Street Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-19. Routes for trucks over four tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40-67 -16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as routes for vehicles over four tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of four tons shall be excluded from all streets, except from those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pickup and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
Brooklake Road From Hanover Road to Ridgedale Avenue
Columbia Turnpike Entire length (within Borough of Florham
Park)
Fernwood Road Entire length
Greenwood Avenue Entire length (within Borough of Florham
Park)
Hanover Road From Brooklake Road to Florham Park/East
Hanover municipal boundary line
James Street Entire length
Park Avenue Entire length (within Borough of Florham
Park)
Ridgedale Avenue Entire length (within Borough of Florham
Park)
Vreeland Road Entire length
§ 238-20. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or parts
of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of materials on such
streets.
Name of Street Weight Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-21. Trucks over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Trucks over the gross vehicle weight are hereby excluded from the streets
or parts of streets described except for the pickup and delivery of materials
on such streets.
§ 238-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-21
235:587
Name of Street Weight Limits
(Reserved)
§ 238-22. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
(Reserved)
§ 238-23. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right-side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Briarwood Road Entire length
Brooklake Entire length
Cathedral Avenue-
Rockwood Road
From Brooklake Road to the Florham Park
Borough-Madison Borough corporate line
Columbia Turnpike Entire length
Crescent Road From Hanover Road to Columbia Turnpike
Crescent Road From Columbia Turnpike to Brooklake Road
East Madison Avenue Entire length
Elm Street Entire length
Greenwood Avenue Entire length
Hanover Road From Brooklake Road to Columbia Turnpike
Hanover Road From Columbia Turnpike to the Florham Park
Borough-East Hanover Township corporate
line
Leslie Avenue Entire length
Lincoln Avenue Entire length
Park Avenue Between the Borough of Florham Park and the
Township of Morris/Township of Hanover
municipal line and the Borough of Florham
Park/Borough of Madison municipal line
Park Street From Columbia Turnpike to Ridgedale Avenue
§ 238-21 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-23
235:588
Name of Street Limits
Passaic Avenue Between the Millburn Township/Borough of
Florham Park municipal line and the Borough
of Chatham/Borough of Florham Park
municipal line
Ridgedale Avenue Between the Borough of Madison/Borough of
Florham Park municipal line and the Borough
of Florham Park/Township of East Hanover
municipal line
Roosevelt Boulevard Entire length
§ 238-24. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Afton Drive and Orchard Road Orchard Road
Broadway and West End Avenue Broadway
Circle Road and Aflon Drive Afton Drive
Circle Road and Knapp Avenue Knapp Avenue
Circle Road and Orchard Road Orchard Road
Corey Road and Hopping Lane [Added
9-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
Hopping Lane (both legs)
Corey Road and Shetland Road
[Added 9-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15]
Corey Road
Deerfield Drive and Spring Valley
Drive
Spring Valley Drive
Driftway and Summit Road [Added
9-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
Driftway
Driftway and Summit Road [Added
9-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
Summit Road, southbound only
Edgewood Drive at Felch Road
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
35-06]
Edgewood Drive
Edgewood Drive and Woodcrest Road Woodcrest Road
Elmwood Road and Beechwood Road Elmwood Road (both ends)
Farr Lane at Murphy Circle [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 35-06]
Farr Lane
Keyes Street, Spring Valley Drive,
Dawn Court
Spring Valley Drive, Dawn Court
§ 238-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-24
235:589
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Lloyd Avenue and Knapp Avenue Knapp Avenue
Lloyd Avenue at Orchard Road [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 35-06]
Lloyd Avenue
Murphy Circle at Murphy Circle
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
35-06]
Murphy Circle
Old Mill Road and Kenwood Lane
[Added 9-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15]
Kenwood Lane
Old Mill Road and Townsend Drive
[Added 9-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15]
Old Mill Road (both ends)
Overlook Road and Cherokee Trail Cherokee Trail (both legs)
Overlook Road and Indian Lane Overlook Road
Pinchbrook Drive and Florham Avenue Pinchbrook Drive
Riverside Drive and Broadway Broadway
Riverside Drive and Insley Road Insley Road
Riverside Drive and West End Avenue Riverside Drive (both legs)
Rockwood Road and Braidburn Road Braidburn Road
Rosemont Hills Drive and Heritage
Road [Added 9-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15]
Rosemont Hills Drive
Rosemont Hills Drive and Summit
Road
Rosemont Hills Drive
Summit Road and Overlook Road Overlook Road
Townsend Drive and Hancock Drive
[Added 9-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15]
Hancock Drive
Townsend Drive and Kenwood Lane
[Added 9-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15]
Kenwood Lane
Tucker Street at Orchard Road
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
35-06]
Tucker Street
Village Road at Vultee Drive [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 35-06]
Village Road
Vreeland Road and Fernwood Road Fernwood Road
Vultee Drive at Village Road [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 35-06]
Vultee Drive
§ 238-24 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-24
235:590
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Washington Street at Orchard Road
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
35-06]
Washington Street
Woodbine Road and Puddingstone Way Puddingstone Way (both
intersections)
§ 238-25. Multi-way stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Signs On
(Reserved)
§ 238-25.1. Stop/yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated as stop/yield intersections. Stop signs or yield
signs shall be installed as provided herein.
§ 238-26. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign(s) on
Beechwood Road north and
Beechwood Road south
Beechwood Road north
Columbia Turnpike and James
Street
A yield sign shall be installed on the
easterly approach of Columbia Turnpike,
controlling the right turn movement from
westbound on Columbia Turnpike to
northbound on James Street
A. The intersection of Brooklake Road and Hanover Road is hereby
designated as a stop/yield intersection. A stop sign shall be installed on
the southbound approach of Hanover Road at Brooklake Road
controlling the left turn movement from southbound Hanover Road to
eastbound Brooklake Road. A yield sign shall be installed on the
southbound approach of Hanover Road at Brooklake Road controlling
the right turn movement from southbound Hanover Road to westbound
Brooklake Road.136
136. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, designating the intersection of Columbia Turnpike
and Fernwood Road as a stop/yield intersection, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 5-21-2002 by Ord. No. 8-02.
§ 238-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-26
235:591
Intersection Yield Sign(s) on
Columbia Turnpike and Park
Street
A yield sign shall be installed on the
southerly approach of Park Street,
controlling the right turn movement from
northbound on Park Street to eastbound on
Columbia Turnpike
Columbia Turnpike and
Vreeland Road
A yield sign shall be installed on the
northerly approach of Vreeland Road,
controlling the right turn movement from
southbound on Vreeland Road to
westbound on Columbia Turnpike
Ridgedale Avenue and
Greenwood Avenue
A yield sign shall be installed on the
northerly approach of Ridgedale Avenue,
controlling the right turn movement from
southbound Ridgedale Avenue to
westbound on Ridgedale Avenue
Park Avenue and Campus
Drive
A yield sign shall be installed on the
easterly approach of Campus Drive,
controlling the right turn movement from
eastbound on Campus Drive to northbound
on Park Avenue
§ 238-27. Turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibition Movement Prohibited
Columbia Turnpike
(County Road #510)
[Added 11-25-2003
by Ord. No. 15-03]
Left Southbound on the westerly exit
driveway of 186 Columbia
Turnpike to eastbound on
Columbia Turnpike (County
Road #510)
Columbia Turnpike and
Felch Road
Left Westbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound on
Felch Road
Columbia Turnpike and
Ridgedale Avenue
Left Westbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound on
Ridgedale Avenue
Columbia Turnpike and
195 Columbia Turnpike
Left Westbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound into
driveway of 195 Columbia
Turnpike
§ 238-26 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-27
235:592
Intersection
Turn
Prohibition Movement Prohibited
Columbia Turnpike and
Park Street
Left Westbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound on Park
Street
Columbia Turnpike and
Borough Environmental
Center
Left Westbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound into the
Borough Environmental Center
Columbia Turnpike and
325 Columbia Turnpike
Left Westbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound into
325 Columbia Turnpike at East
Drive (Cali Office Building, 635
feet west of Elm Street)
Columbia Turnpike and
Ridgedale Avenue
Left Eastbound on Columbia
Turnpike to northbound on
Ridgedale Avenue
Columbia Turnpike U-turn From Essex County line to
Hanover Township line
Columbia Turnpike and
325 Columbia Turnpike
Left Eastbound on Columbia and
Turnpike to jug-handle exit
Columbia Turnpike and
325 Columbia Turnpike
Left Westbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound into
325 Columbia Turnpike at West
Drive
Columbia Turnpike and
Elm Street
Right Eastbound on Columbia
Turnpike to southbound on Elm
Street
26 Columbia Turnpike
and Columbia Turnpike
Left Southbound drive to Eastbound
on Columbia Turnpike
26 Columbia Turnpike
and Columbia Turnpike
Left Eastbound Columbia Turnpike
to 26 Columbia Turnpike
driveway
136 Columbia Turnpike
and Columbia Turnpike
Left Southbound drive to eastbound
on Columbia Turnpike
162 Columbia Turnpike
and Columbia Turnpike
Left Southbound drive to Eastbound
on Columbia Turnpike
222 Columbia Turnpike
and Columbia Turnpike
Left Southbound drive to Eastbound
on Columbia Turnpike
College of St.
Elizabeth's south drive
and Park Avenue
Left Eastbound on St. Elizabeth's
College south drive to
northbound on Park Avenue
§ 238-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-27
235:593
Intersection
Turn
Prohibition Movement Prohibited
Elm Street and
Columbia Turnpike
Left Northbound on Elm Street to
westbound on Columbia
Turnpike, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday through Friday
Environmental Center
Drive and Columbia
Turnpike
Left Northbound on Environmental
Center Drive to westbound on
Columbia Turnpike
Park Avenue and 222
Park Avenue
Left Southbound on Park Avenue to
222 Park Avenue north drive
Park Avenue and
Campus Drive
All Southbound on Park Avenue to
Campus Drive
Park Avenue and
Campus Drive
Left Northbound on Park Avenue to
westbound on jug-handle
Park Avenue U-turn From 180 Park Avenue to
Campus Drive
Park Street and
Columbia Turnpike
Left Northbound on Park Street to
westbound on Columbia
Turnpike
Ridgedale Avenue
Shopping Center
driveway and Brooklake
Road
Left Southbound from rear driveway
of Ridgedale Avenue Shopping
Center to eastbound on
Brooklake Road
Ridgedale Avenue U-turn Between Brooklake Road and
James Street
§ 238-28. No turn on red.
No person shall make a turn on the red signal at any location listed.
A. Intersection of Columbia Turnpike (County Road 510) and Crescent
Road.
(1) From northbound Crescent Road onto eastbound Columbia
Turnpike.
B. Intersection of Ridgedale Avenue (County Road 680) and Briarwood
Road and Briarwood Road extension.
(1) All approaches.
C. Intersection of Columbia Turnpike (County Road 510) and Ridgedale
Avenue (County Roads 608 and 632).
(1) From northbound Ridgedale Avenue to eastbound Columbia
Turnpike.
§ 238-27 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-28
235:594
§ 238-29. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials.
Street Time Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-30. Bus stops.
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Street Hours
A. Along Vreeland Road, northbound, on the easterly side thereof:
(1) Between Columbia Turnpike and Hanover Road (mid-block), beginning
1,450 feet north of the northerly curbline of Columbia Turnpike and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom
All
(2) Between Columbia Turnpike and Hanover Road (mid-block), beginning
2,906 feet north of the northerly curbline of Columbia Turnpike and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom
All
(3) Between Columbia Turnpike and Hanover Road (mid-block), beginning
3,820 feet north of the northerly curbline of Columbia Turnpike and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom
All
(4) Between Columbia Turnpike and Hanover Road (mid-block), beginning
740 feet south of the southerly curbline of Hanover Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom
All
B. Along Vreeland Road, southbound, on the westerly side thereof:
(2) From southbound Ridgedale Avenue to westbound Columbia
Turnpike.
D. Intersection of Columbia Turnpike (County Road 510) and Hanover
Road (County Road 609) and Hanover Road extension.
(1) From eastbound Columbia Turnpike to southbound Hanover Road.
(2) From southbound Hanover Road to westbound Columbia Turnpike.
(3) From westbound Columbia Turnpike to northbound Hanover Road.
E. Intersection of Ridgedale Avenue (County Road 632) and James Street.
(1) From eastbound James Street to southbound Ridgedale Avenue.137
137. Editor's Note: Former § 238-28.1, which had been reserved for traffic control signals, and
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 21-02.
§ 238-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-30
235:595
Street Hours
(1) Between Hanover Road and Columbia Turnpike (mid-block), beginning
650 feet south of the southerly curbline of Hanover Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom
All
(2) Between Hanover Road and Columbia Turnpike (mid-block), beginning
1,990 feet south of the southerly curbline of Hanover Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom
All
(3) Between Hanover Road and Columbia Turnpike (mid-block), beginning
3,090 feet south of the southerly curbline of Hanover Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom
All
(4) Between Hanover Road and Columbia Turnpike (mid-block), beginning
4,525 feet south of the southerly curbline of Hanover Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom
All
§ 238-31. Taxi stands.
The locations described are hereby designated as taxi stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 238-32. Lane use reservation.
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection or Location Movement
(Reserved)
§ 238-33. Speed limits.
A. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below and made a part of this chapter are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits.
§ 238-30 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-33
235:596
§ 238-34. Mid-block crosswalks.
The following locations are hereby established as mid-block crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Greenwood Avenue Beginning at a point 370 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Vultee Drive and extending
10 feet northerly therefrom
Briarwood Road Beginning at a point 160 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Lincoln Avenue and
extending 10 feet westerly therefrom
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Brooklake Road 35 From the Borough of Madison/
Borough of Chatham municipal
boundary with the Borough of
Florham Park to its intersection
with Cathedral Avenue
Brooklake Road 25 From Cathedral Avenue to its
intersection with Ridgedale Avenue
Columbia Turnpike 50 From Hanover Township/ Florham
Park Borough line to Partridge Lane
Columbia Turnpike 35 Partridge Lane to 550 feet east of
Hanover Road
Columbia Turnpike 45 From 550 feet east of Hanover
Road in Livingston Township/
Florham Park Borough line
Hanover Road 35 From Columbia Turnpike to 350
feet north of the center of Crescent
Road
Hanover Road 40 From 350 feet north of the center of
Crescent Road to the East Hanover
Township/Florham Park Borough
line
Passaic Avenue [Amended 5-21-2002 by Ord. No. 8-02; repealed
12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 21-02]
Punchbowl Road [Repealed 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 21-02]
Ridgedale Avenue (County Roads. 608 and 632) [Repealed
12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 21-02]
Vreeland Road 45 From its intersection with Hanover
Road to its intersection with
Columbia Turnpike
§ 238-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-34
235:597
Name of Street Location
Ridgedale Avenue Beginning at a point 204 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Roosevelt Boulevard/
Townsend Drive and extending 10 feet northerly
therefrom
Ridgedale Avenue Beginning at a point 324 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Central Avenue and
extending 10 feet northerly therefrom
§ 238-35. Older and walking impaired person crosswalks.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.1b, the following locations shall be established
as "crosswalks for the older and walking impaired persons":
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-36. No passing zones. [Amended 12-17-2002 by Ord. No.
21-02]
No passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Location
Punchbowl Road From Park Avenue to the Borough of Florham
Park/Township of Morris corporate line.
Approved: November 10, 1983.
§ 238-37. Handicapped parking.138
A. Handicapped parking on streets. In accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street locations are designated as
handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are for use by persons who
have been issued special identification cards or plates or placards by
the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard issued by the
Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Street Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
B. Handicapped parking on streets for private residences. In accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following on-street
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in front of
private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary
138. Editor's Note: For fines for parking in handicapped zones, see § 1-16.
§ 238-34 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-37
235:598
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted in these spaces.
Street Location Permit Number
(Reserved)
C. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and Board of Education
property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the
following off-street parking yards and Board of Education property are
designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards issued by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these areas.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
D. Handicapped parking on private property open to the public and to
which the public is invited (retail business). In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following off-street parking yards
are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use
by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
E. Handicapped parking on all other private property. In accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following off-street parking
locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates
or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
F. Handicapped parking in municipal parks. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following off-street parking locations
are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these spaces.
§ 238-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-37
235:599
§ 238-38. Control for the movement and the parking of traffic on
public and private property.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
G. Handicapped parking on postal property. In accordance with 40
U.S.C.S. § 318B and a written request from the postmaster, the offstreet
locations are hereby designated as handicapped parking,
pursuant to P.L. 1989, c. 201, effective June 1, 1990. Such spaces are for
the use by persons who have been issued special identification cards,
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or temporary
placards issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
H. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance. The owners of
the premises referred to in §§ 238-37C, D and E shall provide and install
signs and pavement markings for each parking space reserved for the
use of handicapped persons, which signs and markings shall be in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The
cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation,
maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no
cost or expense to the Borough of Florham Park. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration of same.
A. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on municipal
property and Board of Education property. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following municipal and Board of
Education property shall have the movement of traffic controlled by the
type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle
in violation of the regulations indicated.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 238-37 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 238-38
235:600
Chapter 244
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 125.
Hazardous or toxic substance
discharge — See Ch. 144.
Illicit connections — See Ch. 146.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 207.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 213.
Private stormdrain inlet retrofitting — See
Ch. 214.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 215.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 216.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 269.
Water supply systems — See Ch. 278.
§ 238-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 238-38
235:601

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 244-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DEPARTMENT — The Water Department of the Borough.
FRANCHISE AREA — Those areas in the northwesterly area of the Borough
along Park Avenue and in the southeasterly area of the Borough along
Passaic Avenue to be serviced by New Jersey American Water Company as
established by Borough Ordinance No. 2-90.139
HOUSE CONNECTION — The line construction from the curb stop or valve
to the point where such line joins the meter.
MAIN — The transmission and distribution pipeline and appurtenances
owned by the Borough and located in a public street, right-of-way or
easement.
MAINS IN PRIVATE PROPERTY — Privately constructed water mains and
services which are turned over to and accepted by the Borough to become
part of the Borough water systems, together with a permanent right-ofway
or public easement so that the Borough may enter upon to excavate,
maintain and service the main.
SERVICE AGREEMENT — Contract pursuant to the County and Municipal
Water Supply Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:31-1 et seq.
SERVICE LINE — The line from the Borough main to the curb or to the limit
of the right-of-way, including the curb stop or valve at the end of such line.
SUPPLIER — Any entity, exclusive of the Borough Water Department,
supplying water to consumers within the Borough.
WATER OPERATIONS COMPANY — A private company with which the
Borough has entered into a contract with pursuant to the County and
Municipal Water Supply Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:31-1 et seq., for the purposes
of operation and maintenance of the Borough water supply system. The
Borough retains full ownership of the water system.
§ 244-2. Access to equipment.
No person shall at any time obstruct or prevent free access to any meter,
main, service line, house connection, curb stop, curb box, valve, hydrant
or other fixture by any authorized employee of the Water Department or
water operations company for the purpose of reading, testing, repairing or
inspecting such meter, main, service line or house connections.
139. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2-90 is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 244-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-3
235:603
§ 244-3. Opening fire hydrants.
No person other than members of the Fire Department, Water Department,
Public Works Department or water operations company shall be permitted
to open any fire hydrant. Only standard hydrant wrenches shall be used in
opening and closing of fire hydrants.
§ 244-4. Maintenance and testing of fire hydrants.
§ 244-5. Compliance required; supervision.
All work done by or under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with
all rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Water Supply Act, N.J.S.A.
40A:31-1 et seq. as well as the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Borough, and shall be performed under the supervision of the Public Works
Department and/or the water operations company.
§ 244-6. Report of violations.
A. The Water Department and/or water operations company will test and
maintain all Borough-owned hydrants annually. The Water Department
and/or the water operations company in accordance with the then
existing contract shall test privately owned hydrants for an annual fee
as set forth in § 244-41J. Where privately owned hydrants must be
replaced, the Water Department and/or the water operations company
may do this at the owner's expense if it is provided for in a then existing
service agreement.
B. Water hydrants in the franchise areas will be tested and maintained by
the franchisee.
A. It shall be the duty of all Borough employees to report any violations of
this chapter to the Director of Public Works or Water Superintendent.
The Director of Public Works shall report to the Mayor and Council all
violations of this chapter and of the rules and regulations of the Water
Department which come to his knowledge or attention and the action
taken.
B. To the extent that the terms of this Chapter 244 are to be applied in the
franchise area, the supplier shall cooperate with the Water Department;
and the supplier shall also be empowered to enforce all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
§ 244-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-6
235:604
ARTICLE II
Water Utility
[Amended 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-40]
§ 244-7. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the Borough a Water Utility which shall
have control over the operation, maintenance and construction of the
Borough water supply and distribution system, including the sale of water
therefrom.
§ 244-8. Administration.
Subject to statutory requirements, the Water Utility and the Water
Superintendent are a part of the Department of Community Services. The
Water Superintendent shall report to the Director of Community Services.
§ 244-9. Powers and duties.
A. Powers and duties of the Water Superintendent. The Water
Superintendent shall be a person holding such license as may be
required by the State Department of Health. Subject to the direction of
the Director of Community Services, the Water Superintendent shall be
responsible for all phases of the water supply, treatment, quality and
distribution in the Borough. The Water Superintendent shall perform all
duties and carry out all responsibilities set forth in state statutes and
regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection and in
this Code. The Water Superintendent shall be responsible for
maintaining all records and submitting reports so as to assure proper
water service in the Borough.
B. Powers and duties of the Director of Community Services.
(1) The Director of Community Services is responsible for directing all
personnel of the Water Utility in carrying out their assigned
departmental responsibilities.
(2) The Director of Community Services shall make an annual
inventory of all tools, equipment, and supplies of the Water Utility
and render a report to the Mayor and Council.
(3) The Director of Community Services shall submit to the Mayor and
Council regular monthly and annual reports regarding the status of
the Water Utility and such other reports as may, from time to time,
be requested by the Mayor and Council or Borough Administrator.
(4) The Director of Community Services shall prepare and maintain
rules and regulations for the operation of the Water Utility which
shall set forth the means for the public to make application for the
use of water in the Borough and provide for standards of
§ 244-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-9
235:605
§ 244-10. through § 244-12. (Reserved)
construction, maintenance and operation of the water supply and
distribution system and any additions thereto.
§ 244-9 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-10
235:606
ARTICLE III
Privately Constructed Mains, Lines and Connections
§ 244-13. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct mains and connections thereto without a
permit issued by the Director of Public Works or the Water Superintendent.
§ 244-14. Information and agreement required.
No permit shall be issued until the Director of Public Works or the Water
Superintendent has approved complete plans, specifications and profiles
and until execution with the Borough of an enforceable agreement with
the owner or builder that he will convey the main and appurtenances to
the Borough and grant a permanent easement at least 20 feet wide for the
maintenance of such main.
§ 244-15. Supervision.
The Director of Public Works or the Water Superintendent will supervise the
construction of mains and service lines and will charge private owners or
developers a fee therefor as prescribed in § 244-41. (These fees shall not
apply in the franchise area.)
§ 244-16. Prerequisites for acceptance of privately constructed
mains by Borough.
Before acceptance by the Borough of any privately constructed mains, the
owner shall furnish:
§ 244-17. Extension specifications.
The minimum size of water main extensions shall be not less than eight
inches in diameter. All extensions shall be of ductile-iron pipe. No deadend
waterline shall be permitted, except upon the written consent of the
Director of Public Works or the Water Superintendent.
§ 244-18. Testing.
All mains, service lines and house connections shall be tested in accordance
with Section 13 of the American Water Works Association's Standard C
600-64. The owner or developer shall bear the cost of pressure testing
and sterilizing such mains and services, including all laboratory tests in
connection therewith, and shall furnish all equipment.
A. An as-built map of all improvements, including valves and hydrants.
B. A maintenance guaranty for two years for 10% of the cost of
installation.
C. A certified laboratory analysis of a water sample taken from the new
main.
§ 244-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-19
235:607
§ 244-19. Street openings.
Where opening of streets is required for installation of new mains or
services, the owner, at his expense, shall comply with the street opening
regulations in Chapter 208, Streets and sidewalks, and all other applicable
ordinances of the Borough.
§ 244-19 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-19
235:608
ARTICLE IV
Water Service
§ 244-20. Connection to main.
Before any house connection may be connected to the service line, the
main and such service line shall have been accepted by the Borough. The
owner or his authorized representative shall make application to the Water
Department to tap into the main. Procedures and fees are different for
single buildings, including dwellings, and for subdivisions. See the schedule
of fees in § 244-41.
§ 244-21. Service to subdivisions.
Application shall be made by the owner of a subdivision to the Water
Department for each water service to be installed in the subdivision. A
service fee as set forth in § 244-41D shall be paid to the Department for
each service prior to installation, and all service connections and meter
installations shall be approved by the Director of Public Works or the Water
Superintendent. No service, other than as provided for with a temporary
permit, shall be turned on prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
by the Borough Building Department.
§ 244-22. Separate service for each building; meter installation.
§ 244-23. Care and protection of meters; repair by Borough.
A. Not more than one building shall be supplied from the same service line
except by special permission and under such restrictions as may be
imposed by the Water Department.
B. If more than one meter is to be installed on any service line, such
meters, up to one inch, shall be installed by the Water Department in
the locations provided by the owner. Meters larger than one inch shall
be purchased and installed by the owner. Meters shall be installed in
any new building before a certificate of occupancy can be obtained.
Meter fees shall be as set forth in § 244-41.
A. The owner or occupant of the premises where the meter is installed
shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or
other damage.
B. Where replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter becomes
necessary due to the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or
occupant of any premises, any expense to the Water Department and
water operations company caused thereby shall be charged to and
collected from the owner of such premises. Such charges shall be added
to the quarterly water bills and collected in the manner prescribed
therefor.
§ 244-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-24
235:609
§ 244-24. Meter installation; ownership; sealing and servicing;
maintenance and calibration.
§ 244-25. Temporary use for construction purposes.
A temporary permit for the use of water taken from Borough mains for
construction purposes will be provided only upon written application by
the contractor or owner to the Director of Public Works or the Water
Department, accompanied by the service charge as set forth in § 244-41E.
The temporary permit for use of water hereinabove provided may be
revoked at any time if it is determined by the Director of Public Works or the
Water Superintendent that the water is being wasted or used unnecessarily.
Fire hydrants may not be used by anyone other than authorized Borough
personnel as a temporary source of water for construction or other
purposes without the written approval of the Director of Public Works or
the Water Superintendent. Any hydrant damages through construction use
shall be restored by the applicant. Applicants shall disconnect temporary
A. The Water Department shall install or supervise the installation of all
meters, and, where it approves the installation of meters by others, the
Water Department shall specify the type, size and location.
B. Upon installation, all water meters become the property of the Water
Department.
C. All water meters shall be sealed by the Department. No person, except
an agent of the Department shall disconnect, remove, break, injure or
in any way tamper with such seals. Only an authorized representative of
the Department shall be permitted to open, adjust, connect, disconnect
or in any other way service any water meter except as provided herein.
D. Owners of premises served by meters 1 1/4 inches and larger shall be
responsible for maintenance and calibration in accordance with the
following frequency table:
(1) The schedule for calibration is as follows:
Meter Size
(inches) Frequency
1 1/4 to 2 Every 4 years
3 Every 2 years
4 and larger Every year
(2) The owner shall furnish certification of calibration by an authorized
meter repair service to the Water Department each time it is due.
Failure to comply within 30 days after notice by the Director of
Public Works or the Water Superintendent shall constitute grounds
for the Borough's performing this work and charging the cost
thereof to the owner's current water bill.
§ 244-24 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-25
235:610
services, backfill, grade and seed all excavations. Failure to do so will
authorize the Borough to take the deposit.
§ 244-26. Defective house connections.
The owner of any premises shall be responsible for all repairs to any
house connections and shall be liable for all loss of water and damage
resulting from any defect in a house connection. From the time any defect
is discovered until the repair or replacement work is completed, the Water
Department may shut off the water with or without notice, if necessary,
and for as long as it may be deemed necessary. Leaks or damage in or to
the house connection shall be promptly reported to the Department and
repaired within a reasonable time. The Director of Public Works or the
Water Superintendent shall determine the amount of water lost as a result
of the leak in or damage to the house connections, using as a guide the size
of the pipe and the pressure per square inch at the point of such leak and
such other factors as may be applicable. The owner or consumer shall be
charged for this loss at the prevailing rate for water consumed.
§ 244-27. Construction of house connections.
The house connection shall be laid as a straight line from the curb box to
the meter. Two valves shall be installed within the building, one before the
meter and one after the meter. No sweat joints will be permitted in service
lines or meter connections.
§ 244-28. Protection from freezing.
The property owner or occupant shall protect service pipes between the
cellar wall and the meter from freezing.
§ 244-29. Curb boxes.
Curb boxes shall be kept in accessible condition by the owner of the
premises. If it becomes necessary to reset, repair or replace any curb box,
such work shall be done by the water operations company and/or the Water
Department unless such work is necessitated by construction or by other
than natural damage, in which case the fee as set forth in § 244-41F shall
be paid to the Department.
§ 244-30. Curb stop.
The curb stop shall not be shut off or turned on except as authorized by the
Director of Public Works, the Water Superintendent or the Financial Officer.
§ 244-31. Emergency discontinuation of service.
The Water Department shall be diligent and exercise all reasonable care
to provide a continuous supply of potable water. However, in the event of
breakage, mechanical failure, power failure, accident or shutting off for
extension or repair or whenever, in the judgment of the Department, an
§ 244-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-31
235:611
emergency exists, the Department may, with or without notice, discontinue
the supply for as long as it may deem necessary to make repairs or correct
the difficulty. The Borough shall not be liable to any consumer for any
damage or loss resulting from such temporary cessation of service.
§ 244-32. Filling tanks and swimming pools.
Before any tank or swimming pool having a capacity in excess of 2,500
gallons is filled or refilled with water drawn from the system, notice of filling
or refilling such tank or swimming pool shall first be furnished to the Water
Department. The Department shall consider the demands on the system and
may, if necessary, limit the time of day, the rate of flow and number of hours
when such withdrawals will be permitted. The Borough shall not be liable to
any consumer for any damage or loss resulting from the denial or limitations
of service hereunder. There shall be no filling of swimming pools from a fire
hydrant.
§ 244-33. Recirculation required for air-conditioning systems.
Installation or use of air-conditioning systems utilizing water without
provision for recirculation is prohibited.
§ 244-34. Fire-protection systems.
The Borough will not charge for water consumed by approved fireprotection
systems. All private fire-protection systems, including hydrants,
are to be installed by and at the expense of the property owner. All material
and workmanship shall comply with the American Water Works Association
standards. Service charges for the availability of water for fire-protection
systems are set forth in § 244-42.
§ 244-35. Sprinkler systems.
Application for a connection to the water main for the purpose of installing a
sprinkler system shall be made to the Water Department, with a copy to the
Fire Department. The fee shall be as set forth in § 244-42. The installation
shall be in accordance with all Borough water regulations and ordinances.
The requirements for sprinkler systems, as prescribed in Chapter 103,
Construction Codes, Uniform, of this Code, are furnished by the National
Fire Protection Association and the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
§ 244-31 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-35
235:612
ARTICLE V
Rates and Charges
§ 244-36. Billing procedure; meter reading.
Water bills for water consumed shall be rendered to the owner or occupant
of premises quarterly.
§ 244-37. Payment of bills; overdue and unpaid bills. [Amended
9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 25-06]
A. In the event that a meter is inaccessible for any reason, the owner or
occupant shall be responsible for entering the meter reading upon a
form provided by the Water Department or water operations company
and for returning the same to the Water Department within five days.
B. If the form is not received by the Water Department within five days or
if a reading is not phoned to the water operations company, the
consumer shall be billed using an estimate based upon the water
consumed during a similar quarter of the previous year.
C. It is the owner's or occupant's responsibility to ensure that access is
granted for actual reading by the Water Department or water
operations company at least once per year.
D. In the event that the period between actual readings exceeds one year,
a penalty of $100 will be assessed, and the consumer will be notified
that water service will be terminated until arrangements can be made
for access to the water meter. The consumer will be billed for
discontinuance and restoration of service if such action becomes
necessary.
A. Bills rendered shall be due within 30 days from the billing date.
(1) An overdue bill will be assessed a penalty fee with interest, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-7, calculated at the rate of 8% per
annum on the first $1,500 of the delinquency and 18% per annum
on any amount in excess of $1,500, to be calculated from the date
the water bill was due and payable until the date that actual
payment to the utility collector is made. An additional penalty of 6%
per annum shall be assessed upon any amount in excess of $10,000
that remains due and payable as of December 31 of any calendar
year.
(2) All consumers whose bills are unpaid within 90 days of the original
billing shall have their water service terminated. Such service shall
be restored only upon payment in full of all water charges,
including the prescribed penalty charge.
(3) Any unpaid water charges shall be a lien upon the land of the owner
after the due date. When unpaid water charges remain in arrears
on April 1 in the calendar year following the calendar year when
§ 244-36 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-37
235:613
§ 244-38. Installation of service; shutting off service; vacant houses.
§ 244-39. Report of defective meter; testing; fee; billing
adjustment.
the same becomes due, the Borough Tax Collector shall enforce
the lien in accordance with the Tax Sale Law of the State of New
Jersey.140
B. All charges are payable to the Water Department and/or water
operations company by mail or in person at the Treasurer's office.
(1) No persons are authorized to accept or give a receipt for money
due the Water Department except the Borough Treasurer or its
duly designated assistants.
(2) Personal payments may be deposited, without liability to the
Borough, in the Borough’s payment drop box that is located at the
Municipal Building 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
A. Except in the case of the initial installation of water service and meter,
no new consumer shall be served with water unless an application is
made to the Water Department by the consumer. Such application shall
be accompanied by payment of a turn-on fee as set forth in § 244-41G.
Consumers changing their places of residence within the Borough shall
also be required to execute an application with the Department.
B. Water may be shut off by the Department on receipt of a written request
by a consumer to the Water Department. A shutoff and turn-on charge
as set forth in § 244-41G, however, shall be made for each turning off
and each restoration of the service.
C. If a house is vacant, no deduction from the minimum charge as set forth
in § 244-40 shall be made as long as the curb stop shall remain open.
A. The consumer shall promptly report in writing any meter thought to be
defective or out of order.
B. The Water Department and/or the water operations company will
comply with a request to test any meter. Such test shall comply with
standards of the American Water Works Association and determine
whether the meter is defective.
C. Should such test disclose that the meter is not defective or out of order,
the Department shall charge the fee set forth in § 244-41. Meters found
to register over 3% fast during the course of such test shall be replaced
or repaired by the Water Department or water operations company at
its expense.
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq.
§ 244-37 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-39
235:614
§ 244-40. Fees for service. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98].
Fees for consumption, fire service and other services rendered by the Water
Department shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Florham Park.
§ 244-41. (Reserved)141
§ 244-42. (Reserved)
§ 244-43. Water supplied by other water utilities. [Amended
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1-00]
Residential and commercial users supplied through arrangements with
other water utilities will be billed as stated in a resolution of the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Florham Park.
D. Water charges for the quarter in which the meter is found to register
fast shall be based on the previous quarter and rendered as per
§ 244-36.
141. Editor's Note: Former §§ 244-41, Fees for services and 244-42, Fees for fire service, were
repealed 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98. See now § 244-40.
§ 244-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-43
235:615

ARTICLE VI
Water Conservation
§ 244-44. Requirements for new construction.
All new construction must meet the following conservation requirements
before a certificate of occupancy will be issued:
§ 244-44.1. Fees for water use and Water Department services.
[Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 11-04; amended 3-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 6-05; 3-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-4; 9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-19;
12-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
A. All showers used for other than safety reasons will be equipped with a
flow-restriction device or shower head which will limit water flow to
three gallons per minute or less.
B. All toilets installed will be of the water-saver type which limits water
usage to 3.5 gallons per flush or less.
C. All urinals will be equipped with flush valves which minimize water
usage.
A. Consumers of water supplied by the Borough water system shall be
charged on a quarterly basis at the following rates per 100 cubic feet
based upon the actual consumption:
*Consumption Unit 2018 Rate 2020 Rate
Residential
0 to 10 cu $2.40 $3.36
11 to 50 cu $1.86 $2.60
51 to 100 cu $2.52 $3.53
101 to 300 cu $3.60 $5.04
301 and above $4.14 $5.80
Commercial
0 to 10 cu $3.60 $5.04
11 to 50 cu $1.86 $2.60
51 to 900 cu $2.52 $3.53
901 and above $3.66 $5.12
Four-way meters
0 to 40 cu $14.40 $20.16
41 to 200 cu $1.86 $2.60
201 to 400 cu $2.52 $3.53
401 to 1,200 cu $3.60 $5.04
§ 244-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-44.1
235:617
*Consumption Unit 2018 Rate 2020 Rate
1,201 and above $4.14 $5.80
Minimum bill -
residential
$24 $33.60
Minimum bill -
commercial
$36 $50.40
Minimum bill - fourway
meter
$144 $201.60
* Consumption unit: 1 cu=100 cubic feet=748 gallons
B. Residential.
(1) Minimum quarterly billing will be $24 and $33.60 beginning in the
year 2020. In those instances when actual consumption results in
bills of less than the minimum bill, the consumer will be charged
the minimum amount.
(2) Consumers of water supplied by the New Jersey American Water
Company in the franchise area shall be charged on a quarterly
basis at the rate to be established by the Board of Public Utilities of
the State of New Jersey. Bills will be sent by NJAWC.
(3) Consumers of water supplied by the Borough of Madison Water and
Light Department along Carrigan Lane and Burnet Road shall be
charged on a quarterly basis at rates which the supplier charges
the Borough of Florham Park. Bills will be sent by the Borough of
Florham Park, and a service charge of $10 per quarter will be
charged.
(4) Consumers of water supplied by the Southeast Morris County
Municipal Utilities Authority in the area of Park Avenue and
Punchbowl Road and not supplied by the franchise shall be charged
on a quarterly basis at rates which the supplier charges the
Borough of Florham Park. Bills will be sent by the Borough of
Florham Park, and a service charge of $10 per quarter will be
charged.
C. Fees for services. Fees for services rendered by the Water Department
shall be as follows:
(1) Fees enumerated.
§ 244-44.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-44.1
235:618
Service 2018 Rate 2020 Rate
Supervision of all main and
service line leakage and
pressure tests; work to be done
by the Borough of Florham Park
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
Inspection of all main and
service line construction, or
repairs; work to be done by the
Borough of Florham Park
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
Tapping of main, construction of
service line and installation of
meter for:
All 3/4-inch service (5/8 inch
and 3/4 inch); owner gets
street opening permit,
excavates and backfills
$900 $1,260
Meter provided by Borough of
Florham Park
$240 $336
Borough of Florham Park
inspects
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
All 1-inch service; owner gets
street opening permit,
excavates and backfills
$1,110 $1,554
Meter provided by Borough of
Florham Park
$330 $462
Borough of Florham Park
inspects
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
All 1 1/4-inch service; owner
gets street opening permit,
excavates and backfills
$1,586 $2,045
Borough of Florham Park
inspects
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
All 1 1/2-inch service; owner
gets street opening permit,
excavates and backfills
$1,683 $2,171
Meter provided by Borough of
Florham Park
$548 $767
Borough of Florham Park
inspects
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
§ 244-44.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-44.1
235:619
Service 2018 Rate 2020 Rate
All 2-inch service; owner gets
street opening permit,
excavates and backfills
$1,808 $2,332
Meter provided by Borough of
Florham Park
$730 $1,022
Borough of Florham Park
inspects
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
*Larger services (owner gets
permit, furnishes meter and all
material, excavates and
backfills)
Borough of Florham Park
inspection
$528 per day; $66
per hour or fraction
thereof
$740 per day; $92
per hour or fraction
thereof
Work may be done by the
builder with a permit from the
Borough of Florham Park Water
Department.
Temporary service.
Fee for temporary service (per
dwelling) plus a monthly fee of
$30
$180 $252
Business and industrial (per
building) plus a monthly fee of
$100
$360 $504
Resetting, repairing or
replacement of curb box,
including all materials and labor
$540 $756
Shut off or turn on of service:
During business hours $42 $58.80
After hours $84 $117.60
Meter test $30 $42
Penalty for late bill $24 $33.60
Hydrant maintenance inspection $66 $92.40
Painting of private hydrants Responsibility of
owner
Permit fee for C(3)(b) and (c)
(from Water Department)
$420 $588
Hydrant use permit $420 $588
§ 244-44.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-44.1
235:620
Service 2018 Rate 2020 Rate
Fee for temporary water service
from fire hydrant (8 hours)
$600 $840
(2) Connection fee. [Added 12-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(a) For each residential service unit the connection fee shall be
$1,069.
(b) For each equivalent service unit the connection fee shall be
$1,069.
(c) For each reconnected service as a result of a demolition/tear
down or an alteration/addition that is greater than 50% of the
original dwellings, first-floor living space square footage and
the existing lateral outside the right-of-way is utilized; the
reconnection fee shall be equivalent to 50% of the new
connection fee.
(d) For all user's classes other than residential and institutional
service, an equivalent service unit shall be computed using the
tables provided by N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.6, Table 1, and N.J.A.C.
5:21-5.2, Table 5.1.
(e) A residential service unit is 300 gallons per day.
(f) The connection fee shall also apply in the case of any expansion
or alteration of any existing building(s) for user classes other
than residential and institutional service.
(g) The minimum water connection fee is one equivalent service
unit.
(h) A copy of the calculation142 is attached hereto and made a part
hereof as set forth herein at length.
(i) A copy of Exhibit,143 as revised, is attached hereto and made a
part hereof as if set.
D. Fees for fire service. Fees for the provision of Borough water service to
the firefighting systems which are privately owned shall be as follows:
Service
2018 Fee
(per quarter)
2020 Fee
(per quarter)
Each hydrant $36 $50.40
Sprinkler service, 2 inches at
building line
$30 $42
142. Editor's Note: See § 244-44.1A.
143. Editor's Note: See § 244-44.1A.
§ 244-44.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-44.1
235:621
Service
2018 Fee
(per quarter)
2020 Fee
(per quarter)
Sprinkler service, 3 inches at
building line
$42 $58.80
Sprinkler service, 4 inches at
building line
$60 $84
Sprinkler service, 6 inches at
building line
$72 $100.80
Sprinkler service, 8 inches at
building line
$102 $142.80
E. Firesafety inspections. The following fee schedule is adopted for the
inspection of those buildings not covered by the state inspection fee
schedule:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) 2018 Rate 2020 Rate
0 to 1,000 $66 $92.40
1,001 to 2,000 $66 $92.40
2,001 to 3,000 $66 $92.40
3,001 to 4,000 $66 $92.40
4,001 to 5,000 $66 $92.40
5,001 to 6,000 $66 $92.40
6,001 to 7,000 $72 $100.80
7,001 to 8,000 $78 $109.20
8,001 to 9,000 $84 $117.60
9,001 to 10,000 $90 $126
10,001 to 11,000 $96 $134.40
11,001 to 12,000 $108 $151.20
12,001 to 15,000 $150 $210
15,001 to 20,000 $162 $226.80
20,001 to 25,000 $198 $277.20
25,001 to 30,000 $234 $327.60
30,001 to 35,000 $270 $378
35,001 to 40,000 $276 $386.40
40,001 to 45,000 $336 $470.40
45,001 to 50,000 $372 $520.80
50,001 to 55,000 $402 $562.80
§ 244-44.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-44.1
235:622
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) 2018 Rate 2020 Rate
55,001 to 60,000 $414 $579.60
60,001 to 65,000 $474 $663.60
65,001 to 70,000 $486 $680.40
70,001 to 75,000 $540 $756
75,001 to 80,000 $552 $772.80
80,001 to 85,000 $612 $856.80
85,001 to 90,000 $648 $907.20
90,001 to 95,000 $678 $949.20
95,001 to 100,000 $714 $999.60
For each 5,000 square feet or part over 100,000 square feet, there
will be charged an additional $50.
§ 244-44.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-44.1
235:623

ARTICLE VII
Water Emergencies
§ 244-45. Declaration of water emergency. [Amended 8-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 13-99]
Whenever the governing body shall be satisfied and finds that a water
emergency exists in the Borough by reason of drought or otherwise, it
may adopt a resolution declaring that a water emergency exists in the
municipality. Such resolution shall be adopted by the governing body at any
regular, special, adjourned or emergency public meeting of the governing
body. Such resolution shall identify that portion of the Borough affected
by the water emergency, which may include the entire Borough, and shall
specify which of the water use restrictions contained in § 244-46 of this
article are being imposed as well as any exemptions as may be authorized.
Such resolution shall be effective immediately upon publication according
to law and shall continue in effect for the balance of the calendar year
in which such resolution was adopted unless repealed as set forth in this
article. For the purpose of this section, a water emergency shall exist if for
any of the following reasons:
§ 244-46. Water use restrictions.
A. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the
Borough has adopted water use restrictions and has notified the
Borough, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other state,
county or local agency entitled to notice of such restrictions, and such
restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any state, county or
local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so; or
B. The governing authority is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency
exists in the Borough.
A. Upon adoption by the governing body of a resolution declaring that a
water emergency exists in the Borough in accordance with § 244-45 of
this article, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor
conservation measures, and any of the following water use restrictions
shall be imposed and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants,
except where a bona fide health emergency exists, and to exempt
businesses, as specified herein, during the water emergency:
(1) The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including
the watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the
washing of cars.
(2) Outside water usage on alternate days allowing outside water
usage by persons or businesses having even house or box numbers
on even days and those having odd house or box numbers on odd
days, with outside water usage being completely banned and
§ 244-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-46
235:625
§ 244-47. Duration of water use restrictions.
The resolution of the governing body required by § 244-45 of this article
shall, in addition to complying with § 244-45, provide a period of time during
which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and which
shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency
under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
If the governing body shall be satisfied that the water emergency has been
abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
it shall adopt a resolution declaring the water emergency ended and the
water use restrictions inapplicable. If, at the expiration of the time period
specified in the resolution, the governing body shall be satisfied that the
water emergency continues to exist, it may adopt a resolution in accordance
with the requirements of this article continuing the water use restrictions.
§ 244-48. Enforcement; issuance of summonses.
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall be enforced
during a water emergency by a local authorized official and/or the Police
Department. Whenever a local authorized official shall find a violation of
the water use restrictions, such authorized official shall give the violator a
prohibited on the 31st day of any month during the water
emergency.
(3) Any other water use restriction specified by the governing body in
the resolution required by § 244-45 of this article which is
reasonable under the circumstances considering the nature and
extent of the water emergency.
B. The governing body may exempt athletic fields and nurseries in whole
or part at its discretion.
C. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this section shall be limited
in application to that portion of the Borough, which may include the
entire Borough, identified as being affected by the water emergency in
the resolution of the governing body adopted in accordance with
§ 244-45 of this article.
D. Permanent water use restrictions. [Added 7-18-2000 by Ord. No.
18-00]
(1) Outside water usage is permanently restricted to usage on
alternate days allowing outside water usage by persons or
businesses having even house or box numbers on even days and
those having odd house or box numbers on odd days, with outside
water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st
day of any month.
(2) This restriction shall not apply to athletic fields and nurseries.
§ 244-46 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-48
235:626
written warning and explain the penalties for a second and third offense
as provided by § 244-49 of this article. The local authorized official shall
keep such records as may be reasonable and necessary for the purpose
of determining the persons and businesses who have been warned upon a
first offense. The local authorized official and/or the Police Department is
hereby empowered to write summonses of the violation of the water use
restrictions imposed pursuant to this article.
§ 244-49. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-16-2006 by Ord. No.
10-06]
In accordance with § 244-46 of this article, any person or business who
thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this
article shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with Chapter 1, § 1-16 of
this Code.
§ 244-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-49
235:627

ARTICLE VIII
Alternate Sources of Water
§ 244-50. Franchise area.
§ 244-51. Areas served by other utilities.
A. Borough Ordinance No. 2-90144 establishes a franchise area for the
supply of water by the New Jersey American Water Company
encompassing two areas, area one being the northwesterly corner of
the Borough and area two being the southeasterly corner of the
Borough.
B. To the extent that Chapter 244 of this Code is in conflict with the rules
and regulations as established by the Board of Public Utilities, the
affected sections shall not apply.
C. All charges and billing will be in accordance with rates established by
the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey, and the
individual accounts will be billed by the New Jersey American Water
Company.
A. Identification. Presently, two areas of the Borough are served by
adjacent water suppliers. These areas are:
(1) In the Park Avenue and Punchbowl Road areas, there are
approximately 23 private homeowners serviced by the Southeast
Morris County Municipal Utilities Authority.
(2) On Carrigan Lane and Burnet Road, there are approximately nine
homes served by the Madison Water and Light Department.
B. Application of ordinances. To the extent that Chapter 244 of the Code of
the Borough of Florham Park is not in conflict with the water service
provided, this chapter shall apply to these two areas of the Borough.
C. Charges and billing. Article V of this chapter shall be observed with
regard to Borough participation.
D. Reports. All reports as required by this chapter shall be maintained by
the Borough Water Department even though the source of the water is
not from the Department.
144. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2-90 is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 244-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 244-51
235:629
Chapter 250
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Firesafety — See Ch. 134.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 175.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
Signs — See Ch. 199.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
212.
Swimming pool enclosures — See Ch. 216 § 4.
Swimming pool fencing — See Ch. 216 § 19.
Sanitation — See Ch. 265.
§ 244-51 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 244-51
235:630
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 250-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Zoning."
§ 250-2. Interpretation and purpose.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the provisions hereof shall be held
to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Among other purposes,
the provisions of this chapter are intended to:
§ 250-2.1. Scope; conflict with other provisions; interpretation of
references to Planning Board.
A. Permit the appropriate use or development of all lands in a manner
which will promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and preservation of the
environment.
E. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies.
F. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, cultural, religious, commercial
and industrial uses and open space, both public and private, according
to their respective environmental requirements.
G. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
H. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
I. Promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources
and prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land.
A. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically or implicitly repealed by this
§ 250-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.1
235:631
§ 250-2.2. Definitions.
chapter, or any private restrictions placed upon property by this
chapter or any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant,
deed or other private agreement unless in conflict herewith.
B. This chapter generally establishes minimum requirements under the
law. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage or
requires greater lot area or larger yards or other open spaces than are
imposed or required by the rules, regulations or permits referred to
above or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
C. This chapter, as well as the Subdivision and Site Plan Review Chapter
(See Chapter 212), and the Sign Ordinance (Ch. 199) shall represent
the Land Use Ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park and have
been drafted so as to implement the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. Any conflict between the ordinances mentioned above
and the designated statutes shall be interpreted and resolved so as to
best achieve the intentions of the drafters of this legislation in
maintaining the most stringent standards which will inure to the benefit
of the Borough.
D. All references to the Planning Board in this chapter include, in
appropriate instances, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, which has
equal powers, and therefore such reference is meant to include the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, where applicable.
E. References to specific Borough codes are made a part of this code.
A. General rules of construction and interpretation. Words used in the
present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the
plural and the plural the singular; the word "used" shall include the
words "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted,"
"rented," "leased" or "intended to be used"; the word "shall" is
mandatory and not optional, and the word "abut" shall include the
words "directly across from," "adjacent" or "next to."
B. Terms not defined. Whenever a term is not defined in this chapter, it is
intended to have the meaning set forth in P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-3 through 40:55D-7), if defined by that statute. In the event of
conflict between the definition in this chapter and that contained in said
statute, the definition in said statute shall apply.
C. Word usage. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel"; the
word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual; and the
words "used" and "occupied" shall be considered as though followed by
the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, or
offered for occupancy." The term "such as," where used herein, shall be
considered as introducing a typical or illustrative, rather than an
§ 250-2.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:632
entirely exclusive or inclusive, designation of permitted or prohibited
uses, activities, establishments or structures. The words "zone" and
"district" are synonymous.
D. For the purposes and use of the Land Use Ordinance, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building
or structure, on the same lot with the principal building, which is
unoccupied or devoted exclusively to an incidental and accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use naturally and normally incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of a structure or lot, including homebased
businesses.
ADDITION — A structure or an increase in floor area or height, added
to the original structure after the certificate of occupancy has been
issued for the original structure.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Borough Administrator, unless a
different municipal official or officials are designated by ordinance,
statute or resolution.
AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING — Housing (a) occupied by (i) at least
one individual who is age 55 or over or (ii) the surviving spouse of an
individual who occupied the housing unit and was 55 years of age or
older at the time of death, and (b) not occupied by anyone under age
19.[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06]
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or an enlargement, whether by
extension of a side or by increase in height or by moving from one
location to another, or a change in use. (See also N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.4-1.4)
ANTENNA — Any structural or mechanical device which is designed
for the purpose of sending or receiving television, radio, microwave,
telephone, satellite or similar signals transmitted from a geostationary
orbit or another land source.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development
and the owner of the property to be developed.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required for approval of a subdivision plat,
site plan, planned development, conditional use, development permit or
zoning variance or for direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36. (See also Ch. 212).
ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining and to assure that assisted-living services are
available when needed, for four or more adult persons, age 55 or older,
unrelated to the proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.2
235:633
multipurpose room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable
door on the unit entrance.
BASEMENT — An interior space of a building having a floor level more
than two feet below the average level of the finished grade at the
front of the building. A basement in a nonresidential building shall be
considered a story unless the basement is and remains unfinished and
under-utilized except for storage or utility purposes. (See also N.J.A.C.
5:23-1.4.). Notwithstanding the foregoing, basements in office buildings
in the POD-S Zone (regardless of finish or use) shall not be counted as
a story so long as the finished basement space, and basement space
used for purposes other than storage (including vehicle parking) or
utility service, are counted as floor area in determining compliance with
the limits on maximum permitted office space under § 250-123A(1)(b)
below.[Amended 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-8]
BUFFER AREA — A strip or parcel of land containing natural
woodlands, earth mounds or other planted screening materials or
vegetation which separates one type of land use from another and
wherein no use, activities or signs shall be permitted unless permitted
by the Planning Board.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction with a
roof, adopted to permanent, temporary or continuous use or occupancy
for public, educational, assembly, institutional, residential, business,
industrial or storage purposes. The term "structure" as used herein is
compatible with but not necessarily limited to an occupancy use. (See
also N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.4.)
BUILDING LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by a
building, as measured at the exterior of the walls, and including any
roof overhangs, should there be any.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The perimeter area within a lot formed by the
minimum front, rear and side yards, or other greater established yards.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — The certificate issued by the
Construction Code Official, in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code145 and the Borough Land Use Ordinances and in
conjunction with all construction or change of use, subject to any prior
approvals and any conditions established by the appropriate boards
having jurisdiction.
CHANGE IN USE — The use of the building or land which is in any
manner different from the previous use by way of function, operation,
extent or change in products sold, handled or manufactured, including
a change from one permitted use to another permitted use in the
same zone; this includes any change in occupancy or tenancy in
nonresidential zones, even if the use remains the same. [(See also
§ 250-7.2B(l)(b).]
145. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and N.J.S.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.
§ 250-2.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:634
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION — A form of development that permits a
reduction of lot area and bulk requirements, provided that there is
no increase in the number of lots permitted under the conventional
zone and no increase in the overall density, and that the remaining
area is devoted to open space, active recreation or preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.[Added
5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01]
COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY — An education institution authorized by
the state to award baccalaureate or higher degrees. The use may
include buildings, structures, uses and activities normally associated
with institutions of higher learning, such as classroom and laboratory
buildings, dormitories, libraries, student centers, faculty residences,
auditoriums, gymnasiums and athletic facilities.[Added 2-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-2]
COMMERCIAL ATHLETIC TRAINING FACILITIES — Athletic training
facilities for professional or amateur sports teams and facilities and/
or uses ancillary or incidental thereto, which facilities and/or uses may
include buildings containing administrative, operations and business
offices, buildings containing gymnasiums, locker rooms and athletic
training equipment, dormitories, indoor and outdoor athletic fields, airsupported
domes for indoor fields, indoor and outdoor field lighting,
surface parking, buildings for maintenance, food service, medical
(including, without limitation, rehabilitation and physical therapy
facilities and services and related administrative uses), lodging for the
players and staff of the sports team, related retail, merchandising,
restaurant and entertainment uses, temporary or permanent seating
or facilities for public spectator events, including, without limitation,
training, practice sessions, special scrimmages, mini-camps, fitness
and training camps, marketing events, carnivals, fairs, concerts, and
the like, and any other accessory buildings and facilities related or
incidental to any of the foregoing uses.[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No.
08-06]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle registered commercially,
or used for profit, which is required by law, if used on the highways,
to bear any license plate other than that issued for passenger car
use under applicable state laws; excluding, however, any passenger
automobile not for hire, used and designed for the transportation of
fewer than 10 passengers.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Ownership of two or more contiguous
parcels of real property by one person or entity, or by two or more
persons or entities owning such property as joint tenants or as tenants
in common.
CONCEPT PLAN — A plan intended for informal review and discussion
purposes which presents in a general manner the proposed design
and features of development, but which carries no vesting rights or
obligations to any party.
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.2
235:635
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an approval
therefor by the Planning Board.
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL — The qualified official appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the Borough Council to enforce and
administer the regulations promulgated by the State Uniform
Construction Code. (See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:23-1
et seq.)
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — Any permit required prior to constructing,
moving, altering or demolishing any building or structure.
CORPORATE SUITES — One or more buildings containing suites/
occupancy units available to the public, with or without meals. The
suites/occupancy units shall be contracted for occupancy on a transient
and/or transitional basis. The minimum size of such suites/occupancy
units shall be not less than 650 heated square feet and shall include
facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. At least
50% of the corporate suites provided on any lot shall contain one
bedroom, and no corporate suite/occupancy shall have more than two
bedrooms. Accessory services and amenities offered by the facility shall
include and be limited to a) indoor facilities and services consisting of
leasing center, housekeeping services, furnished and unfurnished units,
café, vending facilities, lobby/lounge/gallery, structures and facilities,
maintenance facilities, commercial laundry, garages, mail facilities, and
a state of the art business center, which shall contain a business lounge,
computer center/cybercafe videoconferencing facilities,
telecommunications facilities, multimedia presentation facilities, copy/
production facilities, theater with permanent seating for not more than
35 people, media screen room, meeting rooms and conference facilities,
breakout rooms, fitness center, yoga room, spa, massage facilities and
other business support areas, and b) outdoor amenities consisting of
pool, cabanas, fire pit, passive recreation seating, meeting areas with
outdoor furniture, and dancing area, all of which shall be for the
exclusive use of occupants and their guests. Use of facilities by guests
shall be accessory to the occupant's use of such facilities.[Added
4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
DENSITY — The permitted number of families, individuals, households
or dwelling units per unit area of land to be developed.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, location or enlargement of any building or other structure or
of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use
§ 250-2.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:636
of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
for which permission may be required and municipal permits obtained.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person,
partnership, association, company or corporation for the improvement
of property as permitted in COAH's rules.[Added 5-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 9-01]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development, and the means necessary for water supply preservation
or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DWELLING — A single unit of housing providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping eating, cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed upon real estate by deed or
other legal means to permit the use of land by the municipality, public,
a corporation or particular persons for specific uses.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined
by the Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure
that all property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment
ratio or ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit
may be obtained by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for
construction cost. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at
project completion by the Municipal Tax Assessor.[Added 5-15-2001
by Ord. No. 9-01]
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration or maintenance by public utilities, municipal or other
governmental agencies of gas, electrical power, water mains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or governmental
agencies for the public health, safety or general welfare. Essential
services shall include firehouses and first aid and emergency aid
squads, whether provided by municipal or nonprofit agency.
FAMILY — One or more persons customarily living together as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a
boardinghouse, lodging house, hotel or motel; an individual or married
couple and the children thereof, with not more than two other persons
related directly to the individual or married couple by blood or
marriage; or a group of not more than five unrelated persons, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
FARMING — The use of land for agricultural or horticultural use or for
raising poultry or domesticated livestock.
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.2
235:637
FENCE — An arrangement of rails, stakes, shrubs, metal, masonry,
wood or wire, erected or planted as an enclosure, barrier or boundary.
(See also Chapter 216).
FLAG LOT — A lot not meeting the minimum frontage requirements
or not abutting a public street and where access is provided through
a narrow private right-of-way or driveway.[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-2]
FLATS, APARTMENTS — A dwelling unit located in a building
containing one or more similar units and adjoining said similar units
above, below or to the side and which may share with said similar units
common facilities, such as entranceways, hallways and utility facilities
or systems.
FLOODPLAIN; FLOODWAY; FLOOD HAZARD AREA — All lands
designated flood areas, as determined by a map entitled "Special Flood
Hazard Area and Floodway Map," dated January 9, 1976, with latest
revisions.
FLOOR AREA — The area of interior floor space computed by
measuring the dimensions of the outside walls in a building or dwelling
unit, excluding attic, cellar and basement floors, porches, patios,
terraces or breezeways, carports, verandahs or garages; provided,
however, that floor area shall include any area located below the first
or ground floor if used for human habitation or service to the public.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of all floor area of buildings or
structures compared to the total area of the site.[Added 3-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 4-02; amended 12-19-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02A]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or structure or a part of
the main building used for the storage of not more than three passenger
motor vehicles or two such vehicles and one automotive truck not
exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds' capacity owned or
used by the occupant of the building to which the garage is accessory,
and in which no occupation, business or service for profit is conducted.
(See also BOCA Code 407.2.)
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the commercial storage, washing, maintenance or
repair of motor vehicles for profit, or where any such vehicles are kept
for hire. (See also BOCA Code 408.2 or any later revision.)
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building of no more than three stories
containing at least three dwelling units, in which one dwelling unit may
be located over another unit. Access to individual units may be from
common or shared areas.
GOLF COURSE — An area of 50 or more contiguous acres containing
a full-size golf course, at least nine holes in length, as well as the
necessary and usual accessory uses and structures, including but not
limited to clubhouse facilities, dining and refreshment facilities,
swimming pools and tennis courts, if not otherwise prohibited by this
§ 250-2.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:638
Code or other ordinance, provided that the operation of such is
incidental and subordinate to the operation of a golf course.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance or material that, by
reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious
properties, may be injurious, detrimental or deleterious to the health
of any person coming in contact with the same, which materials are
set forth and listed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
HEALTH AND WELLNESS CENTER or HWC — An establishment
providing a broad range of facilities and services for the promotion,
maintenance, and improvement of the health and well-being of people
within the surrounding community, including but not limited to
cardiovascular, strength training and other exercise rooms and
equipment, individual and group exercise programs, swimming pools,
lap pools, therapy pools, whirlpools, locker rooms, private changing
rooms, steam rooms, saunas, showers, individual and group aquatic
exercise and rehabilitation programs, community health education
programs and individual health education counseling, classrooms,
nursing offices, health research library, computer laboratories
providing internet access to health-related topics, medical spas, health
spas, rehabilitation services and facilities, including cardiac
rehabilitation and physical, speech, and occupational therapies, child
care facilities, caf, and cooking classrooms for training and instruction
in the preparation of healthful diets for diabetics, heart patients, and
others with special dietary needs, as well as for normally healthy
individuals.[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 08-06]
HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS — The vertical distance of a structure
measured from the average elevation of the finished grade 10 feet from
the building corners to the level of the highest point of the roof. On lots
of less than two acres in lot size, where retaining walls are proposed,
the height shall be measured from the average grade of the lot prior
to construction.[Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 17-05; 6-14-2018
by Ord. No. 18-15]
HOME OFFICE — Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and
conducted as a customary, incidental, and accessory use in the
resident’s dwelling unit, such as but not limited to physician, dentist,
lawyer, architect, artist, engineer, accountant, consultant, teacher of
academic subjects or musical instruments, or similar occupations, but
shall not include personal service businesses as defined herein, except
for medical massage therapists treating patients solely by
prescription.[Added 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 08-04; amended
3-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-2]
HOTEL or HOTEL AND CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility providing
rooms for temporary lodging for paying guests, which facility may also
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.2
235:639
include in the same building a fitness center for use of hotel guests,
meeting and/or conference rooms, restaurant and/or bar facilities,
ballrooms, and ancillary stores, shops, and service facilities, provided
that such stores, shops, and service facilities are primarily for the use
and convenience of hotel guests and/or patrons of other uses within
the hotel building.[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 08-06; amended
3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4; 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A use by a public, nonprofit, quasipublic or
private institution or entity for educational, religious, charitable or
medical purposes. Summer camps shall not be considered institutional
uses.
JUDGMENT OF REPOSE — A judgment issued by the Superior Court
approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair share
obligation.[Added 5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01]
LAND — Ground, soil or earth, including improvements and fixtures on,
above or below the surface thereof.
LAND USE ORDINANCE — See Chapter 212, Subdivision and Site Plan
Review, and Chapter 199, Signs.
LOADING AREA — An off-street loading or unloading area of at least
420 square feet, exclusive of driveways or aisles giving access thereto,
which is accessible from a street, alley, driveway or aisle and is
arranged, designed and usable for the temporary parking for loading or
unloading of one motor vehicle.
LOT or LOT AREA — A designated parcel, tract or area of land
established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law, to be used,
developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and bounded by two or more
intersecting streets, or a lot bounded on two or more sides of the same
street or different streets when these sides form an interior angle of
less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE, IMPROVED — That percentage of a lot which is
improved or is proposed to be improved with buildings and structures,
including but not limited to driveways, parking lots, pedestrian
walkways, signs, and other man-made improvements on the ground
surface which are more impervious than the natural surface.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary above, stormwater detention
basins (with or without liners) and artificial turf athletic fields shall not
be considered to be improved lot coverage.[Amended 9-19-2006 by
Ord. No. 08-06]
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front and rear
property lines of any lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured along the
street right-of way line. On a corner lot, the frontage is the shortest of
the two street line dimensions.
§ 250-2.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:640
LOT WIDTH — In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum lot
width specified in the Schedule (§ 250-9)146 shall be measured at the
rear line of the minimum required front yard area, provided that never
shall the frontage of such lot be less than 70% of the minimum frontage
required in the Schedule.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the Borough prepared and adopted
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
MOBILE HOME — Any truck or trailer-type structure, over 32 feet in
length, designed and used for habitation.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used or designed to be used for the supply of
gasoline or oil or other fuel for motor vehicles and which may include
facilities used for repairing, storing, polishing, greasing, washing,
maintaining or servicing such motor vehicles, but shall not include
convenience stores, motor vehicle body repairing, motor vehicle
painting, commercial car washing establishments or the selling of new
or used vehicles or the display of those vehicles, new or used, for
sale and other businesses to which motor vehicle service stations are
necessary.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE — An attached grouping of more than
two dwelling units on a common parcel of real property, commonly
referred to as townhouses, apartments, villas, condominiums or low- to
moderate-income housing, and having been constructed in conformity
with an approved site development plan and any other prior approvals.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as amended.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building or structure, the size,
dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment. Such uses shall not
be expanded or enlarged except by variance.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of
146. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.2
235:641
a development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — An improvement which is not located
on the property which is the subject of an application for development
nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way, and includes any
of the following:
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or in the neighborhood of such open space.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, outside the confines of a building,
of goods, supplies, equipment, materials and merchandise of any kind
intended for use or sale on or off the premises.
PARKING SPACE — An accommodation for the parking off-street of one
operable, licensed vehicle, which shall be 10 feet wide and 20 feet long.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings which shall be
allowed, subject to the provisions of this Land Use Ordinance of the
Borough.
All improvements of the types required for on-tract installation
where the need for the providing of such improvements off-tract is,
in whole or in part, made necessary by the proposed application
of the applicant and where the making of such improvements will
confer a benefit upon the applicant's lands which are the subject of
the application.
(1)
Any improvement or facility, the installation of which is required in
the public interest and the public need for which would not arise
but for the improvement of the lands which are the subject of the
applicant's application and the installation of which would confer
a benefit upon the applicant's lands which are the subject of the
application. In addition to improvements of the type referred to
above, improvements required to maintain a safe flow of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic are specifically declared to be necessary in
the public interest.
(2)
Installation of new improvements and extensions and modifications
of existing improvements.
(3)
§ 250-2.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:642
PERSONAL CARE SERVICES — Business primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person, such as beauty salons,
nail salons, barber shops, tanning salons, nonmedical massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy establishments and exercise and health
clubs. [Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2147]
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — A contiguous or
noncontiguous area greater than 300 acres to be developed according
to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial, office and
such other uses incidental to the prominent use as may be permitted
by this chapter.[Added 3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 4-02; amended
12-19-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02A]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A planned unit development, planned
unit residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT or PUD — An area with a minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous area of 450 acres to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan, containing one or more residential
clusters or planned unit residential developments and one or more
public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such ratios of
nonresidential uses to residential uses as are specified in this
chapter.[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 08-06]
POD PARKING SPACE — An accommodation in the Planned Office
District Zones for the off-street parking of one operable, licensed
vehicle, which shall be nine feet wide and 18 feet long.[Added
3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 44-02; amended 12-19-2002 by Ord. No.
22-02A]
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — Any container, storage unit or
portable structure (commonly known as PODS) designed to be used on
a temporary basis and without a foundation for the purpose of storing
tangible property for the use of the residents lawfully occupying the
subject premises and not for occupancy by persons.[Added 9-24-2015
by Ord. No. 15-19]
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of a building or
structure.
PROHIBITED USE — A use not listed as a permitted use in the Land
Use Ordinances of the Borough or which is specifically prohibited.
PUBLIC UTILITY USES — Buildings, structures and facilities, including
generating and switching stations, poles, lines, pipes, pumping stations,
repeaters, antennas, transmitters and receivers, valves and all
buildings and structures relating to the furnishing of utility services,
such as electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer, and public transit, to the
public.
147. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of “personal service
business,” added 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 08-04, as amended.
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.2
235:643
R.O.W. — Right-of-way (public).
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESTAURANT — A facility in which food is prepared and is served
for consumption on the premises to patrons seated at tables, booths
or counters inside the building by waiters and/or waitresses. (See also
Sidewalk Cafe Code, Chapter 208, Article VI.)
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any facility or part thereof whose
primary, principal, normal and usual function is the sale of food and
beverages prepared for immediate consumption and packaged or
wrapped in paper or other disposable containers for sale over the
counter or at a drive-up window to customers for consumption within
the building or off and away from the premises.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use of land usually
set forth in a deed and intended to control the future use of lands
consistent with present approvals.
RETAIL SERVICES — Establishments primarily providing services as
opposed to products to the general public, such as but not limited to
laundry, cleaning and pressing services, tailors, shoe repair, tutoring,
and not including personal care services.[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-2]
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent or
temporary storage of water runoff.
R.S.I.S. — Residential Site Improvement Standards.
SETBACK LINE — The line to which a building must be set back
from the property line or street line. The setback is measured to the
outermost portion of the structure; provided, however, that
architectural features, such as roof overhangs, bay windows and
chimneys, may project no more than 18 inches into the minimum
setback as long as such features do not increase the building's floor
area. Unenclosed front steps and stoops no longer than six feet wide
and five feet deep, with no more than four risers, are permitted
encroachments into the minimum front yard setback.[Amended
4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 17-05]
SIGN — Any composition of text, symbols or graphics, object, device,
display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, and
intended to be viewed from the outdoors, which is used to advertise,
identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures,
colors, illumination or projected images. However, a sign shall not
include any display of official, court or public office notices or any
official traffic control device; nor shall it include the flag, emblem
or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or religious
§ 250-2.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:644
group. A sign may have two display faces (See Borough Code Chapter
199, Signs.)
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling unit owned by one person
solely, joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or in common or joint
tenancy, on a separate parcel of real property.
STEALTH TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it. In single-family residential structures, an attic with a clear height
of seven feet that exceeds 1/3 of the floor area below shall constitute
a story. (See also "basement.")[Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No.
17-05]
STORY ABOVE GRADE — See N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.4.
STREET —
STREET, PAPER — A street or right-of-way that has not been built
but which is shown on an approved plan, subdivision map, tax map or
official map and has not been accepted or approved by the Borough.
STREETS, PRIVATE — A street that has not been accepted or approved
by the municipality or other governmental entity for the purposes of
maintenance or control.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is:
(a) An existing state, county or municipal roadway;
Shown upon a plat heretofore dedicated and approved
pursuant to law;
(b)
(c) Approved by official action as provided herein; or
Shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a
Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to
review plats.
(d)
(1)
"Street" includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the
street lines.
(2)
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-2.2
235:645
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by the Council
approving municipality's housing element and fair share plan in
accordance with the provisions of the Act148 and the rules and criteria
set forth herein. A grant of substantive certification shall be valid for
a period of six years in accordance with the terms and conditions
contained therein.[Added 5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01]
SUPPORTIVE AND SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING — A living
arrangement for intellectually and/or developmentally disabled persons
providing services and support in a community setting, privately leased
or owned by the provider, all of which are utilized for the provision
of residential services, which include group homes, supervised
apartments, and supportive shared living. All individuals or households
occupying supportive and special needs housing shall be of very low,
low or moderate income.[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-17]
TOWER SITE — The enclosed area in which the tower and its
appurtenances are located.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family dwelling contiguous with other such
units in which each unit has its own front access to the outside, no unit
is located over another unit and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more common rated wall assemblies.
UCC — The Uniform Construction Code.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be lawfully occupied,
used or maintained. (See also "permitted use.")
VARIANCE — The permission to depart from the literal requirements of
this chapter, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
YARD, FRONT — An open space, unoccupied except by a use as
hereinafter specifically permitted, extending across the full width of a
lot and lying between the front street property line and the nearest
point of any structure on the lot. Any lot abutting a street less than
50 feet in width shall be construed as having a front street property
line located 25 feet from the center line of such street. Any lot abutting
a street shown as greater than 50 feet on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall provide a front yard measured from the right-of-way required
therein.
YARD, REAR — An open space, unoccupied except by a use hereinafter
specifically permitted, extending across the full width of a lot and lying
between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the principal structure
on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open space, unoccupied except by a use as
hereinafter specifically permitted, extending between the front yard
and the rear yard of a lot and lying between the side lot line and the
nearest point of any structure on the lot.
148. Editor's Note: The "Act" refers to the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 250-2.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-2.2
235:646
§ 250-2.3. Rezoning requests.
§ 250-3. Zones established and enumerated. [Amended 3-19-2002
by Ord. No. 4-02; 12-19-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02A; 8-23-2005 by Ord.
No. 29-05; 12-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-19; 2-15-2018 by Ord. No.
18-1; 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2; 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9;
5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10; 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-11]
The land of the Borough is hereby divided into the following zones:
R-88 One-Family Residence Residential Zone
R-44 One-Family Residence Residential Zone
R-25 One-Family Residence Residential Zone
R-15 One-Family Residence Residential Zone
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Borough Council to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, Chapter 188 and Chapter 199, and to prosecute any
violation of such provisions in the Borough Municipal Court.
ZONING FEE — The mandated fee to be paid by an owner, applicant
and/or agent to the Borough for the review of a zoning application
submitted to the Zoning Official on the form prescribed in the manner
acceptable to the Borough for work proposed. The fee is described in
the attachment below and is nonrefundable.149 The fee for a zoning
permit, whether approved or denied, is separate from any fees
associated with a Board hearing, if needed, or any validly issued
construction permit. The owner of the subject property in question
for which a zoning permit is filed is the owner of the zoning permit
regardless of who pays for it.[Added 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-16]
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Official which
is required by this chapter as a condition precedent to the
commencement of use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and
which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of this chapter, subdivision or site plan approval or has
an approved variance therefrom.
A. A request for rezoning or amendment to any zoning regulations shall be
in writing to the Planning Board on forms available from the Planning
Board Secretary and shall be accompanied by a fee and escrow deposit,
as provided for in the Planning Board fee schedule found at § 212-15B.
[Amended 2-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1]
B. The Planning Board shall review the request and, if it finds that the
request has merit, it shall refer same to the Borough Council for its
consideration.
149. Editor's Note: Said attachment is included as § 250-30.1.
§ 250-2.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-3
235:647
R-7 One-Family Residence Residential Zone
B-1 Business Zone
PB-1 Professional and Business Office Zone
PB-2 Professional and Business Office Zone — Residential
Appearance Required
C-1 Office and Manufacturing Zone
C-1MF Multifamily Residential Housing
C-1MFAR Multifamily Age Restricted Housing
C-2 Office and Manufacturing Zone
C-3 Office, Research and Laboratory Zone
C-4 Mixed Office, Research, Laboratory and Multifamily
Residential Zone
MF-1 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-2 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-3 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-4 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-5 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-6 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-7 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-8 Multifamily Residential Zone
MF-9 Multifamily Residential Zone
OSR Open Space Recreation Zone
OSM Open Space Municipal Zone
POD-N Planned Office District - North
POD-S Planned Office District - South
U University/College Zone
§ 250-4. Zoning Map. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4]
The zones enumerated in § 250-3 are hereby established by the
designations, locations and boundaries thereof set forth and indicated on
the Zoning Map dated December 17, 1962, as revised from time to time,
the last revision being dated December 18, 2007. Such map shall be known
as the "Zoning Map of the Borough of Florham Park" and is hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this chapter, and is available in the
Borough Clerk's office.
§ 250-5. Determination of zone boundaries.
The following rules shall apply to the location of zone boundaries on the
Zoning Map.
§ 250-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-5
235:648
§ 250-6. Enforcement of chapter.
§ 250-7. Construction permit: generally.
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of the
streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines, or in
the same extended as they exist on the Borough's current Tax Maps,
unless such zone boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the
Zoning Map.
B. Where there is a dispute as to the location of a zone boundary, such
determination shall be made by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
A. This chapter shall be administered by the Construction Code Official,
who shall in no case grant any permit for the construction or alteration
of any building or structure where the proposed construction, alteration
or use thereof or use of land would be in violation of any provision of
this chapter.
B. This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and/
or Construction Official, or any other Borough official having
jurisdiction, who is hereby empowered to cause any building, structure,
place or premises to be inspected and examined and to enforce the
remedying of any conditions found to exist which are in violation of any
zoning provisions of this chapter and to prosecute such violation in the
Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall maintain records of every written
complaint of any violation of the provisions of this chapter, as well as
the action taken in answer to or as a result of such complaint.
D. The Construction Code Official shall maintain appropriate files of all
applications for permits and certificates of occupancy, along with the
documents submitted therewith, as well as a record of the dates of
issuance of said certificates and permits.
E. The Construction Code Official and the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall each report to the Borough Council monthly as to the number and
types of permits and certificates issued and the types and number of
violations reported and actions taken thereon.
A. Required; conditions to issuance. No building or part thereof shall be
erected, demolished, constructed, altered, repaired or moved until a
construction permit has been issued by the Construction Code Official.
No construction permit shall be issued unless the relevant following
requirements and conditions are complied with:
(1) The application process has been successfully completed by the
developer, property owner or authorized agent.
§ 250-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7
235:649
(2) The Board of Health has issued a permit for an individual disposal
system, where required, or the developer has an approved means
of sewage treatment or disposal.
(3) For the erection, demolition, construction, reconstruction,
alteration or moving of any building or part thereof, that the plans
and intended use indicate that such building is designed and
intended to conform in all respects to the provisions of this chapter,
and that there has been the proper certification by the Borough
Engineer that all required improvements have been installed or
their installation has been guaranteed.
(4) A licensed land surveyor shall locate such building or improvement
and the lot lines of the intended site for the Construction Code
Official. A land survey is valid for a maximum of 10 years.
(5) The Construction Code Official shall ascertain that all requirements
of this chapter or of an approved site plan have been complied with.
(6) Except for a single-family residence, where permitted:
(a) That the Construction Code Official has received a certified
copy of a resolution of final site plan approval or waiver
therefrom from the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(b) That more than 45 days (10 acres of land or less) or 95 days
(more than 10 acres of land) have elapsed since the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment has accepted the completed
application without approval or disapproval having been given.
Then the final site plan will be deemed to have been approved.
The Secretary of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
will make the notation on the final site plan that approval is
automatic due to failure of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment to act within the time required.
(7) That the Borough Engineer, or his agent, has approved all proposed
drainage plans.
(8) All development must comply with barrier-free requirements as set
forth in the UCC.
B. Maintenance; expiration. All permits as applied for shall be held, and
maintained, or shall expire, as provided for in the State Uniform
Construction Code or unless otherwise provided for in a developer's
agreement.
C. Fees. The fees for building permits are more particularly set forth in
Chapter 103 of this Code and copies are available from the
Construction Code Official.
§ 250-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.1
235:650
§ 250-7.1. Construction permit: surface grading permit
requirements for all residential zones. [Amended 12-16-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-41]
A. A surface grading permit shall be required prior to any residential lot
improvements that include land disturbance, excavation, placement of
fill, or changes to the existing surface grades. The surface grading
permit shall be considered a "prior approval" under the Uniform
Construction Code, and no construction permit shall be issued unless
the applicant has obtained the required surface grading permit. The
surface grading permit shall be issued by the Borough Engineer or his
designee.
B. Exemptions:
(1) Any development that has received site plan approval from the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment; provided, however,
individual lots for single-family and multifamily dwellings included
within any approved subdivision shall not be exempt.
(2) Placement of topsoil not greater than four inches deep for the
purpose of turf replacement, and/or the placement of mulch in
planting beds.
(3) The Borough Engineer may waive the requirement for a surface
grading permit, or any components of a surface grading permit,
based upon the specific land disturbance and site conditions.
C. Surface grading plan preparation and requirements.
(1) A surface grading plan shall be designed to provide proper grading
and erosion control; protect against adverse consequences for
surface water runoff; and prevent sedimentation and/or damage to
on-site and off-site property, as established herein.
(2) A surface grading plan is required for any proposed land
disturbance and the construction of a residential dwelling and shall
be prepared by a professional engineer and/or architect licensed in
the State of New Jersey. Where required, a surface grading plan for
any land disturbance of less than 1,000 square feet, and land
disturbance for the purpose of constructing a building addition of
less than 600 square feet to an existing residential dwelling may be
prepared and submitted by a homeowner, provided sufficient
technical information is included. In addition to the conditions
listed above, any surface grading plan that proposes land
disturbance greater than 5,000 square feet shall be submitted with
an approved soil erosion and control plan issued and approved by
the Morris County Soil Conservation District. Any surface grading
plan proposing construction of a new residential dwelling shall be
submitted with an approved soil erosion and control plan or a letter
of exemption issued and approved by the Morris County Soil
Conservation District.
§ 250-7.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.1
235:651
(3) Three copies of a signed surface grading permit application and a
surface grading plan, signed and sealed by a professional engineer
(if required), shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer with the
required permit fee. A surface grading permit application may be
obtained from the Engineering Department within the Borough of
Florham Park's Department of Community Services. The surface
grading plan shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than 30 feet
equals one inch and shall be prepared with sufficient detail to show
the following requirements:
(a) Date, North arrow, scale, block and lot number of the subject
property, name and address of the record owner, name and
address of the person preparing the plan (include license
number and seal if the plan is prepared by a professional
engineer).
(b) Complete lot boundary line, property easements, deed
restriction information, and adjacent public right-of-way based
on a current survey prepared by a surveyor licensed in the
State of New Jersey.
(c) Existing surface drainage pattern as it affects the subject
property and all adjacent properties. Contours shall be shown
at maximum intervals of two feet on the subject property and
extend 10 feet beyond all property lines. Existing contours
shall be shown by dashed lines.
(d) Silt fencing, hay bales, soil stockpile protection measures, and
such other soil conservation methods shall be shown and
implemented regardless of area of disturbance to retain all
sediment on the site. Soil conservation and sediment control
measures shall conform to the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey authored by the New Jersey
State Soil Conservation Committee.
(e) Spot elevations of the street and top of curb at each limit of the
subject property frontage, and grate and pipe invert elevations
of public stormwater drainage inlets along or near the frontage
of the subject property, or on the subject property.
(f) All existing trees with trunks exceeding five inches in diameter
measured at a point four feet above the existing ground line on
the subject property as well as any trees 10 feet beyond all
property lines. Any tree removals and proposed tree plantings
shall be shown on the surface grading plan. Tree removal is
governed by Chapter 229, Trees, of the Borough Code. A tree
removal permit application is required for any tree removal
and shall be attached to the surface grading permit
application, if applicable.
(g) Location of all existing and proposed structures, including
walls, fences, accessory structures, and any other
§ 250-7.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.1
235:652
aboveground physical features. Top and bottom of wall
elevations shall be shown.
(h) Location of existing rock outcroppings, high points,
watercourses, depressions, ponds, marsh areas, wooded areas,
and other significant natural features.
(i) Any proposed changes in the existing surface grading and
drainage pattern that will result from construction of said
improvements or land disturbance, including any proposed
grade changes to adjacent properties. Proposed contours shall
be shown by solid lines.
(j) Proposed elevations of the finished garage floor, first floor, and
basement floor of any new residential dwelling or addition to
an existing residential dwelling.
(k) Proposed location of all foundation, roof leader, and sump
pump drain outlets and underground drainage piping.
(l) Existing and proposed stormwater conveyance structures, dry
wells, ditches, or swales.
(m) Existing and proposed utility locations.
(n) Existing and proposed driveways, curbs, sidewalks, walkways,
patios, swimming pools, and any other accessory structure or
surface element defined as improved lot coverage.
(o) Outer limits of all areas where any proposed filling or grading
is proposed.
(p) Principal building setback lines; principal buildings, including
outline of roof overhangs; detached accessory buildings,
including outline of roof overhangs; decks; and balconies.
(q) FEMA one-hundred-year flood hazard area, if applicable. A
copy of the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps can be obtained
from the Borough of Florham Park's Engineering Department.
(r) For the proposed construction of any new residential dwelling,
or where otherwise required by the Borough Engineer, the
metes and bounds of all delineated wetlands and wetland
transition areas confirmed through a NJDEP letter of
interpretation (LOI) application shall be shown on the surface
grading plan. The NJDEP file number shall be shown on the
surface grading plan, and a copy of the LOI with associated
conditions shall be attached to the surface grading plan. If no
wetlands exist, then the plan must contain a note confirming
that no wetlands exist on the subject property.
§ 250-7.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.1
235:653
(s) Such other information as required by the Borough Engineer
or his designee in order to determine that the requirements of
this section have been met.
(4) Surface grading plan design standards. The following surface
grading plan standards shall be met prior to the Borough
Engineer's approval of the surface grading plan. If any of the
following provisions of this section cannot be satisfied, then the
applicant must appear before the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a
variance from said provisions, or for a request for interpretation of
said provisions of this section.
(a) A zoning table referencing applicable zoning requirements in
§ 250-9 shall be shown on the surface grading plan.
(b) Driveways should be as narrow as possible to minimize
improved lot coverage and to minimize disruption of the
sidewalk or street front planting strips. The number of curb
cuts or driveway access points shall be limited to one per 50
feet of frontage up to a maximum of two as long as the two curb
cuts access the same driveway. The maximum width of the
depressed curb cut for a driveway shall be 22 feet for one curb
cut and 15 feet per curb cut for two curb cuts. A roadway
opening permit is required for the replacement/installation of
any curbing, sidewalks, driveways, and planting strips within
the Borough's right-of-way. Driveways on a corner lot shall only
access one street, and the start of the curb cut shall be located
at least 50 feet from the intersection of the nearest street
curblines. Driveways shall be located to have a minimum fourfoot
setback from the side property lines. The setback area
shall be suitably landscaped when a side-loaded garage faces
an adjoining property to buffer impact of headlights and
vehicle exhaust, and to prevent vehicles from overhanging or
encroaching on adjoining property. Driveways shall be a
minimum of 24 feet wide perpendicular to the opening of each
side-load garage entrance.
(c) Any proposed piers/light stanchions at driveway entrances and
proposed mailboxes supported by masonry construction shall
be located out of the public right-of-way and are considered
accessory structures with a minimum ten-foot setback
requirement from the side property lines. Existing piers/light
stanchions and mailboxes supported by masonry construction
within the Borough's right-of-way shall be removed as part of
any proposed construction of a building addition greater than
400 square feet and/or major renovation to an existing singlefamily
dwelling, or construction of a new single-family
dwelling. Concrete sidewalks in the public right-of-way, if
required, shall follow the requirements in the Borough's Public
Works Improvement Standards and shall be continuous across
driveways, unless written approval is granted by the Borough
§ 250-7.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.1
235:654
Engineer for installation of an alternative material within the
Borough's right-of-way. A roadway opening permit is required
for the replacement/installation of any curbing, sidewalks,
driveways, and planting strips within the Borough's right-ofway.
(d) The amount of improved coverage in the area bounded by the
front wall of the principal building, the front property line, and
the two sidelines shall be limited to a maximum of 40% of said
area.
(e) Provisions shall be designed for the proper disposition of
stormwater surface runoff so that it shall not create unstable
conditions. Appropriate storm drainage facilities shall be
provided to protect downstream properties. Stormwater
surface drainage running off the site shall be controlled and
connected to the Borough's public storm sewer system, where
possible.
(f) Dry wells or other infiltration facilities acceptable to the
Borough Engineer or his designee are required for all new
dwellings and for all new additions to existing dwellings
involving a roof area of greater than 600 square feet. The
design capacity of the infiltration facility must, at a minimum,
be sized for three inches of rainfall over the area of the roof of
the new dwelling or new addition to an existing dwelling.
Design of these facilities must be based on appropriate sitespecific
soil tests certified by the applicant's engineer and
submitted and approved by the Borough Engineer. Overflow
pipes shall be incorporated into the dry well design. Should
site specific conditions obviate the use of dry wells or any other
infiltration facility, an alternative means acceptable to the
Borough Engineer for management of stormwater must be
provided. All underground roof leader pipes shall be a
minimum of four inches in diameter, designed of sufficient
strength taking into account surface loads, and shall connect to
the infiltration facility. If a dry well or infiltration facility is not
feasible as per the Borough Engineer or his designee, then roof
leaders and sump pump discharge pipes may be discharged
into the municipal stormwater collection system via direct
connection to a stormwater structure or pipe, where feasible.
The last alternative shall be the discharge of roof leaders and
sump pump water through the curb. Discharge pipes through
the curb shall be a minimum of four-inch diameter Schedule 40
PVC.
(g) For corner lots, fences, walls, hedges and other landscaping
shall not be located so as to constitute a hazard to traffic or
safety within the sight triangle. (Refer to Borough Code
Chapter 188.)
§ 250-7.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.1
235:655
(h) There shall be no alteration to existing site elevations and
grades without the implementation of drainage facilities or
swales to control stormwater runoff in a manner that will
protect adjoining lands. There shall be no alteration to existing
site elevations in excess of one foot within five feet of an
adjoining property line. There shall be no change in existing
grade which raises any portion of the lot within 15 feet of a
property line to an elevation that is more than two feet above
the existing ground level at the adjoining property line.
(i) There shall be no disturbance to any existing steep slopes
exceeding 1H:4V. Changes in grade shall not exceed a slope of
1H:3V unless supported by retaining walls, maintenance-free
vegetation, or other approved method of soil stabilization.
(j) Calculations signed and sealed by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of New Jersey for all proposed structural
retaining walls greater than four feet in height shall be
submitted to the Construction Official for approval.
(k) Prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy for a new
dwelling, a final as-built topographic survey, including
certification of building and improved lot coverages and
garage and first-floor elevations, must be submitted to the
Borough Engineer via hardcopy and approved digital format
(AutocadTM format) prior to final approval and closeout of a
surface grading permit.
(5) Time of action.
(a) The Borough Engineer or his designee shall review and
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the surface grading
permit application within 10 days from which a complete
application was submitted.
(6) Site inspections. Site inspections may be performed at random,
when requested, or when required. The applicant shall coordinate
the required inspections with the Borough Engineer prior to
performing work. Inspections are required for, but are not limited
to, curb cut installation, sidewalk installation in public right-of-way,
underground pipe connection to Borough-owned stormwater
facilities, and final rough grading prior to landscaping. Request for
inspections by the applicant are required within 24 hours of
performing work.
(7) Approval of surface grading. Upon application for issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, the
Construction Official shall request the Borough Engineer to
perform a final surface grading inspection of property. The Borough
Engineer or his designee will report items of nonconformance or
§ 250-7.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.1
235:656
will provide a closed-out surface grading permit to the
Construction Official.
(8) Escrow to complete work. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, the Construction Official may issue a certificate of
occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy prior to full
compliance with the surface grading plan, provided that the
Borough Engineer has determined that sufficient work has been
completed to ensure adequate site access, site safety, and soil
erosion control, and a cash escrow deposit in the amount of the
estimated cost effecting full compliance, as determined by the
Borough Engineer, is submitted along with the establishment of an
effective date of compliance as determined by the Borough
Engineer.
(9) Surface grading permit fee.
(a) A fee of $400 shall be imposed for each permit for any
proposed land disturbance of greater than 1,000 square feet
and any proposed land disturbance for the purpose of
constructing a building addition to an existing residential
dwelling greater than 600 square feet; otherwise, a fee of $150
shall be imposed for smaller projects.
(b) The fee shall cover the cost of a preliminary site visit, review of
initial submission and one revision, issuance of surface grading
plan approval, two random site inspections in addition to
required inspections, and final approval of surface grading
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, temporary
certificate of occupancy, or the release of any performance
guarantee that may have been posted for incomplete site work.
(c) An additional fee of $50 for each review of plans with
substantial revisions and each additional inspection other than
those noted above shall be charged to the applicant. Fees shall
be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a
temporary certificate of occupancy.
(10) Liability of applicant. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter
or any condition of the permit, the applicant is responsible for the
prevention of damage to other properties, and personal injury,
which may result from the activity requiring the surface grading
permit.
(11) Violations.
(a) Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains, or uses any building, structure, or land in violation
of the requirements of this chapter or an approved surface
grading permit shall, upon conviction thereof by any court
authorized by law to hear and determine the matter, be liable
for a fine of not less than $400 nor more than $2,000 or to
§ 250-7.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.1
235:657
§ 250-7.2. Certificate of occupancy/approval.
imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days, or both,
as such court in its discretion may impose. Each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(b) If a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of
occupancy is issued for a property prior to full compliance with
a surface grading permit, and full compliance is not effected by
a date set forth by the Borough Engineer, then continued
occupancy of such property after such date shall constitute a
use of such property in violation of this section.
A. No building, private or commercial, hereafter erected, altered or
subject to a change of use or tenant shall be occupied or used, in whole
or in part, for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the Construction Code Official. The certificate shall
state that the building, structure or alteration complies with all the
provisions of the UCC and all applicable Borough and state
requirements.
B. Certificates shall be granted or denied within 10 days of the application
being received by the Construction Code Official.
(1) Contents; changed use or occupancy.
(a) A certificate of occupancy shall specify the use of the building
and any circumstances or conditions imposed by any public
agency, code or regulations.
(b) Any change in a nonresidential occupancy or use, including a
change from one permitted use to another kind of permitted
use or a change from one permitted use to the same use
conducted by another tenant or owner, in the same zone, will
be treated as a new use, and site plan approval, or waiver, and
a new certificate of occupancy shall be required. Prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such change in use,
all provisions of this chapter shall be complied with as if the
new use were a new structure or use, including making an
application for a certificate of occupancy.
(c) Upon a change of occupancy of an existing nonresidential
building or structure, or tenant space and after review and
approval by the Borough Engineer pursuant to § 250-8 hereof
or § 212-21 of this Code, the Construction Code Official, upon
payment of an appropriate fee, shall issue a certificate of
continued occupancy, provided that there are not violations of
law or orders of the Construction Code Official pending and
that it is established after inspection and investigation that the
alleged use of the building or structure has heretofore existed.
§ 250-7.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.2
235:658
The certificate of continued occupancy shall evidence only
that a general inspection of the visible parts of the building
has been made and that there are not apparent violations of
the regulations. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the
continued use and occupancy of any such lawfully existing
building or structure. [Amended 6-13-2019 by Ord. No.
19-12]
(d) Any change in the occupancy or use of nonresidential premises
will be treated as a new use and will require the review and
approval of the Borough Engineer as aforesaid and the
issuance of a certificate of continued occupancy. [Amended
6-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-12]
(2) Compliance with other regulations. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued by the Construction Code Official until he has
ascertained that all requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code and Borough ordinances have been fully complied with. Prior
approval compliance must be met.
(3) Plan approval. Where a subdivision or site plan, as required by
Borough ordinances, has been duly reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board, the erection or alteration of the building or
structure shall not be deemed to be completed until all
requirements of the approved plan, including the surface grading
plan, are installed and approved by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Temporary issuance. Upon written request by the applicant, the
Construction Code Official, with the approval of the Borough
Council, may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy, for a
period not to exceed 90 days, when:
(a) The issuance of such temporary certificate of occupancy is in
the best interest of the Borough; and
(b) The failure to meet the requirements for a permanent
certificate of occupancy is due to circumstances beyond the
applicant's control; and
(c) The failure to issue a certificate of occupancy will impose a
serious hardship on the applicant. In such case, the Borough
governing body may authorize such temporary certificate of
occupancy when the applicant has requested, in writing, to
occupy the premises and states as a condition that he
understands that the unfulfilled conditions will be met by an
established date or his use and/or occupancy will be
terminated. Upon application by the developer owner or agent,
the Borough Council, with consent of the Construction Official,
may extend the temporary certificate of occupancy for one
ninety-day period. Escrow funds may be required to insure
compliance.
§ 250-7.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.2
235:659
§ 250-7.3. Mandatory development fees. [Added 5-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 9-01]
(d) Failure of the applicant to comply with Borough regulations
within the term of the extended temporary certificate of
occupancy will result in litigation for removal, and the
applicant shall be liable for all costs and fees incurred by the
Borough during this process, irrespective of whether the
applicant eventually complies or not.
(5) The Construction Code Official, when authorized by the Borough
Council, may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for uses
incidental to construction, such as storage and field office
buildings, and for dwellings to be used for sales and management
purposes, subject to the following:
(a) Recommendation of the Planning Board
(b) That the temporary building is being located on an approved
lot.
(c) That only sales, management or storage may be conducted on
the property in the same development which is incidental to
the construction thereon.
(d) That there is observance of all local laws, especially zoning and
property and maintenance codes.
(e) That there is landscaping, permanent or temporary, to improve
site appearance.
(f) That there is removal of the temporary use, either by
demolition or by converting to permanent use, within one year
of the date of issuance of the certificate.
(g) Upon termination of a temporary use, the site must be restored
to a condition satisfactory to the Borough Engineer.
(h) The location and use of the proposed temporary structure must
be approved by the Fire and Police Departments.
(6) Fees. Fees for all certificates are more particularly set in Chapter
103 of this Code by Council resolution, and copies are available
from the Construction Code Official or Borough Clerk.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Ass'n. v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990),
the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution subject to COAH
developing rules. The purpose of this section is to establish standards
for the collection, maintenance and expenditure of development fees
pursuant to COAH's rules. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall
be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income
§ 250-7.2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.3
235:660
housing. This section shall be interpreted within the framework of
COAH's rules on development fees.
B. Within all zone districts, excepting those excluded in Subsection D,
developers shall pay a development fee of 1 1/2% of either the
equalized assessed value of the eligible residential activity pursuant to
Subsection D of this section, the coverage amount of the homeowner
warranty document for a for-sale unit, or the appraised value on the
document used for construction financing for a rental unit. Where a
project involves a "d" variance or density increase, a greater
percentage will be charged in accordance with N.J.S.A. 5:94-6.6 and
6.7. [Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 18-05; 3-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-10]
C. Nonresidential development fees. Developers within all zone districts,
except as specifically excluded in Subsection D, shall pay a fee of 2.5%
of the equalized assessed value or the appraised value on the document
used for construction financing for eligible nonresidential activities
pursuant to Subsection D of this section. Where a project involves a "d"
variance or density increase, a greater percentage will be charged in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 5:94-5.6 and 6.7. [Amended 4-26-2005 by
Ord. No. 18-05; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10; 10-17-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-12]
D. Eligible exaction, ineligible exaction and exemptions.
(1) Developers of low- and moderate-income units shall be exempt
from paying development fees.
(2) Developers that expand an existing structure shall pay a
development fee. The development fee shall be calculated based on
the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved
structure.
(3) Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the effective date of this section shall be exempt from paying a
development fee unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval.
(4) Within that portion of the MF-4 and C-4 Districts which are zoned
to provide Affordable Housing (Block 1201, Lot 4; Block 4201, Lots
28, 29 and 30), developers shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
(5) (Reserved)150
(6) Developers of single-family residential structures which are
undergoing additions and renovations shall be exempt from paying
a development fee, provided the addition is less than 50% of the
150. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(5), regarding an exemption for developers within the
B-1 Business Zone, was repealed 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-19.
§ 250-7.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.3
235:661
floor area prior to the expansion. Additions that are greater than
50% of the floor area shall be subject to the fee. [Amended
10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-12]
E. Collection of fees.
(1) Developer shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to the
Borough at the issuance of building permits. The development fee
shall be estimated by the tax assessor prior to the issuance of
building permits.
(2) Developers shall pay the remaining fee to the Borough at the
issuance of certificates of occupancy. At the issuance of certificates
of occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the equalized
assessed value and the appropriate development fee. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at certificate of occupancy and the amount paid
at building permit.
F. Housing trust fund.
(1) There is hereby created an interest bearing housing trust fund in
the Chase Manhattan Bank, Florham Park Branch Office, for the
purpose of receiving development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers. All development fees paid by developers
pursuant to this section shall be deposited in this fund. No money
shall be expended from the housing trust fund unless the
expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH.
(2) If COAH determines that the Borough is not in conformance with
COAH's rules on development fees, COAH is authorized to direct
the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to this
section shall be expended. Such authorization is pursuant to this
section, COAH's rules on development fees, the written
authorization from the governing body to the Chase Manhattan
Bank, Florham Park Branch, Florham Park, New Jersey, and a final
adjudication as to the COAH determination.
G. Use of funds.
(1) Money deposited in a housing trust fund may be used for an activity
approved by COAH for addressing the Borough's low- and
moderate-income housing obligation. Such activities may include,
but are not necessarily limited to, housing rehabilitation; new
construction; regional contribution agreements; the purchase of
land for low- and moderate-income housing; extensions and/or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to low- and moderateincome
housing sites; assistance designed to render units to be
more affordable to low and moderate income people; and
administrative costs necessary to implement the Borough's housing
elements. The expenditure of all money shall conform to a spending
plan approved by COAH.
§ 250-7.3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.3
235:662
§ 250-7.4. Mandatory set-aside. [Added 10-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-20]
(2) At least 30% of the revenues collected shall be devoted to render
units more affordable. Examples of such activities include, but are
not limited to, down payment assistance; low interest loans; and
rental assistance.
(3) No more than 20% of the revenues shall be expended on
administrative costs necessary to develop, revise or implement the
housing element. Examples of eligible administrative activities
include personnel; consultant services; space costs; consumable
supplies; and rental purchase of equipment.
(4) Development fee revenues received pursuant to this section shall
not be expended to reimburse the Borough for housing activities
that preceded substantive certification.
H. Expiration. This section shall expire if:
(1) COAH dismisses or denies the Borough's petition for substantive
certification.
(2) COAH revokes substantive certification or its certification of this
section.
I. COAH monitoring and penalties. The Borough is required to comply
with the monitoring requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16 and to
the penalties for noncompliance with COAH regulations set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.17.
A. If Florham Park permits the construction of multifamily or single-family
attached residential development that is "approvable" and
"developable," as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3, at a gross residential
density of five or more units per acre, the Borough shall require that an
appropriate percentage of the residential units be set aside for low- and
moderate-income households, as defined by applicable state law or
regulations. For inclusionary projects in which the low- and moderateincome
units are to be offered for sale, the appropriate set-aside
percentage is 20%; for projects in which the low- and moderate-income
units are to be offered for rent, the appropriate set-aside percentage is
15%.
(1) All affordable housing controls and standards are subject to the
rules of the Council on Affordable Housing ("COAH") or any
subsequent state agency. The development, marketing and sale of
the affordable units shall be pursuant to applicable state
regulations and §§ 250-84 through 250-90 of this chapter, and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
(2) This requirement shall apply to any multifamily or single-family
attached residential development, including the residential portion
§ 250-7.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.4
235:663
§ 250-7.5. Affordable housing regulations. [Added 2-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-4]
of a mixed-use project, of three acres or more, in any zone within
Florham Park, and proposed at a density of five units per acre
or greater, whether permitted by a zoning amendment, a variance
granted by Florham Park's Land Use Boards, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas in
need of redevelopment or rehabilitation.
(3) This requirement shall not impose any obligation on a
development, or the nonresidential portion of a mixed-use
development, that is subject to the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act, N.J.S.A. 40:45D-8.1 et seq.
B. Nothing in this section precludes Florham Park from imposing an
affordable housing set-aside requirement on a development that is not
required to have an affordable housing set-aside pursuant to this
section, when such imposition is consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311,
Subdivision h, and other applicable law.
C. This affordable housing set-aside requirement shall not create any
entitlement to a special dispensation or approval for a property owner
or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan.
A. Purpose.
(1) This section is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income
units ("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability
and that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these
units. This section is also intended to ensure that any site that
benefits from a rezoning, variance, or redevelopment or
rehabilitation plan approved by the Borough that results in any
multifamily or single-family attached residential development,
including the residential portion of a mixed-use project, of three
acres or more, in any zone within Florham Park, and proposed at a
density of five units per acre or greater produces affordable
housing at a set-aside rate of 20% for for-sale affordable units and
at a set-aside rate of 15% for rental affordable units. This section
shall apply except where inconsistent with applicable law. This
requirement does not give any developer the right to any such
rezoning, variance or other relief, or establish any obligation on the
part of the Borough of Florham Park to grant such rezoning,
variance or other relief.
(2) The Borough of Florham Park Planning Board has adopted a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq. (hereinafter "Fair Share
Plan"). The Fair Share Plan was subsequently endorsed by the
governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes how Florham Park
§ 250-7.4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:664
Borough shall address its fair share of low- and moderate-income
housing as documented in the Fair Share Plan itself, the settlement
agreement entered into between the Borough of Florham Park;
Fair Share Housing Center ("FSHC"); Alfieri-Florham Park, LLC;
the Sisters of Charity of Saint Elizabeth; Palmont Associates, LLC;
Ridgedale Plaza Associates, LLC; Braemar Homes, LLC; and B&B
Associates, LLC on July 6, 2017, (hereinafter "settlement
agreement"), and the court order approving same dated, which was
entered by the Court on July 28, 2017, after a properly noticed
fairness hearing.
(3) The Borough of Florham Park shall track the status of the
implementation of the Fair Share Plan. Any evaluation report of the
Fair Share Plan shall be available to the public at the Borough
Municipal Building located on 111 Ridgedale Avenue, Florham
Park, NJ 07932.
B. Definitions. The following terms when used in this section shall have
the meanings given in this Section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit
with a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private
entrance, which is created within an existing home, or through the
conversion of an existing accessory structure on the same site, or
by an addition to an existing home or accessory building, or by the
construction of a new accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.) as has been subsequently amended.
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the
administration of affordable units in accordance with this ordinance,
applicable COAH regulations and the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls (UHAC)(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.)
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a lowor
moderate-income household as defined by COAH in its applicable
regulations or an equivalent controlling New Jersey state agency; in the
case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may
be amended and supplemented.
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:665
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development, all or a
portion of which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Borough's Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an
inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in the
Borough's Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address the
Borough's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to applicable COAH regulations, the FSHC
settlement agreement, or an order of the Court.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that: 1) all the residents of the development where the
unit is situated are 62 years or older; or 2) at least 80% of the units are
occupied by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3) the development
has been designated by the Secretary of the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as
defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that require the repair or replacement of a major
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey, that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing
Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:666
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. Inclusionary developments must
have a 20% set-aside of affordable units if the development has five
or more units and is a for-sale project, or a 15% set-aside if the
development is a rental project. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of new
affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household
income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural
systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by the Department.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:667
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income
at 80% of the regional median as defined by the Department's adopted
Regional Income Limits published annually by the Department.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for
its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, "rent" does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include
a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the median household
income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
C. Affordable housing programs. The Borough of Florham Park will use the
following mechanisms to satisfy its affordable housing obligations:
(1) A rehabilitation program.
(a) The Borough of Florham Park and FSHC have agreed that the
Borough's indigenous need rehabilitation obligation is 74
units. The Borough currently participates in the Morris County
Housing Rehabilitation Program and Morris County HOME
Consortium, which is funded through county CDBG planning.
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:668
The Borough will continue to implement its rehabilitation
program to ensure that its entire rehabilitation obligation has
been satisfied. The Borough will enact its own rehabilitation
program to update and renovate deficient housing units
occupied by low- and moderate-income households such that,
after rehabilitation, these units will comply with the New
Jersey State Housing Code pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:28. The
Borough will continue to rehabilitate housing units to improve
its housing stock and to continue to provide indigenous need
affordable units.
(b) All rehabilitated rental and owner-occupied units shall remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a
period of 10 years (the control period). For owner-occupied
units, the control period will be enforced with a lien and for
renter occupied units the control period will be enforced with a
deed restriction.
(c) The Borough of Florham Park shall dedicate an average of
$10,000 for each unit to be rehabilitated through this program,
reflecting the minimum hard cost of rehabilitation for each
unit.
(d) The Borough of Florham Park plans to set aside funding
through the Affordable Housing Trust Fund to help fund and
implement a rehabilitation program, per the review and
approval of a Spending Plan. Additionally, the Borough will
continue to participate in the Morris County Housing
Rehabilitation Program to administer the Rehabilitation
Program in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93 et. seq.151
(e) Units in a Rehabilitation Program shall be exempt from N.J.A.C.
5:93-9152 and UHAC requirements, but shall be administered in
accordance with the following:
[1] If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is re-rented
prior to the end of controls on affordability, the deed
restriction shall require the unit to be rented to a low- or
moderate-income household at an affordable rent and
affirmatively marketed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and
UHAC.
[2] If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser
of the current rent or the maximum permitted rent
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and UHAC.
151. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
152. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:669
[3] Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based
on the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 or the standards issued
by a New Jersey administrative agency with proper
authority to issue such standards.
[4] Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income-eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and
UHAC, except that households in owner-occupied units
shall be exempt from the regional asset limit.
(2) Phasing. Inclusionary developments shall be subject to the
following schedule, except where an alternate phasing schedule
has been incorporated into a development or redevelopment
agreement:
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units
Completed
0% 25%
10% 25%+1 Unit
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 90%
(3) Fractional units. If 15% or 20% of the total number of units in a
development (or the set-aside, as applicable) results in a fraction or
decimal, the developer shall be required to provide an additional
affordable unit on site.
Example: An eight-unit development requiring an affordable
housing set-aside of 1.6 units is proposed. The developer is
required to provide two on-site affordable units.
(4) Integration of affordable units. In inclusionary developments, to the
extent possible, low- and moderate-income units shall be integrated
with the market-rate units.
(5) Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating
source as market units within the affordable development.
D. New construction. The following general guidelines apply to all newly
constructed developments that contain low- and moderate-income
housing units, including any currently unanticipated future
developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing
units.
(1) Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:670
number of affordable housing units the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit.
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income
units. If there is only one affordable unit it must be a lowincome
unit.
(c) Thirteen percent of all affordable units in the Borough, with
the exception of units constructed as of July 1, 2008, and units
subject to preliminary or final site plan approval as of July 1,
2008, shall be designated as very-low-income households at
30% of the median income, with at least 50% of all very-lowincome
units being available to families. Very-low-income units
shall be considered low-income units for the purposes of
evaluating compliance with the required low/moderate-income
unit splits, bedroom distribution, and phasing requirements of
this section.
(d) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
[1] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
[2] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are
two-bedroom units;
[3] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
[4] The remaining units, if any, may be allocated among twoand
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(e) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be
structured such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the
number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units
within the inclusionary development. The standard may be met
by having all one-bedroom units or by having a two-bedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
(2) Accessibility requirements:
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:671
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
[1] An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
[2] An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
[3] An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
[4] An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
[5] An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first
floor; and
[6] An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the Borough of
Florham Park has collected funds from the developer
sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the
development accessible:
[a] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[b] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust
Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed
with adaptable entrances.
[c] The funds deposited under Subsection D(2)(b)[6][b]
above shall be used by the Borough of Florham Park
for the sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance
of any affordable unit accessible when requested to do
so by a person with a disability who occupies or
intends to occupy the unit and requires an accessible
entrance.
[d] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate for the conversion from
adaptable to accessible entrances to the Construction
Official of the Borough.
[e] Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:672
payment shall be made to the Borough's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[f] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall
not be required where an entity can demonstrate that
it is site impracticable to meet the requirements.
Determinations of site impracticability shall be in
compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.
(3) Maximum rents and sales prices.
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC utilizing the regional income limits established
by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (DCA) or
other agency as required by the Court.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 52% of median
income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units.
[1] At least 13% of all low- and moderate-income dwelling
units shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 30% of median income.
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different prices for each bedroom
type, and low-income ownership units must be available for at
least two different prices for each bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
other than assisted living facilities, the following standards
shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household;
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:673
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
[4] A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-onehalf-
person household; and
[5] A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household; and
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate household size as determined under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that the rent shall be subject to the affordability
average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended
and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(j) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:674
not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall
be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income
housing tax credits.
(k) Utilities. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent
with the utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8
program.
E. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) The Borough of Florham Park shall adopt by resolution an
Affirmative Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court,
compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and
supplemented. The initial Affirmative Marketing Plan shall include
the following community and regional organizations: Fair Share
Housing Center, the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP,
the Latino Action Network, East Orange NAACP, Newark NAACP,
Morris County NAACP and Elizabeth NAACP.
(2) The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is also intended
to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs all marketing activities toward Housing Region 2 and
covers the period of deed restriction.
(3) The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference
for all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 2.
(4) The administrative agent designated by the Borough of Florham
Park shall assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units
consistent with the Affirmative Marketing Plan for the municipality.
(5) In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law.
(6) The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least four months prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:675
(7) The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Borough.
F. Occupancy standards.
(1) In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying
the unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(a) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(b) Provide separate bedrooms for adults and children;
(c) Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
(d) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
(2) Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall
be provided in the municipal Operating Manual.
G. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
(1) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section until the Borough of
Florham Park elects to release the unit from such requirement;
however, and prior to such an election, a restricted ownership unit
must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, for at least 30 years.
(2) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value.
(4) At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute
and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating
the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and
assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's
release from the requirements of this section, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value
and its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:676
a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the
unit.
(5) The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
(6) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all code standards
upon the first transfer of title that follows the expiration of the
applicable minimum control period provided under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
H. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowner
association fees and resale prices. Price restrictions for restricted
ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may
be amended and supplemented, including:
(1) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
(2) The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards.
(3) The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable
between the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market
unit owners.
(4) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
I. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income. Very-low-income units
shall be reserved for households with a gross household income of
less than 30% of median income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:677
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular
unit (including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's
certified monthly income.
J. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit; subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing
that the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this
section.
(2) With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time
cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted
ownership unit to exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale
price of that unit, as such price is determined by the administrative
agent in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
K. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80- 26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this section until the Borough of Florham Park
elects to release the unit from such requirements pursuant to
action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et. seq, as may
be amended and supplemented, and prior to such an election, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80- 26.1 et seq, as may be amended and supplemented,
for at least 30 years.
(2) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Morris. A copy of the filed document shall be
provided to the administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt
of a certificate of occupancy.
(3) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this section, despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
L. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:678
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units,
except for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the administrative agent.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this section.
M. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of
median income.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income,
low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's
eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of the
following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:679
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents proposed third-party assistance
from an outside source such as a family member in a form
acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection M(2)(a) through (e)
above with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the
household on budgeting.
N. Administration.
(1) The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for the Borough
of Florham Park is established by this section. The Borough shall
make the actual appointment of the MHL by means of a resolution.
(a) The MHL must be either a full time or part-time employee of
Florham Park.
(b) The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to the
Court and thereafter posted on the Borough's website.
(c) The MHL must meet all the requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training, if such training is made
available by COAH or the DCA.
(d) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for the Borough of Florham Park, including the
following responsibilities which may not be contracted out to
the administrative agent:
[1] Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
[2] The implementation of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and
affordability controls.
[3] When applicable, supervising any contracting
administrative agent.
[4] Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the
Borough's Fair Share Plan;
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:680
[5] Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as
required;
[6] Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers
and administrative agents, as applicable; and
[7] Attending continuing education opportunities on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring and
affirmative marketing as offered or approved by the
Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey (AHPNJ),
if such continuing education opportunities are made
available by COAH or the DCA.
(2) The Borough of Florham Park shall designate by resolution of the
Borough Council, subject to the approval of the Court, one or more
administrative agents to administer newly constructed affordable
units in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93153 and UHAC.
(3) An Operating Manual shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body. The
Operating Manuals shall be available for public inspection in the
Office of the Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the
administrative agent(s).
(4) The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC,
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80- 26.14, 16 and 18 thereof,
and shall have authority to take all actions necessary and
appropriate to carry out its responsibilities, which includes:
(a) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Affordable Housing Professionals of
New Jersey (AHPNJ).;
(b) Affirmative marketing;
(c) Household certification;
(d) Affordability controls;
(e) Records retention;
(f) Resale and re-rental;
(g) Processing requests from unit owners; and
(h) Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
O. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
153. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:681
(1) Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal
fines, a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of
all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent
further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and
specific performance.
(2) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
or tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court:
[1] A fine of not more than $10,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day
that the violation continues or exists shall be considered a
separate and specific violation of these provisions and not
as a continuing offense;
[2] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Borough of Florham Park Affordable Housing Trust Fund
of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
[3] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of
the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of
a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the lowand
moderate-income unit.
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:682
(3) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall
be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money mortgage and
prior liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred
by the municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have the right to possession terminated as well as the title
conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(4) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or
until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture
of such balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned
on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be
paid to the owner or forfeited to the municipality.
(5) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing units
as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were
taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any
right of redemption.
(6) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with
an amount equal to the difference between the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-7.5
235:683
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price
for which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(7) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the
owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(8) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
P. Annual and periodic monitoring of the implementation of the Borough's
affordable housing plan.
(1) Beginning one year after the entry of the Borough's Round 3
Judgment of Compliance and Repose, the Borough agrees to
provide annual reporting of the status of all affordable housing
activity within the Borough through posting on the municipal
website with a copy of such posting provided to Fair Share Housing
Center, using forms previously developed for this purpose by the
Council on Affordable Housing or any other forms endorsed by the
Special Master and Fair Share Housing Center. In addition to the
foregoing, the Borough may also post such activity on the CTM
system and/or file a copy of its report with COAH or its successor
agency at the State level.
(2) The Fair Housing Act includes two provisions regarding action to
be taken by the Borough during its ten-year repose period. The
Borough agrees to comply with those provisions as follows:
(a) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1,
2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its
implementation of its Plan and an analysis of whether any
unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a
realistic opportunity and whether the mechanisms to meet
unmet need should be revised or supplemented. Such posting
shall invite any interested party to submit comments to the
Borough, with a copy to Fair Share Housing Center, regarding
whether any sites no longer present a realistic opportunity and
should be replaced and whether the mechanisms to meet
unmet need should be revised or supplemented. Any interested
§ 250-7.5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-7.5
235:684
§ 250-8. Site plan applications; waiver.
party may by motion request a hearing before the Court
regarding these issues.
(b) For the review of very-low-income housing requirements
required by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third
anniversary of the entry of the Borough's Judgement of
Compliance and Repose, and every third year thereafter, the
Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its
satisfaction of its very-low-income requirements, including the
family very-low-income requirements referenced herein. Such
posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the Borough and Fair Share Housing Center on the issue of
whether the Borough has complied with its very low income
housing obligation under the terms of this settlement.
(c) In addition to the foregoing postings, the Borough may also
elect to file copies of its reports with COAH or its successor
agency at the state level.
A. Site plan applications shall be made by the owner of the property
pursuant to Chapter 212 of this Code.
B. To apply for a waiver of site plan review, the owner shall submit
sufficient information to the Borough Engineer so as to facilitate his/her
decision. The information shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, a survey or other suitable map, the date of and copies of any prior
site plan approval affecting the property and a definite statement as to
why no present site plan review is necessary. [Amended 6-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-12]
C. Where a site plan waiver is applied for, the nonrefundable filing fee
shall be in accordance with § 212-23F of this Code.
D. The Borough Engineer may consider granting a waiver of site plan
review where a new use does not require substantial structural changes
and a greater amount of off-street parking than the prior use and where
the proposed use does not pose an increased risk to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare. [Amended 6-13-2019 by Ord. No.
19-12]
E. Except for special or extraordinary reasons as determined by the
Borough Engineer, a site plan waiver shall customarily issue where a
site plan approval was obtained within the past five years and there is
compliance with Subsections B, C and D above. [Amended 6-13-2019
by Ord. No. 19-12]
F. Should the Borough Engineer deny a site plan waiver the application
shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and decision. The
Borough Engineer shall submit a report to the Planning Board notifying
§ 250-7.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-8
235:685
§ 250-9. Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements.
The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 250-10. Dimensional requirements for irregularly shaped lots.
In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum lot width specified in
the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements set forth in § 250-9154
shall be the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of such lot,
measured at the front yard setback line, provided that in no case shall the
frontage of such lot at the street line be less than 70% of the minimum
frontage required in such section.
§ 250-11. Reduction of requirement: conditions.
Where additional street right-of-way is obtained by the Borough, county
or state for a road improvement by purchase, donation, dedication,
condemnation or by other legal means, the required minimum lot area,
dimensions or setbacks may be reduced by the same area deeded to the
Borough, county or state as aforesaid, at the discretion of the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment.
§ 250-12. Joint use of area to meet requirements.
§ 250-13. Placement of principal residential building or dwelling on
lots.
the Board of all site plan waiver actions. [Added 6-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-12]
A. Yards and open spaces. No part of a yard or open space required about
any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly
required for another building.
B. Off-street parking and loading. No off-street parking area, loading or
unloading area provided to meet the minimum off-street parking,
loading or unloading for one use or structure shall be considered as
providing off-street parking, loading or unloading for a use or structure
on any other lot.
A. A building to be used as a single-family residence shall not be
constructed in the rear or moved to the rear of a structure on the same
lot, and a structure shall not be constructed in front of or moved to the
front of a residence situated on the same lot.
B. No lot shall have more than one principal residential building.
154. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements as an
amendment to this chapter.
§ 250-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-14
235:686
§ 250-14. Accessory buildings.
Buildings which are accessory to the principal use or building are permitted
in all zones, provided that:
§ 250-14.1. Keeping of animals. [Added 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-4]
The keeping of animals within the Borough shall be permitted as an
accessory use in all single-family residential districts subject to the
following conditions:
A. Yard and accessory building requirements are met as specified for the
zone in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements set forth
in § 250-9.155
B. An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply in
all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the principal
building and may be considered a part of the principal building.
Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the front
building line of the principal building and, if located in a side yard area,
shall conform to the side yard requirements with respect to the
principal building.
C. Such buildings, when constructed subsequent to the principal building,
shall require a certificate of occupancy before they may be legally used.
D. The footprint of such buildings shall not exceed 600 square feet in area
in a residential zone. The height of an accessory building shall not
exceed 15 feet or be more than one story high. [Amended 5-17-2018
by Ord. No. 18-11]
E. No detached accessory building shall be used as a residence or dwelling
unit.
F. A maximum of two accessory buildings is permitted, per lot, in all
residential zones, provided that one is a garage.
G. No swimming pool may be located in a side yard. [Added 2-26-2008
by Ord. No. 08-2]
H. Sheds that are less than 100 square feet in area shall not require a
building permit for installation and shall not be counted when
calculating building coverage. Such sheds shall not be located in any
front yard and shall not be located closer than three feet to any rear or
side property lines. [Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2]
A. A permit shall be required from the Health Department subject to
compliance with the regulations contained in Chapter 265.
155. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-14.1
235:687
§ 250-14.2. Freestanding air-conditioning units and permanent
generators. [Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2]
Freestanding air-conditioning units and permanent generators shall not be
located in the front yard of any property and shall not be located any closer
than five feet to the side or rear property lines of any property.
§ 250-14.3. Affordable accessory apartments. [Added 2-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-3]
B. The keeping of dogs and cats is excluded from the requirements of this
section.
C. No person shall keep swine in the Borough.
D. The following animals may be kept within the Borough, provided that
the property contains the specified minimum lot sizes and maximum
number of animals:
(1) Horses: five acres and no more than one horse per acre.
(2) Ponies: five acres and no more than one pony per acre.
(3) Cattle: five acres and no more than one per acre.
(4) Sheep: two acres and no more than one per acre.
(5) Goats: two acres and no more than one per acre.
(6) Fowl (including pigeons, ducks, geese, peacocks and chickens,
excluding roosters): 15,000 square feet and no more than four per
1/3 acre. The keeping of roosters is specifically prohibited.
E. Properties classified as "farmland assessment" shall not be subject to
the limitations concerning the number of animals.
F. Regulations for buildings, coops and enclosures for housing animals.
(1) No building, coop, run or stable used for the housing or shelter of
animals shall be located in the front yard.
(2) All buildings, coops, runs or stables shall be located only in the rear
yard and shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the rear and side
property lines and 20 feet from any dwelling, except that stables or
other buildings used for the keeping of horses, ponies, cattle, sheep
or goats shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any dwelling.
(3) Any outdoor area for keeping animals, including corrals, shall be
located a minimum of 20 feet from the rear and side property lines,
20 feet from any residential structure and is not permitted in the
front yard.
A. Applicability. This chapter applies to the creation of subsidized
accessory apartments in all residential districts of the Borough.
§ 250-14.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-14.3
235:688
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this program to help meet a portion of the
Borough's fair-share housing obligation and provides a realistic
opportunity for the development of affordable housing through
subsidizing the construction of up to 10 accessory apartments for
occupancy by low-income or moderate-income households, Boroughwide.
Accessory apartments are permitted in conjunction with the
Borough's affordable housing program and the rules and regulations
established herein shall be designed to ensure that each accessory
apartment established hereunder shall be and shall remain
creditworthy under the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing (COAH) and other applicable law for a period of
at least 10 years.
C. Definitions. Definitions pertaining to affordable housing not found
below are the same as those definitions that appear in the rules and
regulations adopted by the Council on Affordable Housing in N.J.A.C.
5:93-1 et seq. as used in this chapter:156
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit
of no less than 300 square feet with a kitchen, sanitary facilities,
sleeping quarters and a private entrance, which is created within an
existing home, or through the conversion of an existing accessory
structure on the same site, or by an addition to an existing home or
accessory building, or by the construction of a new accessory structure
on the same site. Any dwelling unit created or designated as an
accessory apartment pursuant to this section shall be and shall remain
permanently accessory to the primary use of the property as a singlefamily
dwelling and shall in no way confer upon the property owner any
future rights to subdivide the existing lot in order to place the accessory
dwelling on a separate lot from the principal dwelling.
APPLICANT FOR AN AFFORDABLE ACCESSORY APARTMENT — The
person or persons applying for funds to create an accessory apartment
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
COUNCIL ON AFFORDABLE HOUSING — The Council established by
the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., also
known as "COAH."
HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR — The person, agency or consultant
designated by the Borough Council to perform the duties described in
this chapter. The Borough Council may appoint the Borough Housing
Liaison as the Housing Administrator.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a gross household
income equal to 50% or less of the median gross household income
for households of the same size within the housing region in which the
housing is located as determined by the Council on Affordable Housing
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., or its subsequent rules and regulations.157
156. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired on October 16, 2016.
157. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired on October 16, 2016.
§ 250-14.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-14.3
235:689
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a gross
household income more than 50% but less than 80% of the median
gross household income for households of the same size within the
housing region in which the housing is located as determined by the
Council on Affordable Housing in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., or its
subsequent rules and regulations.158
UTILITY ALLOWANCE — An allowance for utilities that is consistent
with the personal benefit expense allowance for utilities as defined by
HUD (or a similar allowance approved by COAH).
D. Minimum standards.
(1) Accessory apartments shall be permitted on properties in which a
dwelling with three or more bedrooms, which is in conformity with
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located,
including minimum required lot area, lot frontage, lot width, and
lot depth, and is at least one acre in area.
(2) Accessory apartments shall have living/sleeping space, cooking
facilities, a kitchen sink, and complete sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of its occupants. The accessory apartment shall have
a separate, private entrance from the principal structure on the
same property. It shall consist of no less than 300 square feet with
at least two rooms, one of which shall be a full bathroom.
(3) The potable water supply and sewage disposal system for the
accessory apartment shall be adequate as evidenced by approval of
the Borough Water and Sewer Utility.
(4) The net habitable floor area devoted to the accessory apartment
shall not exceed 25% of the aggregate net habitable floor area
within buildings on the site, including both the principal singlefamily
building on the site and all accessory buildings on the site,
which shall be certified by a licensed New Jersey architect.
(5) The creation of an accessory apartment shall not create a
nonconforming condition on the site regarding applicable zoning
requirements. An accessory apartment that is detached from the
principal dwelling shall conform to all of the accessory building
requirements of the zone.
(6) There shall be no more than one accessory apartment located on
any one lot.
(7) Off-street parking shall be provided for the occupants of the
affordable accessory apartment in conformance with § 250-34, Offstreet
parking requirements, which shall be depicted on the
submitted sketch or site plan.
158. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired on October 16, 2016.
§ 250-14.3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-14.3
235:690
(8) Any construction relative to the creation of an accessory apartment
shall be architecturally consistent with the appearance of other
structures on the same site. Accessory apartments shall be
designed to blend and harmonize new construction with the
existing exterior architectural design of the original dwelling unit
using similar materials, colors and details. The present exterior
architectural design of the original dwelling unit shall be
maintained to preserve the residential character of the
neighborhood.
(9) Any dwelling unit created or designated as an accessory apartment
pursuant to this section shall be and shall remain permanently
accessory to the primary use of the property as a single-family
dwelling, and shall in no way confer upon the property owner any
future rights to subdivide the existing lot in order to place the
accessory dwelling on a separate lot from the principal dwelling.
(10) In the case of an accessory apartment created illegally or without
proper permits, which the property owner desires to legitimize as
an accessory apartment under this program, all of the
requirements of this section and all requirements of the U.C.C.
shall apply.
(11) Any existing code deficiencies in the portion of the building to be
devoted to the accessory apartment unit shall be corrected, and the
unit shall be brought up to code standard. The standard for
evaluating any rehabilitation activity on an existing dwelling unit
shall be N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.4 and 5:23-2.5. The evaluation shall be
undertaken and certified by a licensed New Jersey architect prior
to the issuance of a construction permit.
(12) The owner of any accessory apartment as part of this program shall
agree, by written contract, to comply with all of the requirements
of § 250-87, Affordable Housing Board regulations, of the Borough
Code, § 250-7.5, Affordable housing regulations, and the Accessory
Apartment Manual.
(13) The owner shall agree to rent the accessory apartment unit only to
a moderate- or low-income tenant.
(14) The owner shall agree that, prior to the issuance of a construction
permit and certificate of occupancy for the initial tenant of the
accessory apartment, there shall be a recorded deed or declaration
of covenants and restrictions applied to the property running with
the land that maintains the affordability of the accessory apartment
for the minimum ten-year period. A sample deed restriction and/or
loan agreement prepared by the Borough Attorney shall be
supplied to the applicant.
(15) The owner shall agree that, prior to the issuance of a construction
permit and certificate of occupancy for the initial tenant of the
accessory apartment, a separate deed restriction shall be recorded
§ 250-14.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-14.3
235:691
for any property containing an accessory apartment created
pursuant to this section specifying that such unit(s) shall remain
permanently accessory to the principal dwelling and shall not in
the future be subdivided and placed on a separate lot from the
principal dwelling.
E. Administration.
(1) Affirmative marketing plan.
(a) The accessory apartments created shall be affirmatively
marketed in accordance with the Borough's affirmative
marketing plan.
(b) Notification of the availability of funds for the creation of
accessory apartments shall be accomplished through the
circulation of flyers describing the accessory apartments
program, as described in the Accessory Apartment Manual
adopted by the Borough, and making information and
application packets available to interested owners upon
request and free of charge.
(c) Before any rental or re-rental of an accessory apartment, the
unit shall be affirmatively marketed by the Borough's
affordable housing administrative agent to households
throughout the housing region (consisting of Union, Morris,
Essex, and Warren Counties) in a manner consistent with the
affirmative marketing requirements of the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing.
(2) Housing administrator or Borough administrative agent. The
Borough Council shall designate a Housing Administrator, who may
be the Borough housing liaison, or the Borough administrative
agent, to manage the accessory apartment program, whose duties
may include all or some of the following:
(a) Preparing an accessory apartment program operating manual
consisting of the following:
[1] Implementing the affirmative marketing plan adopted by
the Borough;
[2] Criteria for determining eligibility of properties and
accepting applications from interested households to
determine their eligibility;
[3] Creating and maintaining a waiting list of applicant
households;
[4] The amount of money currently available for accessory
apartment conversions or additions;
§ 250-14.3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-14.3
235:692
[5] Ensuring compliance with permissible rents and annual
rent increases;
[6] Procedures for review and approval of work, including
interim inspections of work;
[7] Establishing and maintaining effective communication
with owners and sending out annual mailings about
restrictions including allowable rent increases; and
[8] The length and terms of affordability controls.
(b) Preparing information packets to be distributed to interested
owners.
(c) Developing the necessary application forms to be used by
owners interested in applying for participation in the accessory
apartments program. The application form shall clearly state
that any owner who utilizes the provisions of this program shall
agree to place a deed restriction and a lien on his or her
property. In addition, the application form shall require proof
of ownership, insurance and other general information on the
property in question. The content shall be pursuant to the
accessory apartment program operating manual.
(3) The affordable accessory apartment shall be subject to inspection
by the appropriate subcode officials and Construction Official in the
normal course of his/her responsibilities, upon the submission of a
construction permit.
(4) Funding.
(a) Funding for the accessory apartments program shall come
from the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund, as
designated in the Borough's approved spending plan. The
money expended on the accessory apartments program shall
be exempt from the limitations on final appropriations imposed
pursuant to P.L. 1976, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-45.1 et seq.).
(b) The Borough shall provide ten-year forgivable loans to fund the
creation of up to 10 accessory apartments Borough-wide in the
amount up to $25,000 per unit.
(c) A minimum of $10,000 and up to a maximum of $20,000 shall
be provided for each moderate-income accessory apartment
unit to be created, or $25,000 for each low-income accessory
apartment created. The property owner shall be obligated for
any additional costs. The $20,000 or $25,000 subsidy shall be
applied to the construction costs of the accessory apartment
unit and/or to provide compensation for reduced rental costs.
(d) Recommendations for funding shall be sent by the Housing
Administrator or Borough administrative agent to the Borough
§ 250-14.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-14.3
235:693
Clerk for inclusion on the agenda of the Borough Council. If
all program criteria and zoning requirements have been met
and certified by both the Housing Administrator/administrative
agent and Zoning Officer in writing, the Committee shall
approve the funding of the improvements from the funds
reserved for the program and shall authorize the Borough
Attorney to prepare an accessory apartment loan agreement
and deed restriction so as to ensure that a lien position may
be held the Borough. The recommendation for funding shall
include all capital costs and an estimate of the soft costs/
administrative expenses to be budgeted (such as the inspection
costs, attorney's fees, and processing expenses incurred by the
Borough Clerk).
(e) Funding will be provided to the approved accessory apartment
owner as follows:
[1] Twenty percent will be provided once the lien and deed
restrictions are recorded.
[2] Twenty percent will be provided at the issuance of the
building permit.
[3] Twenty percent will be provided after the project passes
the framing inspection.
[4] Twenty percent will be provided at the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy or the certificate of approval.
[5] Twenty percent will be provided when the lease is
executed with the initial prospective tenant.
(f) All subsidy monies shall be refunded to the Borough should the
affordable accessory apartment not be occupied by a qualified
family or tenant within one year of the granting of the subsidy.
F. General procedures for application, review, and approval.
(1) owner application, eligibility, and review.
(a) Interested owners will be able to secure information and
application packets from the designated Housing
Administrator or Borough administrative agent.
(b) Interested owners will submit a completed application form to
the Housing Administrator or Borough administrative agent.
The Housing Administrator or Borough administrative agent
will be available to assist the owner in the completion of the
application form.
(c) Interested owners who submit applications for the accessory
apartments program shall not be required to pay application
§ 250-14.3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-14.3
235:694
fees. Any necessary construction fees or permitting are not
waived.
(d) The Housing Administrator or Borough administrative agent
will review the application for completeness and, if the
application is complete, determine that the applicant has
signed a binding contract stating his or her willingness to rent
the accessory apartment unit to a qualified low- or moderateincome
household.
(2) Zoning approval procedure.
(a) Approved applicants for the creation of an accessory
apartment shall submit for approval through the Borough's
zoning permit approval process. The application shall include
the forms required for a Borough zoning permit and all
information necessary for the Zoning Officer to determine
compliance with this section. The application shall include, but
may not be limited to, the following:
[1] A plot plan (survey) including the location of the proposed
construction and demonstration of conformity to the
applicable bulk requirements of the zone.
[2] A sketch of floor plan(s) and site plan(s) signed and sealed
plan by a licensed New Jersey architect showing the
location, size, and relationship of both the accessory
apartment and the primary dwelling within the building or
in another structure as to size and demonstration of
compliance with the applicable requirements of this
section.
[3] Elevations showing modification of any exterior building
facade to which changes are proposed.
[4] The zoning permit for an application for an accessory
apartment shall only be denied if the property is not in
conformance with this section and other applicable zone
requirements. All denials shall be made in writing with the
reasons clearly stated.
(b) The Zoning Officer's determination shall be submitted in
writing to the Housing Administrator or Borough
administrative agent. Funding shall be requested and
administered according to the schedule required by
Subsection E(4) of this section.
(c) Any new construction or renovation of an accessory apartment
shall require construction permits which submitted to the
Construction Official with the appropriate forms and fees. The
Construction Official shall review the plans in the normal
§ 250-14.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-14.3
235:695
course of business and issue the appropriate permits when
warranted.
(d) Before a construction permit and a certificate of occupancy
may be issued;
[1] The applicant shall have entered into and recorded an
agreement with the Borough of Florham Park specifying
that the proposed accessory apartment shall be
constructed, occupied, and maintained in a manner that
complies with all of the requirements of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing, including the minimum
ten-year length of the affordable housing deed restriction,
the necessity of affirmatively marketing the unit, the basis
for calculating the maximum permitted rent and all
incremental increases in the permissible rent; the method
and timing of payments/subsidies by the Borough and any
other relevant matters consistent with the intent and
purpose of this section and the affordable housing
program in general;
[2] All of the necessary agreements shall be signed by the
applicant and the Housing Administrator or Borough
administrative agent;
[3] The lien shall be filed and recorded with the County Clerk;
[4] The deed restriction for the ten-year affordability control
shall be filed and recorded with the County Clerk; and
[5] A separate permanent deed restriction establishing the
permanent accessory status of the accessory apartment
shall be filed and recorded with the County Clerk.
(e) All subsidy monies shall be refunded to the Borough should the
affordable accessory apartment not be occupied by a qualified
family or tenant within one year of the granting of the subsidy.
Should the affordable accessory apartment not be produced or
rented to a qualified low- or moderate-income household, the
subsidy shall be returned to the Borough and deposited in the
Housing Trust Fund. All escrow and/or permitting fees shall
not be refunded. The affordable accessory apartment shall only
be rented to a qualified household.
G. Affordability controls.
(1) Liens on property. An owner who receives financial assistance
under the provisions of the subsidized accessory apartments
program shall be required to place a lien on his or her property. The
following requirements shall apply to such liens:
(a) The Borough shall be specified as the lienholder.
§ 250-14.3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-14.3
235:696
(b) The lien shall specify that the value of the lien equals the
amount of the monetary benefits received by the applicant
under the accessory apartments program.
(c) A record of the lien will be kept on the property tax record, in
the County Clerk's files, in the Housing Administrator's or
Borough administrative agent's records, and notification to the
tax collector with the deed and with the insurance policy, as
required by this program.
(d) The owner shall notify the Housing Administrator or Borough
administrative agent, in writing, of the intent to sell a property
that has benefitted from the accessory apartments program, if
the accessory apartment is still under the affordability controls
and restrictions required by this program.
(e) Each time the unit is re-rented, the Housing Administrator or
Borough administrative agent will verify that the unit will
continue to be occupied by a qualified moderate- or low-income
household and that the rent charged meets the affordability
guidelines of the program.
(f) All properties shall be periodically checked for liens, and any
suspected violations of the program shall be reported to the
Housing Administrator or Borough administrative agent for
further investigation.
(g) At the termination of the affordability controls, the loan shall
be forgiven and the lien shall be discharged by way of a notice
of lien discharged filed with the County Clerk.
(2) Length of affordability. owners who utilize the provisions of the
accessory apartments program shall accept a deed restriction on
the property. The deed restriction shall state that only a moderateor
low-income tenant, as determined by the Housing Administrator
or Borough administrative agent, shall occupy the accessory
apartment unit. The deed restriction shall be recorded with the
County Clerk, and a copy of the recorded deed shall be forwarded
to the Housing Administrator or Borough administrative agent. The
deed restriction shall go into effect as soon as a certificate of
occupancy has been issued and shall apply for a period of at least
10 years until the Borough elects to release the unit from the
requirements of the deed restriction. Any sale of the subject
property shall not affect the length or terms of the deed restriction.
(3) Pricing. The Housing Administrator or Borough administrative
agent and owner(s) of a deed-restricted accessory apartment unit
must follow the rental guidelines set forth below:
(a) Gross rents, including a utility allowance consistent with the
utility allowance approved by HUD for use in New Jersey, shall
be set so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly income for
§ 250-14.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-14.3
235:697
the appropriate household size and income level. Maximum
rents for each household size and income level shall be
calculated based on the regional weighted average of the
current uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and adopted by COAH.
(b) The following criteria shall be used to calculate applicable
rents for the accessory apartment units:
[1] Efficiency units shall be affordable to one-person
households;
[2] One-bedroom units shall be affordable to one-and-one-halfperson
households;
[3] Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to three-person
households.
(c) The rent level of each subsidized accessory apartment shall be
affordable to an appropriately sized household, as set forth in
Subsection G(3)(b), above, earning not more than 50% of the
regional median income for that size household for low-income
residents and between 50% and 80% of the regional median
income for that size household for moderate-income residents.
The Housing Administrator or Borough administrative agent
shall establish the maximum rent level for each subsidized
accessory apartment based upon these criteria.
(4) Annual indexed increases. The rents of the accessory apartment
units may be increased annually in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.15.159
H. Program compliance.
(1) The provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, the accessory
apartments program will comply with all of the regulations of the
Council on Affordable Housing, Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls, and with the requirements of the Chapter 250, § 250-7.5,
Affordable housing regulations. When references to the New Jersey
Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.) made herein are superseded, the
successor correlative regulations are intended to be referred to.
(2) Violations, defaults, and remedies. In the event of a threatened
breach of any of the regulations governing the affordable unit by an
owner of an accessory apartment, the administrative agent shall
have all the remedies provided at law or equity, including the right
to seek injunctive relief or specific performance, it being
recognized by both parties that it will cause irreparable harm to the
municipality, in light of the public policies set forth in the Fair
Housing Act160 and the obligation for the provision of low- and
159. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired on October 16, 2016.
§ 250-14.3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-14.3
235:698
§ 250-15. Churches.
Churches and similar places of worship and religious instruction shall have
a minimum lot area of three acres. No such building or accessory building
shall be within 75 feet of any lot or street line. Such uses shall comply with
all other requirements of the zone in which located.
§ 250-16. Lot frontage; yards.
§ 250-17. Buffer areas.
moderate-income housing. Upon the occurrence of a breach of
any of the regulations governing the affordable units by an owner
of an accessory apartment, the Borough shall have all remedies
provided at law or equity, including but not limited to foreclosure,
acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any
funds from a sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive
relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on the
premises, and specific performance.
A. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with a frontage on a
public street which has been improved or approved in accordance with
Borough standards, unless relief is granted pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, 40:55D-60 or 40:55D-76, except that lots in the
R-88 Zone may be developed on private driveways as provided in
§ 250-46 hereunder.
B. Every lot must provide front, side and rear yards as required for its
zone.
C. All front yards must face upon a dedicated public street or a private
street approved by the Planning Board.
D. All yards abutting a street shall be considered front yards and shall
conform to the minimum front yard requirements for the zone in which
located for the purpose of constructing the principal building only.
A. Required, permitted uses, etc., within area. Wherever the property line
of a lot in a nonresidential zone abuts a residential zone, a buffer area
shall be established within the nonresidential zone, which shall include
an area of land 50 feet wide, as measured from the residential zone line,
except as specified herein. Within the buffer area, no use or activity
shall be permitted, except for driveways or signage as permitted by the
Planning Board.
B. Buffer strips apply only in side and rear yards, except whenever the
property line of a lot in any nonresidential zone abuts or is across a
street from a residential zone, in which case a buffer area 50 feet in
width shall be established. A fifty-foot buffer is required in the B-1 Zone,
160. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 250-14.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-17
235:699
§ 250-18. Radio, television and satellite communication antennas.
a thirty-foot requirement in the PB Zones, except in the PB-3 Zone
for lots under one acre, where the buffer requirement would be lifted;
the requirement in the C-1 and C-4 Zones is 100 feet. Any variation
from these requirements constitutes a noticed exception, which may be
granted by the Planning Board.
C. Landscaping. Within the buffer area, solid and continuous landscaping
shall be planted and maintained and be in accordance with
requirements of the Florham Park Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment. The landscaping shall consist of lawn, massed conifer and
deciduous trees, ornamental trees and shrubs of such species, size and
density as will:
(1) Obscure, through all seasons, all of the glare of automobile
headlights emitted from the premises as is reasonably practicable.
(2) Conceal or at least break up the outline of the structure and
parking area and convey, as much as possible, to the general public
a pleasing view. Screens also should be designed to facilitate
maintenance such as weeding, pruning, etc. Plantings at
intersections should be placed so as to protect and provide
required sight distance. Landscaping in buffer zones is exclusive of
any other landscaping requirements of the Code.
D. Remaining area. The remainder of the area and all required yard areas
not occupied by parking areas shall be landscaped according to plans
approved by the Planning Board.
E. Replacement of plantings. In the event that any of the plantings in
accordance with the above requirements do not live or are removed
within one year from the time of planting, they shall be replaced.
A. Radio and television antennas, including satellite dish antennas, may be
installed, erected and maintained as accessory uses on a lot which
contains a principal structure within all Zone districts, but only in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The term "antenna," as
used herein, shall include any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting
discs or similar devices, which system is external to or attached to the
exterior of any building. Antennas shall include devices having active
elements extending in any direction and directional beam-type arrays
having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal
boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or
tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which
elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. The height of an
antenna shall be the total maximum to which it is capable of being
raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the finished
grade adjacent to the structure if ground-mounted or from the peak of
the roof if roof-mounted.
§ 250-17 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-18
235:700
B. It is the purpose of this section, in particular, to regulate the
construction, erection and use of satellite dishes consistent with an
applicant's desire to receive and utilize satellite signals. The size, shape
and location of satellite dish antennas present health, safety and
aesthetic concerns to the community, and it is the purpose of this
section to locate all antennas in the rear yard whenever and wherever
possible. It is further the purpose of this section to locate the satellite
dish antennas on the ground. Finally, except as otherwise permitted in
the PB, B-1 and C Zones, it is the purpose of this section to limit rooftop
locations of antennas to those applicants who are unable to received
desired signals from hidden or screened locations on the property.
(1) All such antennas are accessory uses and must comply with the
provisions and regulations controlling such uses and structures.
(2) With the exception of antennas which are less than one meter in
diameter, and two meters or less in commercial and industrial
zones, all other antennas shall be installed only after application to
the Planning Board and approval as to the issuance of a
construction permit by the Construction Official.
(3) The Planning Board may grant exception to ordinance
requirements in an attempt to ensure adequate signal reception,
but clear and convincing proof must first be submitted by the
applicant as to the need for the reception and the "negative
criteria" impact on the neighborhood involved in the location of the
antenna.
(4) The antennas shall only relate to the primary use on the property.
(5) Consistent with this purpose, the following regulations shall apply:
(a) No antenna shall be erected more than a height of 12 feet to
the highest point of the antenna without approval of the
Planning Board. The height requirement relates to visibility
from other properties.
(b) No antenna shall have a diameter of more than eight feet,
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board.
(c) Every antenna shall be located to the rear of the premises, no
closer than 10 feet to the rear/side lot line and screened to
create a minimum visibility to surrounding properties. On
corner lots which have no defined rear yard area, the antenna
may be located in a side yard at least two times the required
front yard setback from the street line.
(d) Screening or buffer requirements may be established by the
Planning Board, but all such antennas shall be screened from
view by plants or trees of at least the same height as the
structure and shall be placed so as to provide maximum
screening capabilities.
§ 250-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-18
235:701
(e) Power and control cables, whenever possible, shall be
underground.
(f) The antenna shall not be constructed so as to extend the
permitted height of the principal building.
(g) In all residential zones, there shall be a limit of one screened
antenna per principal building, and, in multifamily zones, there
shall be one screened antenna permitted for each 25 housing
units. In all commercial zones (PB, B-1 and C Zones), the
number of screened antennas permitted on a commercial
building shall be limited to one antenna per 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area up to a maximum of five antennas per
building. If a commercial building contains less than 10,000
square feet of gross floor area, no more than one screened
antenna would be permitted.
C. All antennas shall be subject to the following:
(1) Development standards. All antennas shall be located, designed,
constructed, treated and maintained in compliance with the
requirements of the BOCA Basic Building Code and the
requirements set forth below. The requirements below have been
designed with the intent of advancing and achieving health, safety
and aesthetic interests and objectives and are further intended to
operate so as not to impose unreasonable limitations on, or
prevent, reception of satellite-delivered signals or to impose costs
on the users which are excessive in light of the cost of purchase and
installation. However, wherever possible, the antenna to be
installed shall be the smallest or most compact available.
(2) Antennas in residential districts.
(a) No lot shall contain more than two antennas, not more than
one of which may be a satellite dish antenna.
(b) No antenna shall be located in a front yard.
(c) Roof-mounted antennas of any type shall not extend higher
than 12 feet above the highest point of the roof. Satellite dish
antennas shall not be permitted on the roof unless the
requirements set forth in this section cannot be satisfied, as
determined by the Planning Board. In such instances, no roofmounted
satellite dish antenna shall exceed eight feet in
diameter nor extend higher than 10 feet above the highest
point of the roof. A roof antenna shall be of mesh construction.
(d) Ground-mounted, accessory antennas of any type shall not
extend higher than 50 feet above adjacent ground level, except
that ground-mounted, satellite dish antennas shall not exceed
eight feet in diameter nor 12 feet in height.
§ 250-18 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-18
235:702
(e) Antennas located in a side yard shall meet the side yard
setback requirement for principal buildings.
(f) Antennas located in a rear yard shall meet the property line
setback requirement applicable to accessory buildings, but in
no event shall be located closer to a property line than 1/2 the
height of the antenna.
(3) Antennas located in multifamily housing developments shall meet
the requirements of Subsection B(2) above, except that there may
be one satellite dish antenna for each 25 dwelling units up to a
maximum of three such antennas.
(a) No antenna shall be located in a front yard.
(b) An antenna may be erected on the roof of a building, provided
that the building, including the antenna, falls within the height
limits established for the zone district. Dish antennas
exceeding eight feet in diameter or ten feet in height shall not
be permitted on the roof. Ground-mounted antennas shall not
exceed 50 feet in height, provided that no ground-mounted
dish antenna shall exceed a diameter of 12 feet nor extend
above the ground more than 12 feet.
(c) An antenna located in a side yard or a rear yard shall be
located at least 40 feet from a property line, but not less than
the height of the antenna.
(4) General regulations.
(a) No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the
property lines or into any front yard area. Guy wires shall not
be anchored within any front yard area but may be attached to
the building.
(b) Ground-mounted antennas shall be any antenna with its base
mounted directly in the ground, even if such antenna is
supported or attached to the wall of a building. Fixed-guyed
antenna towers shall be fascia-mounted or guyed according to
approved standards. Wire antennas that are not selfsupporting
shall be supported by objects within the property
lines, but not within any front yard areas.
(c) The antenna, including guy wires, supporting structures and
accessory equipment, shall be located and designed so as to
minimize, to the greatest extent possible, the visual impact on
surrounding properties and from public streets. Antennas
should be screened from view through the addition of anticlimb
fencing and architectural features or evergreen
landscaping that harmonize with the elements and
characteristics of the property; provided, however, that no
screening shall be required which would inhibit adequate
§ 250-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-18
235:703
reception. Screening by fencing or plantings may be waived if
natural terrain and landscaping provide adequate screening.
The materials used in constructing the antenna shall not be
unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish or reflective, and all
antennas shall blend with the surrounding environment.
(d) Antennas shall be so constructed, erected and/or mounted to
withstand the elements, including maximum wind velocities,
that may be anticipated based on the Borough's geographic
location. The mast or tower shall be of noncombustible and
noncorrosive hardware; brackets, turnbuckles, clips and
similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion shall be
protected with a zinc or cadmium coating by either galvanizing
or a compatible process after forming. These finishes are
selected to guard against corrosion and to protect from the
elements against electrolytic action due to the use of adjoining
dissimilar metals. All structural elements and supports shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer.
Written evidence of the structural integrity of the antenna and
its installation from the manufacturer and/or installer, as the
case may be, shall be provided, and the applicant may be
required, upon installation, to provide an affidavit certifying
that the composition and installation of the antenna meets all
manufacturer's specifications.
(e) Power control and signal cables to or from the antenna shall be
by underground conduit.
(5) Approval of antennas. Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, an
application for an antenna shall be made to and approved by the
Planning Board following the procedures established for minor site
plan approval. Said application shall include or shall be
accompanied by the following:
(a) Completed application form in triplicate.
(b) Application fees, as established.
(c) A plat plan drawn in accordance with minor site plan
specifications, accurately showing the following:
[1] The property in question, with all lot lines and lot line
dimensions.
[2] The location of all buildings on the property.
[3] The location of the proposed antenna, including:
[a] Distances from property lines and buildings.
[b] Specifications for the antenna, including its size,
height, color and physical description, proposed
§ 250-18 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-18
235:704
§ 250-19. Walls and fences; shrubbery.
mounting and support structures and other relevant
information.
[c] Existing and proposed vegetation, fencing and other
provisions for screening of any dish antenna.
[d] A report prepared by the installer of the antenna
explaining why the proposed location was selected.
(6) Exceptions. The foregoing regulations are intended to foster the
health, safety and general welfare of the Borough, especially to
protect the values of neighboring properties, which values may be
threatened by the negative impacts created by dish and other
antennas, particularly those impacts on aesthetic values resulting
from potential unsightly appearance, obstruction of light and
visibility and similar adverse effects. Where the limitations imposed
by these regulations as applied to a particular property would
prevent, limit or restrict reception of satellite-delivered signals, the
Planning Board may grant such exceptions from said regulations
which will violate their purpose and intent to the least degree
possible. In seeking any such exceptions, and in support of the
same, the applicant, at his own expense, may be required by the
Planning Board to provide technical evidence from a qualified
expert.
(7) Prohibitions. No antenna or antenna structure located in the
Borough, regardless of when it was erected, shall be used as a sign
or as a supporting structure for any sign or lettering.
(8) Enforcement.
(a) All antennas shall be maintained in good condition and in
accordance with all requirements of this section.
(b) All antennas shall be subject to periodic reinspection. No
additions, changes or modifications shall be made to an
antenna, unless the addition, change or modification is in
conformity with the BOCA Basic Building Code and approved
by the Planning Board.
A. All zones. Walls and fences are permitted in the yards of all zones,
provided that they are not higher than four feet and the foundation or
posts are located at least six inches inside the property line. Fences
above six feet are permitted only to enclose permanent athletic
facilities. (See also § 250-19C.) An appropriate fence permit must be
obtained from the Construction Official prior to construction.
B. Residential zones. In all residential zones, fences not higher than six
feet are permitted in the side and rear yards. Fences more than 50%
solid are permitted only in rear and side yards of residential zones to
§ 250-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-19
235:705
§ 250-19.1. Signs.
The provisions of Borough Code, Chapter 199, are incorporated, by
reference, in Borough Code Chapter 250 as if fully set forth at length. (See
§ 250-2.1 C.)
§ 250-20. Soil removal; lot grading plan.
the plane defining the front of the house. (See also § 216-4.) Front yards
may have fences not exceeding four feet high, 50% solid. When a wall
or fence is installed on top of a berm, railroad tie wall, or other similar
structure or mounding, the height of the fence shall include the height
of the berm, retaining wall or other mounding which is at a higher
elevation than the predominant grade of the property on which the
fence is located, as determined by the Zoning Officer. For the purpose
of corner lots, both street frontages shall be treated as a front yard.
[Amended 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 14-02]
C. B-1, PB-1, PB-2 and C Zones. In these zones, fences or walls not
exceeding seven feet in height shall be permitted in the side and rear
yards. A fence or wall used for screening, if required by the Planning
Board, may be higher. All fences and walls shall be at least six inches
inside the property line. When a wall or fence is installed on top of a
berm, railroad tie wall, or other similar structure or mounding, the
height of the fence shall include the height of the berm, retaining wall
or other mounding which is at a higher elevation than the predominant
grade of the property on which the fence is located, as determined by
the Zoning Officer. [Amended 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 14-02]
D. Electric or barbed-wire fences are permitted only in connection with
farming operations to control livestock.
E. All zones.
(1) The finished or "good side" of the fence must face away from the
property on which installed.
(2) If fencing has dissimilar sides in respect to finish, the structural
members, supports and braces must face property for which the
fence is intended, and the finished side must face adjoining
property.
A. No persons shall excavate, scrape, dig or otherwise disturb the soil on
any lots or property in the Borough for use other than on the premises
from which it shall be taken, nor shall any person remove or cause to be
removed an amount of soil in excess of 12 cubic yards from any lot or
property for use on any other lot or property, whether such removal is
for sale, gift or otherwise, unless a permit is first secured pursuant to
Chapter 203 of the Code of the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 250-19 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-20
235:706
§ 250-21. Landscaping for nonresidential uses in residential zones.
Nonresidential uses in all zones shall be landscaped from the property line
in the front yard area so that the landscaped area shall be at least 1/2 of the
gross floor area of all nonresidential buildings and structures.
§ 250-22. Parking of mobile homes, recreational vehicles, trailers,
travel trailers and boats.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the parking of mobile
homes, recreational vehicles, trailers, travel trailers and boats in excess
of 32 feet in any zone is prohibited. This prohibition does not apply to
one unoccupied trailer, travel trailer, camper, van, recreational vehicle or
boat, which is 32 feet or less, owned and used by the residential occupant
property owner, and provided that said vehicle has an existing valid license,
registration and insurance. Parking should be behind the principal dwelling
when possible.
§ 250-23. Parking or storage of commercial vehicles in residential
zones.
Not more than one commercial vehicle not exceeding a manufacturers'
gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds excluding a trailer, owned or used
by a resident of the premises, shall be permitted to be stored or parked
outdoors in a residential zone, and, if possible, such parking or storage shall
be in a garage or in the rear of the premises and buffered from public view.
§ 250-24. Visibility at street intersections (sight distance).
See Borough Code § 188-14, Sight triangles, for residential and
nonresidential zones.
§ 250-25. Outdoor storage.
B. Soil disturbance shall include cutting, filling and removing of natural
vegetation, along with the excavation of any soil for other than the
foundation of the principal building.
C. Topsoil may be redistributed on a lot or on the premises in question, but
removal requires a soil disturbance or removal permit.
D. A surface grading plan may be required in conjunction with any soil
movement or removal prior to the issuance of any construction permit.
This requirement may be waived by the Borough Engineer, or his agent,
where the proposed installation or construction will not present any
risks of problems of soil erosion, drainage or other hazards.
A. B-1 and C Zones. In the B-1 and C Zones, no article or material shall be
kept, stored or displayed outside the confines of a building unless such
article or material is so screened by special plantings or a fence, as
approved by the Planning Board, and is not visible from an adjacent
§ 250-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-25
235:707
residential zone, a public street or from an interior driveway between
public streets and principal buildings.
B. Residential and PB Zones. In the Residential and PB Zones, outdoor
storage of items defined in Borough Code § 188-4 (See definition of
"nuisance") is prohibited. Outdoor storage, as regulated in this section
and Borough Code § 188-4 (nuisance), is only permitted in side and rear
yards.
C. Within any residential zone, no motor vehicle shall be permitted to be
stored, spray painted or repaired, including but not limited to the
removal of wheels, outside of a garage so as to cause the motor vehicle
at any time to be in any disassembled or disabled condition, or be
unregistered or uninspected or be left on blocks or other similar
devices.
D. No public garage, service station or new or used automobile sales
establishment shall store outside in a side or front yard wrecked,
damaged or disassembled, either whole or in part, motor vehicles, boats
or used automotive or marine parts or used supplies or materials. Any
such storage area located in a rear yard shall be screened so that no
stored vehicle or article shall be visible from the front of the premises
or to any adjacent premises. No vehicle, boat or equipment shall be
offered for sale at a public garage or service station.
E. The use of portable storage containers in an R-Zone will be allowed on a
temporary basis, subject to the following conditions: [Added
9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-19]
(1) Portable storage containers and/or similar temporary storage-type
structures shall be placed on a subject property within a residential
zone for no more than 30 days unless used in conjunction with a
validly issued construction permit, in which event, said container
shall be permitted to remain for the active duration of the
construction permit, but in no event for more than one year (365
days) from the date of the initial permit issuance.
(2) A property owner may apply for an extension of the thirty-day
limitation to the Zoning Official for good cause, but in no event for
more than an additional 30 days.
(3) No portable storage container or similar storage-type temporary
structure shall be placed in any area on a residential property not
meeting the accessory structure setback requirements of the zone
in which it lies and in no event shall a portable storage container be
placed in or on a front yard, the public right-of-way, or at any
location which obstructs traffic visibility or flow as determined by
the Borough Zoning Official and/or the Borough Police Chief or
approved designee. All portable storage containers shall be placed
on a driveway, where possible.
§ 250-25 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-25
235:708
§ 250-26. Restoration of unsafe structures.
Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by the Construction
Official or his agent shall be razed and removed from the property. It may
be restored to a safe condition, provided that the use is a permitted use in
the zone in which it is located and the appropriate permits and/or Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment approvals have been obtained. (See also
Borough Code Chapter § 94.)
§ 250-27. Prohibited uses generally.
Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by this
chapter is hereby specifically prohibited from that district, and the following
uses and activities are specifically prohibited in any zone in the Borough:
(4) There shall be a limit of one portable storage container per
property.
(5) No more than one portable storage container permit shall be issued
to the same property within a three-hundred-sixty-five-day period
without express consent of the Zoning Official.
(6) The size of a portable storage container shall not exceed 10 feet in
height and 10 feet width by 20 feet in length.
(7) The portable storage container and the area surrounding it shall be
kept in a neat and clean condition.
(8) No material, goods, wares or debris is allowed to be placed on or
under the portable storage container.
(9) Said container is to be left closed at all times except when loading
or unloading.
(10)No hazardous, toxic or dangerous material is permitted to be
stored in said container.
A. All billboards, signboards, advertising signs or devices not expressly
related to the business being conducted on the premises or otherwise
specifically permitted by this chapter.
B. Auction markets.
C. Carousels, roller coasters, Ferris wheels, pony or train rides, midways,
sideshows, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges or batting cages.
D. Motels, hotels, cabins for hire, trailer coach or mobile home parks.
E. Outdoor storage or display of new or used motor vehicles or trailer
coaches or mobile homes or any other related goods for sale or storage
at point of sale.
§ 250-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-27
235:709
F. Junkyards, automobile wrecking or disassembly yards, the sorting or
baling of scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap or waste material or
the outdoor storage of machines, containers or parts thereof.
G. Any use which emits excessive or objectionable amounts of dust, fumes,
noise, odor, smoke, vibration, glare or waste products.
H. Use of any building or premises in such manner that the health, morals,
safety or welfare of the community may be endangered.
I. Use of a trailer coach or mobile home as a dwelling; use of a trailer for
storage or for offering goods for sale.
J. Outdoor or aboveground storage of building supplies, lumber, coal or
fuel.
K. Drive-in eating establishments in which food or drink are served to or
consumed by customers while in automobiles.
L. Mines, quarries or other commercial excavating or associated or
related activity.
M. Mobile homes, whether or not situated on a permanent foundation. (See
also § 250-22.)
N. Any commercial operation or facility operated, maintained or used in
any public or quasi-public place or in any building or place to which the
public is invited, where money is charged for the use or operation of any
automatic amusement device or game, including but not limited to
pinball machines or computer games. This prohibition extends to all
premises designated for the principal or primary use of amusement
games or machines. Any facility having such an automatic amusement
device or game as an incidental feature and which is not the principal or
sole purpose and function of such facility is not prohibited if properly
licensed by the Borough.
O. The storage of more than 10 gallons of Class I flammable liquids above
or below ground in a residential zone. (See N.J.A.C. 5:23.)
P. Car washes.
Q. Sexually oriented businesses.
(1) "Sexually oriented businesses" is to be construed to include the
following: Any establishment which sells, distributes, rents or
exhibits obscene material within the Borough of Florham Park or
permits or employs a person in any place open to the public, or to
which the public is invited within the limits of the Borough of
Florham Park, to perform the following:
(a) Dances commonly known as "go-go dances."
§ 250-27 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-27
235:710
§ 250-28. Land uses within flood hazard areas.
All land uses falling within a flood hazard area shall be specifically
controlled by the Florham Park Surface Water Management Plan. (See
Borough Code Chapter 215)
(b) Engaging in what is commonly known as "strip tease" by the
removing of all or part of one's clothing where accompanied by
music or without music and whether or not as part of a dance.
(c) Topless or bottomless exhibitions or dancing by a female
person or persons.
(d) Bottomless exhibition or dancing by male persons.
(2) Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this
subsection, shall have the following meanings:
BOTTOMLESS — Having the genital area beneath the waist
unclothed or clothed by a transparent material.
EXHIBIT or EXHIBITION — To show oneself in any capacity,
whether while employed in the performance of work or
entertainment or whether simply at leisure or otherwise, or the sale
of admission to view obscene material.
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account,
display or depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area contained
in, or consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance or film video which, by means of
posing, composition, format or animated sensual details:
TOPLESS — Having the breasts unclothed or clothed by a
transparent material.
Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated masturbation,
excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals;
(a)
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value,
when taken as a whole; and
(b)
Is a part of a work which, to the average person applying
contemporary community standards, has a dominant theme,
taken as a whole, which appeals to the prurient interest.
(c)
(3) Sale of obscene material shall be deemed to include any form of
transaction which results in the admission to a display or depiction
of obscene material or temporary or permanent access to any
obscene material.
R. Firearm and ammunition sales. [Added 12-19-2000 by Ord. No.
30-00]
S. Flag lots. [Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2]
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-29
235:711
§ 250-29. Hazardous conditions.
No site approval, construction permit or occupancy permit shall be granted
for a structure or use if the design or construction of such structure or use
involves or is likely to involve exceptional risk of traffic congestion, public
safety or hazard. No lighting of any kind shall be permitted which interferes
with or is likely to involve a risk to traffic safety or creates any condition
which violates the purposes of this chapter. (See § 250-2.)
§ 250-30. Nonconforming uses and structures; lots.
§ 250-30.1. Zoning permit fees. [Added 9-24-2015 by Ord. No.
15-16]
A. Continuance. The use of any building or land which was lawful prior to
the time of any adoption, revisions or amendments changing zones or
uses may be continued although such uses do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter and are not favored under the Land Use
Ordinances of the Borough of Florham Park.
B. Maintenance; repair; alteration. A nonconforming structure may be
maintained and repaired during its life, provided that any
reconstruction complies with all the requirements of this chapter and
with the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. Extension; enlargement; change. A nonconforming use shall not be
increased, extended, changed or enlarged.
D. Discontinuance; reestablishment. Whenever a nonconforming use has
been discontinued or abandoned for a period of six months, such use
shall not thereafter be reestablished, and any future use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Reversion. Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall
be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.
F. A lot which fails to comply with the minimum lot area or frontage
requirements of this chapter may be used for any use not prohibited in
the zone in which it lies, provided that the same owner or owners do not
own any contiguous lot and can not acquire additional contiguous
property, and provided that all other requirements of this chapter are
complied with.
A. The following fees have been established for the review of a properly
filed zoning permit. Note that the fee is due whether the application is
approved or denied.
§ 250-29 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-30.1
235:712
Item Fee
New residential, single-family dwellings and
additions
$100
Residential alterations (if zoning review is
required)
$50
Commercial/nonresidential applications $150
Detached accessory structures such as
garages, sheds greater than 100 square feet,
pool cabanas and similar structures
$50
Sheds 100 square feet or less $25
Decks, whether attached or detached $50
*(If filed for in conjunction with a new
residential, single-family dwelling or
addition, no fee.)
A/C condensers, generators, driveways (new
or altered), patios, tennis courts, hot tubs,
swimming pools, retaining walls, fences (other
than temporary required for excavations)
$25
Temporary signs, not to exceed 30 days with
the consent and approval of mayor and council
$50
Permanent signs $25 per sign
Storage containers/pods See § 250-25E
Charity clothing bins See § 250-179-13C(2)
Nonresidential change of occupancy
certificates, when requested
$150
Zoning analysis/confirmation letter, per
request
$100
B. Any item, feature or function not specifically listed and/or described
above shall include a permit fee determined by the Zoning Official to
match, as closely as possible, a similar type of use and/or based on the
extent and nature of the complexity of the matter being reviewed.
§ 250-30.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-30.1
235:713

ARTICLE II
R-15 Residential Zone
§ 250-31. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in an R-15 Residential Zone:
§ 250-32. Permitted accessory uses.
The following accessory uses are permitted in an R-15 Residential Zone:
A. Single-family residences.
B. Churches and similar places of worship, subject to the provision of
§ 250-15.
C. Public schools; municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds or other
municipal facilities as are deemed necessary and appropriate by the
Council of the Borough.
A. Private garage (maximum footprint of 600 square feet, maximum ridge
height 15 feet, one story).161
B. (Reserved)162
C. The keeping or raising of fowl, livestock or other animals shall be
subject to ordinances and regulations of the Board of Health of the
Borough. (See Borough Code Chapter 265.)
D. All antennas as a ground installation, subject to Planning Board
approval.
E. All of the foregoing accessory uses shall be clearly incidental to the
permitted uses set forth in § 250-31. No structural or architectural
changes shall be made to any dwelling to accommodate the accessory
uses unless such changes clearly conform to the residential character of
the dwelling house and the neighborhood and are approved by the
Construction Official.
F. Portable storage containers subject to the conditions set forth in
§ 250-25. [Added 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-19]
(1) Persons intending to place a portable storage container on a
residential property shall first obtain a permit therefor, following
completion of the relevant application form and payment of a fee of
$75.
(2) The Zoning Official, or his designee, is hereby designated to
enforce the provisions of this section.
161. Editor's Note: The maximum ridge height was changed from 20 feet to 15 feet pursuant to
Ord. No. 17-05 at the Borough's request 2-18-2019.
162. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to home offices, was repealed 9-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 08-04. See now § 250-32.1, Home offices.
§ 250-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-32.1
235:715
§ 250-32.1. Home offices. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 08-04]
A. Accessory use home office. Accessory use home offices shall be
permitted in all portions of all residential zones, even multifamily
residential zones, if they conform to all of the following criteria:
(1) The home office shall be clearly subordinate to the residential use
and shall be located in the principal structure.
(2) Such home office shall be conducted by the owner or tenant
residing on the premises.
(3) No employees other than owner or tenant are permitted.
(4) No more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling is allowed
to be devoted to the home office.
(5) No outdoor storage is allowed.
(6) No more than three clients on the premises at one time.
(7) No retail sales or rentals are permitted on the premises.
(8) No personal service businesses are permitted.
(9) Site plan approval is not required. A zoning permit may be
requested and will be issued if the use is found to conform to all of
the criteria listed in this section.
(10)Home offices shall not cause any off-site noise, odors, radiation,
glare, vibration, radio, wireless, or television interference, etc.
(11)No toxic or hazardous materials that would constitute a danger to
the environment or neighboring properties shall be stored on the
premises.
(12)Home offices shall be allowed no more than two non-passenger
vehicle deliveries per day, excluding U.S. Mail delivery.
(13) No signs shall be permitted.
(14)No additional parking, other than that required for the residential
use, shall be required.
(15) Any alteration to the dwelling for the home office shall maintain the
residential character and appearance of the building.
(16) The hours of operation of the home office shall be limited to 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(17) Only one home office is permitted per lot.
B. Conditional use home offices. The governing body finds that certain
portions of the residential areas of the Borough, because of their
location along more heavily traveled streets, are appropriate for more
§ 250-32.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-32.1
235:716
intense accessory use home offices, such as those of physicians,
dentists, and optometrists. These areas are residentially developed
properties that have frontage on any street or portion thereof which
is identified on the Borough's Master Plan as an arterial road, or
the following streets: Park Street (between Columbia Turnpike and
Ridgedale Avenue) and Felch Road (between Columbia Turnpike and
Brooklake Road). Conditional use home offices may be located within
these areas only with prior conditional use approval from the Planning
Board. The following are the conditions for the use:
(1) The applicant shall submit a site plan or request a site plan waiver
in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 212.
(2) The home office shall be clearly subordinate to the residential use
and shall be located in the principal structure.
(3) The person conducting the home office shall reside on the
premises. A person conducting the home office for a minimum of 10
years (a "ten-year occupant") is not required to reside on the
premises, provided that all parking requirements and all other
requirements of the home office ordinance are met and subject to
site plan and conditional use and approval by the Planning Board.
Further, if a ten-year occupant sells the property, the home office
exemption provided by this section shall be lost. [Amended
9-20-2005 by Ord. No. 31-05]
(4) No more than three people, at any one time, shall be engaged in the
home office.
(5) No more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling is allowed
to be devoted to the home office.
(6) No outdoor storage is allowed.
(7) No retail sales or rentals are permitted on the premises.
(8) No personal service businesses shall be permitted.
(9) Home offices shall not create any off-site noise, odors, radiation,
glare, vibration, radio, wireless, or television interference, etc.
(10)No toxic or hazardous materials that would constitute a danger to
the environment or neighboring properties shall be stored on the
premises.
(11)Home offices shall be allowed no more than two non-passenger
vehicle deliveries per day, excluding U.S. Mail delivery.
(12) Only one sign is permitted at no more than four square feet in size
as per § 99-29.
(13) Adequate parking shall be provided pursuant to § 250-105 and
shall be screened from adjacent residential uses. Handicapped
§ 250-32.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-32.1
235:717
§ 250-33. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
In an R-15 Residential Zone, the area, yard and building coverage
requirements shall be as specified for this zone in § 250-9.163
§ 250-34. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking spaces, with appropriate access thereto, shall be
provided on the same lot they are intended to serve in accordance with the
following minimum standards:
accessible parking shall be provided per applicable state and
federal requirements.
(14) The hours of operation of the home office shall be limited to 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday only.
(15) Any alteration to the dwelling for the home office shall maintain the
residential character and appearance of the building.
(16) Only one home office is permitted per lot.
A. One-family dwellings: A minimum of two spaces, and a maximum of
four, not including garage. No parking shall be permitted on lawn areas
or blocking sidewalks.
B. Other uses: The minimum standards shall be determined by § 250-105,
except as amended by N.J.A.C. 5:21 Residential Site Improvement
Standards.
163. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-32.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-34
235:718
ARTICLE III
R-25 Residential Zones
§ 250-35. Permitted uses and accessory uses.
The permitted uses and accessory uses in the R-25 Residential Zones are as
specified for the R-15 Residential Zone in § 250-31 and § 250-32.
§ 250-36. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
In the R-25 Residential Zones, area, yard and building coverage
requirements are as specified for these zones in § 250-9.164
§ 250-36.1. Yard requirements for existing platted substandard lots
established by approved lot clustering. [Added 5-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 8-01]
In the R-25 Residential Zones, existing substandard platted lots created by
approved lot clustering shall be subject to yard requirements as follows:
Interior lots shall have a minimum forty-foot front yard, ten-foot side yard
and thirty-foot rear yard and corner lots shall have a minimum forty-foot
front yard, forty-foot street side yard, ten-foot inside yard and forty-foot rear
yard.
§ 250-37. Off-street parking requirements.
The off-street parking requirements in the R-25 Residential Zones are as
specified for the R-15 Zone. (See § 250-34.)
164. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-37
235:719

ARTICLE IV
R-44 Residential Zones
§ 250-38. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in the R-44 Residential Zones are as specified for the
R-15 Zone.165
§ 250-39. Permitted accessory uses.
The permitted accessory uses in the R-44 Residential Zones are as specified
for the R-15 Residential Zone.166
§ 250-40. Area, yard and building coverage requirements; cluster
subdivisions.
§ 250-41. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking requirements for the R-44 Residential Zones are as
specified for the R-15 Zone. (See § 250-34.)
A. The area, yard and building coverage requirements for the R-44
Residential Zones are as specified for these zones in § 250-9.167
B. Cluster subdivision development may apply to lots in which the overall
density of housing development is maintained to a maximum of one
dwelling per acre, and the difference in the land area between the
individual dwelling lots and streets and the total area of the
development is dedicated as common open space, including recreation
facilities, or for public facilities servicing the neighborhood and owned
either by the Borough or by a neighborhood association established on
an automatic basis upon the sale of the residential lots and composed of
the owners of the lots. This provision applies only to residential
developments processed under the terms of the Subdivision Ordinance
of the Borough168 and applies only where the common open space or
public facilities areas are determined by the Planning Board to be
desirable, necessary and appropriate. The number of lots to be
developed shall be determined by the Planning Board after the
applicant has submitted a sketch plat for subdivision under the R-44
zoning provisions. The maximum number of lots permitted shall not be
greater than the number of lots otherwise permitted pursuant to major
subdivision approval in an R-44 application.
165. Editor's Note: See § 250-31.
166. Editor's Note: See § 250-32.
167. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 250-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-41
235:721

ARTICLE V
R-88 Residential Zone
§ 250-42. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in the R-88 Residential Zone are as specified for the
R-15 Residential Zone.169
§ 250-43. Permitted accessory uses.
The permitted accessory uses in the R-88 Residential Zone are as specified
for the R-15 Residential Zone.170
§ 250-44. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
In the R-88 Residential Zone, the area, yard and building coverage
requirements shall be as specified for this zone in § 250-9.171
§ 250-45. Off-street parking requirements.
The off-street parking requirements in the R-88 Residential Zone are as
specified for the R-15 Residential Zone.172
§ 250-46. Special provisions.
In the R-88 Zone, lots may be located on private driveways instead of on
public streets, subject to Planning Board approval, under the following
conditions:
A. Appropriate deed provisions shall be made for such private driveways,
with appropriate enforceable provisions being made by the Planning
Board to ensure the continuing obligation for the repair and
maintenance of the driveway where such driveway is used by more than
one lot.
B. Where there is a joint use of an access driveway, such driveway shall be
fully paved to a width of at least 24 feet, and access shall be permitted
by deed for Borough police, fire, maintenance and emergency vehicles.
C. Area, width, depth, yard and building coverage requirements shall be
measured as if the access driveway were a public street.
D. The right-of-way for driveways where there is joint use shall be 45 feet
in width.
169. Editor's Note: See § 250-31.
170. Editor's Note: See § 250-32.
171. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
172. Editor's Note: See § 250-34.
§ 250-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-46
235:723

ARTICLE VI
B-1 Business Zone
§ 250-47. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in a B-1 Business Zone are as follows:
§ 250-48. Permitted accessory uses other than retail shopping
centers.
The permitted accessory uses in a B-1 Business District, in other than retail
shopping centers, shall be as follows:
§ 250-49. Permitted accessory uses; retail shopping centers.
The permitted accessory uses in a B-1 Zone for retail shopping centers shall
be as follows:
A. Bank or other financial institution.
B. Office, office building and medical clinic.
C. Restaurant and tavern.
D. Retail sales, retail services and personal care services. [Amended
2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2]
E. Retail shopping center consisting of a group of retail stores and
personal service shops within a single building, which shall be deemed
a single use for the purpose of this article as long as the building exists.
F. Meeting halls and clubhouses of nonprofit organizations.
G. Funeral homes.
H. Commercial recreation conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
I. Municipal facilities or uses.
A. Garage and parking space.
B. Private garage space for the storage of commercial vehicles used in
conjunction with a permitted business.
C. Off-street parking space for the use of patrons and employees of a
permitted business.
D. Accessory uses and structures which are incidental to the principal use
and structure, including a satellite antenna as a ground installation,
subject to Planning Board approval.
E. Charitable clothing bins. [Added 5-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-7]
§ 250-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-49
235:725
§ 250-50. Area, yard and building requirements.
A. Accessory uses and structures which are incidental to the operation of
the shopping center, including a satellite antenna as a ground
installation, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
B. Charitable clothing bins. [Added 5-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-7]
A. Area, yard and building requirements for a B-1 Zone shall be as
specified in § 250-9.173
B. Authentic period (Colonial, Federal or Victorian) reproductions are
encouraged, to complement the historic buildings in and around the B-1
Zone and the established character of more recently constructed
buildings. In any case, as a minimum, in order to assure compatibility of
new building construction or alterations of existing buildings, the
building design standards in this section shall be adhered to, except
that the Planning Board may grant waivers of specific requirements on
a showing of unavoidable hardship by the developer.
C. Exterior walls shall be finished with face brick, integrally colored
masonry units (not panels) or wood clapboards, cedar shingles or
vertical boards. All exterior walls of buildings shall be finished with the
same materials or combinations of materials. Exceptions require Board
of Adjustment or Planning Board approval.
D. Visible sections of roofs shall be cedar shingle or textured asphalt
shingle, in dark colors.
E. Mansard roofs, when provided, shall be full canopies of textured
asphalt shingle, or fiberglass in dark colors.
F. All design features applied to building exteriors shall be functional,
rather than superimposed for decorative purposes only, unless part of
authentic period architecture. Shutters, when provided, shall be
designed to fit the windows to which they are attached.
G. Where existing or former residential structures are altered or are
converted to commercial use, such alterations shall maintain the
residential appearance of the building, such that the exterior is
consistent with actual residential use. No new siding material shall be
applied over existing siding, except aluminum or textured vinyl
maintaining the appearance of the original siding.
H. No detention basin shall be permitted in the front yard of a lot in the B-1
Zone.
I. Notwithstanding the maximum building height requirements, it is
permitted that any office building may be erected not to extend higher
than 50 feet above finished grade, upon the condition that, for each five-
173. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-49 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-50
235:726
§ 250-51. General provisions and requirements.
The following general provisions and requirements shall apply within a B-1
Zone:
foot increase above the ordinance maximum, there shall be added three
feet to the minimum front setback requirements.
J. No rooftop mechanical structures shall be permitted in the B-1 Zone,
without Planning Board or Board of Adjustment approval. All
mechanicals shall be adequately screened so as to conceal them.
A. Driveways. Not more than two driveways, of not less than 24 feet nor
more than 30 feet in width, as a means of ingress for parking areas shall
be permitted for each 300 feet of frontage upon a public street, nor
shall any driveway be located closer than 50 feet to the intersection of
two public streets. No public street shall be used to provide direct
access to parking stalls.
B. Loading and unloading areas. Truck loading and unloading areas shall
be provided in sufficient amount to permit the transfer of goods and
products in other than a public street or parking area.
C. Buffer areas.
(1) Wherever the property line of a lot in the B-1 Zone abuts or is
across a street from a residential zone, a buffer area shall be
established within the B-1 Zone, which shall include an area of land
50 feet wide, as measured from the zone line. Within the buffer
area, no use, activity, sign or placement of equipment shall be
established other than the following:
(a) Such driveways as are necessary to provide direct means of
ingress and egress for the parking areas, subject to the
restrictions set forth in Subsection A of this section, with
minimal intrusion upon the buffer area.
(b) Directional signs in conjunction with the driveways which are
necessary for the proper guidance and control of vehicular
traffic, provided that not more than one such sign is erected in
conjunction with each driveway and that the size and
placement conform to state, county and Borough standards.
(2) Within the buffer area, a solid and continuous landscaping shall be
planted and maintained. The landscaping shall consist of lawn,
massed conifer and deciduous trees and shrubs of such species and
size as will produce, within two growing seasons, a screen at least
four feet in height and of such density as will obscure, throughout
the full course of the year, all of the glare of automobile headlights
emitted from the premises, except from the driveway. Landscaping
within the buffer area shall not satisfy any other landscaping
requirement of this chapter.
§ 250-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-51
235:727
(3) The required height of the landscape screen as required above
shall be measured in relation to the elevation of the edge of the
adjacent parking area. In such cases where the ground elevation of
the location at which the screen is to be planted is less than the
elevation of the edge of adjacent parking area, the required height
of the screen shall be increased in an amount equal to this
difference in elevation. In the event that the ground elevation of the
location at which the screen is to be planted is greater than that at
the edge of the adjacent parking area, the required height of the
screen may be reduced in an amount equal to the difference in
elevation, provided that in no case shall the required height be
reduced to less than two feet.
(4) The remainder of the area and all required yard areas not occupied
by parking areas shall be graded and planted with grass seed or
sod and such shrubbery or trees as may be desired by the owner
and approved by the Planning Board. The entire area shall be
attractively maintained and kept free of all debris and rubbish.
(5) In the event that any of the plantings in accordance with the above
requirements do not live or are removed, they shall be replaced
within one year.
D. Buffer strips. Where buffer area requirements do not specifically apply,
there shall nonetheless be a landscaped strip along the property lines of
a width of at least ten feet.
E. Distance between principal buildings. Within the Business Zone, no
principal building shall be located within 20 feet of any other principal
building located either on the same or on a separate lot (exception: strip
malls).
F. Outside storage or display. No articles or materials shall be kept,
stored, or displayed outside the confines of a building, except in
accordance with § 250-25A. Outdoor storage or display is permitted on
the sidewalk appurtenant to the entrance of the building for the
purpose of conducting business during business hours only. No articles
or materials placed outside during business hours may be placed or
stored in such a way as to block any sidewalk by obstructing the same
so that it is impossible for a pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk
without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on
the street, or so as to leave a passageway of less than four feet for such
pedestrian traffic. [Amended 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 16-02]
G. Refuse storage facilities. All refuse storage facilities must be enclosed
maintained, landscaped and screened from view by landscaping and
fencing. The facilities shall include space for storing recyclable
materials, the area of which shall be consistent with the volume of
materials expected to be generated by the use.
§ 250-51 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-51
235:728
ARTICLE VII
PB Professional and Business Office Zone
§ 250-52. Permitted, conditional and accessory uses in PB-1 and
PB-2 Zones. [Amended 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 17-02]
§ 250-53. Permitted uses in PB-2 Zone.
The permitted uses in the PB-2 Zone shall provide that all buildings, both
new and conversions of existing houses to office use, shall have a residential
appearance similar to and compatible with existing dwellings in the nearest
residential zone, as determined by the Planning Board.
A. The permitted uses in these zones (PB-1, PB-2) are as follows:
(1) Office buildings for business, professional and administrative
offices not engaged in retail or wholesale sale and delivery of goods
nor the repairing, servicing or receiving of service on the premises.
(2) Funeral homes.
(3) Municipal facilities or uses.
(4) Single-family dwellings as permitted in the R-15 Zone.
(5) Medical and dental offices. [Added 12-12-2013 by Ord. No.
13-14]
B. Conditional uses in these zones (PB-1, PB-2) are as follows: Banks or
other financial institutions, where it is shown that such use will comply
with the conditions and standards for these zones so as not to have an
adverse effect upon neighboring residential properties, upon the
issuance of an authorization by the Planning Board. The following
specific conditions shall apply to any bank or financial institution:
(1) There shall be no Sunday hours of operation for the bank or other
financial institutions. Weekday hours of operation shall not start
before 8:00 a.m. and extend past 9:00 p.m. Saturday hours of
operation shall not start before 8:00 a.m. and extend past 4:00 p.m.
These restrictions do not apply to automatic teller machines
(ATMs).
(2) Lighting for all automatic teller machines shall be screened from
adjacent residences.
C. Accessory uses in these zones (PB-1, PB-2) are as follows: [Added
5-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-7]
(1) Charitable clothing bins.
§ 250-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-54
235:729
§ 250-54. General conditions and procedures.
The following general conditions and procedures apply in all professional
and business office zones:
A. Area, yard and building coverage requirements. All requirements are
set forth in § 250-9.174
B. Parking requirements.
(1) Parking shall be permitted in the side and rear yards on any lot in
the PB Zone. All parking shall be on site.
(2) Detached accessory buildings are prohibited, except where
existing as a residential garage, in which case continued use for
parking is permitted.
C. A thirty-foot-wide buffer area is required in the PB Zone, except for lots
under one acre, where the minimum shall be a ten-foot-wide buffer
requirement.
D. Residential appearance. In a PB-1 Zone, where residential buildings are
converted to office use, the residential appearance of such buildings
shall be maintained as in the PB-2 Zone, and the bulk requirements of
the adjacent residential zone shall apply.
E. Common driveways. In all PB Zones, common driveways are permitted
in order to reduce traffic hazards and to increase the extent of
landscaped street frontage.
F. In any PB Zone where it abuts a residential use, the minimum building
setback is one hundred fifty feet.
G. In all PB Zones, no detention basin shall be permitted in the front yard.
H. In all PB Zones, no rooftop mechanical structures shall be permitted. All
ground-level mechanicals shall be adequately screened to conceal
them.
I. A recycling plan shall be provided for nonresidential uses in accordance
with state, county and municipal requirements.
174. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-54 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-54
235:730
ARTICLE VIII
Office and Manufacturing Zones
§ 250-55. Permitted uses in C-1 Zone.
The following uses are permitted in the C-1 Zone:
§ 250-55.1. Permitted uses in C-1MF Zone.
The following uses are permitted in the C-1MF Zone:
§ 250-55.2. Permitted uses in the C-1MFAR Zone. [Added 8-23-2005
by Ord. No. 29-05]
The following uses are permitted in the C-1MFAR Zone:
§ 250-56. Permitted uses in C-2 Zones. [Amended 10-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-21]
The following uses are permitted in a C-2 Zone:
A. Municipal facilities or uses.
B. General business offices.
C. Laboratories for nonhazardous research, experimentation or testing.
D. Light, non-nuisance manufacturing.
E. Medical and dental offices. [Added 12-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-14]
F. Commercial recreational and sports activities, including full-sized and/
or practice turf and/or grass fields, courts, pools and rinks. [Added
10-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-16]
G. Indoor and outdoor recreational and sports uses, including, but not
limited to, swimming pools, fields, courts, hockey rinks, meeting rooms,
instructional and conference rooms related to the primary business,
and all activities related to indoor and outdoor recreation and sports
facilities. [Added 10-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-16]
A. All of the uses permitted in the C-1 Zone.175
B. Multifamily residential housing developed as a single entity with a
minimum tract of 40 acres.
A. All the uses permitted in the C-1 Zone.
B. Multifamily age restricted housing developed as a single entity with a
minimum tract of eight acres.
175. Editor's Note: see § 250-55.
§ 250-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-56
235:731
§ 250-57. Permitted accessory uses in C Zones.
A. Five hundred sixty multifamily units in an inclusionary development
that may be provided either within a mixed-use development or in a
stand-alone setting.
B. Additional uses on the ground floor of buildings providing residential
units:
(1) Amenities and administrative services for a rental community.
(2) Special-needs housing.
(3) Uses which primarily serve the needs of community residents:
(a) Professional offices and services, including medical.
(b) Convenience retail.
(c) Restaurants and food services.
(d) Enclosed parking facilities.
C. Conditionally permitted uses.
(1) Subject to the sole condition that a site plan approval for 560
multifamily units has been granted or shall be granted
simultaneously:
(a) All uses permitted in the B-1 Business Zone.
(b) Hotel with conference facilities designed in accordance with
§ 250-119A, which requirements shall not be considered
conditions pursuant to that section. Relief from any of those
conditions shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, Subsection
C.
A. Permitted accessory uses in all C Zones. The following accessory uses
are permitted only with office and manufacturing use in an office and
manufacturing zone:
(1) Garage space for the storage of commercial vehicles.
(2) Off-street parking space for the use of patrons and employees.
(3) A satellite or other antenna, subject to approval by the Planning
Board.
B. The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4
Zones: [Added 5-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-7]
(1) Charitable clothing bins.
§ 250-56 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-57
235:732
§ 250-58. Area, yard and building requirements. [Amended
10-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-16; 10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-21]
The area, yard, setback and building requirements in an office and
manufacturing zone, including multifamily residential housing in the C-1MF
Zone, and all development in the C-2 Zone, are as specified in § 250-9,
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements.176 The criteria for office
and manufacturing development in the C-1MF Zone are the same as in
the C-1 Zone, and the criteria for retail and office development in the C-2
Zone are the same as in the C-1 Zone. Recreation use in the C-1 Zone that
includes outdoor fields or courts requires a minimum lot size of six acres.
§ 250-58.1. General provisions and requirements for C-1MF
(multifamily option).
C. The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-1 Zone when
accessory to those uses permitted in § 250-55F and G. [Added
10-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-16]
(1) Clubhouse and restaurant to be used in conjunction with the
primary business.
(2) Catering and food preparation for events on and/or off site.
(3) Health and fitness training and preparation for all aspects of sports
and recreation; child care services, rehabilitation services and
programs.
(4) Maintenance buildings and facilities, where reasonably necessary
for the operation of the facility.
(5) Off-street parking for the use of patrons and employees.
A. The maximum gross density permitted is seven dwelling units per acre.
B. A maximum of eight, and a minimum of three dwelling units per
structure is permitted.
C. There shall be no more than two dwelling units in an unbroken building
line, along the front facade, with a setback of at least four feet deemed
to be a satisfactory break in the building line. A similar break is
encouraged along the rear facade. There shall be no more than two
adjacent dwelling units with the same roof height. A minimum of one
foot of vertical height difference is satisfactory to establish the height
differential.
D. The maximum building height is three stories and 35 feet. All roofs shall
have a minimum 1:6 pitch.
176. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 250-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-58.1
235:733
E. Each dwelling unit shall have at least two exterior exposures, with at
least one window in each exposure.
F. Each dwelling unit shall have at least two means of access directly to
the outside. These may consist of either two doorways or one doorway
plus an operable egress window compliant with the UCC.
G. Within the development as a whole, private garaged parking spaces
shall be provided at an average ratio of at least 1.2 spaces per dwelling
unit, and each dwelling unit shall be served by at least one private
garage directly connected to the unit. Within the development as a
whole, parking, including both private garaged spaces and on- and offstreet
parking, shall be provided consistent with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:2 1, which call for
an overall ratio of at least two spaces per dwelling unit, provided that
there shall be at least 1.8 parking spaces per one-bedroom unit, two
spaces per two-bedroom unit and 2.2 parking spaces per threebedroom
unit. Parking shall be permitted only in designated spaces or
areas.
H. An enclosed bulk storage space shall be provided in a convenient
location for each unit of at least 600 cubic feet, exclusive of interior
closets and a 10 feet by 18 feet garage parking space.
I. No vehicular access shall be permitted through a single-family
residential zone.
J. All parking areas and driveways shall have a minimum setback from
tract boundaries of 50 feet, with the exception of the access driveways
which intersect with the adjacent public roads.
K. A minimum landscaped buffer area of 50 feet in width shall be provided
along all tract boundaries, in accordance with § 250-17. Pedestrian
trails and walkways are permitted within the buffer area. If wooded, the
buffer shall remain in its natural state or be planted with a landscaped
visual screen at least six feet in height, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
L. The minimum distances between buildings shall be measured from
foundation wall to foundation wall as follows:
(1) Side to side:
(a) Windowless wall to windowless wall: 25 feet (NOTE: Provided
that the building code does not require greater separation and
the fire rating meets or exceeds the building code).
(b) Windowless wall to window wall: 30 feet.
(c) Window wall to window wall: 35 feet.
(2) Rear to rear: 38 feet.
§ 250-58.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-58.1
235:734
(3) Front to side: 35 feet.
(4) Front to front: 50 feet.
M. Balconies, porches, bay windows and other architectural features may
project up to six feet from a building into a required minimum setback
or required distance between buildings, provided that no such
projections shall be permitted to extend into or over a public or private
street, a service alley or other vehicular accessway.
N. At least 50% of the site shall be retained as common open space, which
may include undevelopable wetlands and steep slopes and shall include
areas improved for appropriate passive and active recreation.
O. The minimum width of any individual dwelling unit shall be 16 feet.
P. The minimum setbacks from interior streets and alleys are as follows:
(1) Side of building to curb: seven feet.
(2) Front of building to curb: 12 feet.
(3) Rear of building to curb: 10 feet.
Q. Roadway design shall be pursuant to the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
R. The project shall be constructed pursuant to the following design
criteria:
(1) The project shall be designed to replicate a village environment. A
street circulation system with traditional street blocks is intended,
with low traffic speeds. Access to private garages will be primarily
via service alleys. Nongarage parking spaces will be provided
primarily on parallel spaces along access roads.
(2) Any designated parking space provided in front of a private garage
shall be a minimum of 18 feet deep and shall not encroach upon a
pedestrian sidewalk.
(3) Other than parking provided at the recreation/clubhouse facility
and parallel spaces along the access roads, no single parking area
servicing more than five vehicles shall be permitted.
(4) Usable open space shall be distributed throughout the
development by means of courtyards with appropriate street
furniture.
(5) Wetlands shall be preserved in their natural state to the maximum
extent possible, pursuant to state regulations.
(6) Community mailboxes shall be provided at strategic locations
throughout the development, pursuant to postal regulations.
§ 250-58.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-58.1
235:735
§ 250-58.2. General provisions and requirements for C-1MFAR
(multifamily age restricted option). [Added 8-23-2005 by Ord. No.
29-05]
§ 250-58.3. General provisions and requirements for the C-2 Office
and Manufacturing Zone. [Added 10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-21]
(7) Trash collection may be curbside for each unit or in enclosed,
screened compactors, centrally located within the development.
Any community trash or recyclable collection area shall be suitably
screened and designed in coordination with the overall project.
(8) Pedestrian movement to and through the development shall be
facilitated through the construction of a network of sidewalks,
footpaths and designated pedestrian crossings in streets.
(9) A community center, heated and air conditioned, shall be provided
within the development. The community center shall include a
clubhouse/maintenance building, which may include a leasing
office as well as indoor recreational and meeting facilities, as well
as appropriate outdoor recreational facilities.
(10) Development must comply with state-mandated barrier-free
requirements.
A. Residency restricted to households with at least one member who is 55
years of age or older and with no permanent household member under
the age of 19.
B. The maximum gross density permitted is four dwelling units per acre.
C. The maximum building coverage is 25%.
D. The maximum improved lot coverage is 50%.
E. A minimum front yard of at least one frontage of 75 feet.
F. A minimum front yard of the other frontage of 50 feet.
G. Minimum side yards of 25 feet.
H. Minimum rear yards of 25 feet.
I. Maximum building height of 35 feet.
J. Minimum distance between buildings of 25 feet or the height of the
adjoining wall, whichever is greater.
K. Minimum distance between buildings and parking areas and driveways
of 10 feet.
A. Coverage. The following maximum coverages shall apply within the C-2
Office and Manufacturing Zone regardless of the mix of uses within the
overall development:
§ 250-58.1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-58.3
235:736
(1) Improved lot coverage: 60%.
(2) Building coverage: 35%.
(3) Coverage calculations shall be based on the gross land area within
the zone and shall not be affected by subdivision into sections or
lots.
B. Building height.
(1) All nonresidential buildings: as permitted in § 250-58.
(2) All buildings containing residential units: 55 feet and no more than
four stories.
(3) As an exception to the permitted number of stories for a residential
building, a fifth level may be included in a building, to be used
exclusively for parking, where entry to that level occurs below the
grade of the front of the building and any exposed walls of such a
level are opposite the facade facing towards Columbia Turnpike.
C. Perimeter buffers.
(1) All buildings shall be set back 100 feet from the right-of-way of
Columbia Turnpike, excluding adjoining ramps.
(2) All parking and circulation elements, other than those providing
direct access to the site, shall be set back 50 feet from the right-ofway
of Columbia Turnpike, inclusive of adjoining ramps.
(3) Within the setbacks in § 250-58.3C(1) and (2), above, there shall be
a landscaped buffer of not less than 25 feet.
(4) The C-2 Office and Manufacturing Zone shall remain a
nonresidential zone regardless of the actual mix of uses in
determining the appropriate perimeter buffer adjoining abutting
residential uses under § 250-17.
D. Minimum distance between residential buildings.
(1) Front/rear to front/rear: 60 feet.
(2) Side to side: 35 feet.
(3) Side to front/rear (within an angle of 75° to 105°): 40 feet.
(4) Building to parking space or interior access lane (excluding access
to within-building garages): 15 feet.
(5) Building to collector roadway (entrance road or access to
nonresidential areas): 25 feet.
E. Design requirements for residential buildings.
§ 250-58.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-58.3
235:737
(1) The maximum number of units which may be located in a single
building pod is 24; however, two such pods may be combined into a
single building through the use of a connecting corridor. Such
connecting corridor, fire stair or elevator core shall be offset from
the facade of the primary buildings by at least 10 feet, be no more
than 25 feet from side to side (width) and extend between the
buildings a minimum of 20 feet (length), and may not include any
floorspace contained within the demised space of a residential unit.
(2) Floor plans shall be provided for each of the buildings.
Architectural designs shall be consistent with architect's project
elevation provided.
(3) The buildings shall include breaks in the facades with the use of
different colors or materials to break up the building lengths.
(4) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be inconspicuously
placed or adequately screened from view.
F. Trash and recyclable materials.
(1) Facilities, including commitment to management operations within
the community, shall be provided to facilitate the collection of trash
and recyclable materials in a safe, efficient and aesthetic manner.
(2) Any community trash or recyclable material collection area shall be
suitably screened and designed in coordination with the overall
project. Any outdoor facilities shall be fully enclosed with materials
consistent with the architectural design and materials of the
principal buildings and shall provide gated access.
G. Recreation.
(1) A clubhouse and pool shall be required for any portion of property
serving at least 200 units.
(2) Additional recreational activities may be provided, including, but
not limited to, bocce courts, pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, sitting
areas or playground area.
(3) All recreational facilities and activities shall be provided for
residents, including nonresidential users on site and their guests,
and the design and location shall be complimentary to and in
accordance with the character of the development.
(4) Tot lot and family gathering areas shall be provided in reasonable
proximity to affordable housing units.
H. Affordable housing.
(1) All residential development within the C-2 Zone shall provide for
low- and moderate-income housing set-asides of 20% of the total
number of units proposed within the development pursuant to the
§ 250-58.3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-58.3
235:738
provisions of N.J.A.C. 3:97-6.4(b), as may be amended, and the
requirements of §§ 250-84 through 250-89, as may be amended.
The affordable units shall be split with 50% affordable to moderateincome
families and 50% affordable to low-income families, of
which 13% shall be affordable to very-low-income families.
(2) Special-needs housing.
(a) If provided, the number of special-needs housing units will
count toward the total number of units in the development but
shall provide credits toward the percentage of affordable
housing in the development by the bedroom.
(b) All credits generated by special-needs housing shall count as
one-bedroom units within the overall provision of a bedroom
mix required of the development.
(c) All special-needs housing units must be provided on the ground
floor of residential buildings.
(3) Affordable units shall be developed and rented in accordance with
the applicable provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. and UHAC
regulations adopted as of the date of the adoption of this section
which requirements include, but are not limited to, distribution of
low- and moderate-income housing, bedroom distribution, range of
affordability, rental rates, affirmative marketing, affordability
controls, and construction phasing.
(4) Design and location of affordable units.
(a) Units may not be unduly concentrated in one building or area
of the community and should be generally dispersed
throughout the development.
(b) Three-bedroom units shall be provided on ground floors where
possible.
(c) Two- and three-bedroom units shall be provided in reasonable
proximity to tot lot and open space facilities.
§ 250-58.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-58.3
235:739

ARTICLE IX
C-3 Office, Research and Laboratory Zone
§ 250-59. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in a C-3 Office, Research and Laboratory
Zone:
§ 250-60. Area, yard and building height and coverage
requirements.
A. Office buildings for business, professional and administrative facilities
not engaged in retail or wholesale sale and delivery of goods nor repair,
service for repair or service on the premises.
B. Research and laboratory uses devoted to nonhazardous research,
design and experimentation, provided that pilot plants for the testing of
processes, products or materials shall be permitted only as an
accessory use to a research or laboratory use, shall not occupy more
than 20% of the total floor area of all buildings and the materials or
finished products produced shall be incidental to the principal research
and laboratory use.
C. Municipal facilities.
D. Assisted-living residences:
(1) As conditional use.
(2) Having a minimum lot size of 15 acres.
(3) Not located in an Airport Hazard Area.
(4) With a maximum number of 110 units, with a maximum bed
capacity of 120.
A. All yard and building coverage requirements for an office, research and
laboratory zone are as specified in § 250-9.177
B. Notwithstanding the minimum yards required, no building or structure
used for business or office purposes shall be closer than 100 feet to the
boundary of a residential district, and no building or structure used for
industrial or laboratory purposes and no storage tank or structure shall
be closer than 200 feet to a residential district, except that, where the
district boundary is along a public street, the normal setback
requirements shall apply.
177. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-61
235:741
§ 250-61. Other provisions and requirements.
All other regulations and controls pertaining to the C-1 Office and
Manufacturing Zone, not in conflict with the provisions of this article, shall
apply to all C-3 Zones.178
178. Editor's Note: See Art. VIII, Office and Manufacturing Zones.
§ 250-61 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-61
235:742
ARTICLE X
C-4 Mixed Office, Research, Laboratory and Multifamily Residential
Zone
§ 250-62. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the C-4 Mixed Office, Research,
Laboratory and Multifamily Residential Zone:
§ 250-63. Permitted accessory uses: multifamily residential use.
§ 250-64. Area, yard and building requirements.179
A. Office buildings for business, professional and administrative facilities
not engaged in retail or wholesale and delivery of goods nor repair,
service or receipt for repair or service on the premises.
B. Research and laboratory uses devoted to research, design and
experimentation.
C. Residential developments in accordance with the requirements of the
MF-4 Multifamily Residential Zone.
D. Restaurants, provided that the same are situated on a minimum of five
acres of land and cannot be characterized as a fast-food establishment.
E. Municipal facilities.
A. The following are permitted accessory uses where properties in this
zone are developed for a multifamily residential zone use:
(1) Off-street accessory parking for the use of patrons and employees.
When parking is needed for in excess of 200,000 square feet of
office, research or laboratory development, parking decks, as
approved by the Planning Board, are to be located at or beneath a
portion of the building.
(2) Accessory uses which are incidental to the operation of the
permitted uses, including but not limited to service uses such as
barber shops and beauty shops, stationery paper sundry stores,
telex photocopying or communication-related services,
luncheonettes, banks and such other stores, exclusive of retail food
and clothing establishments, which contribute to the day-to-day
existence of the employees or residents.
B. The Planning Board is to have the final determination in the compliance
of the accessory use with this chapter.
A. The area, yard and building requirements for the zone are as
specifically designated for each use in § 250-9.
179. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-64
235:743
§ 250-65. General provisions and requirements.
§ 250-66. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in an MF-1 Multifamily Residential Zone are as follows:
§ 250-67. Permitted accessory uses.
The permitted accessory uses in a MF-1 Multifamily Residential Zone are
as specified for the R-15 Residential Zone,183 except that garages, where
provided, must be enclosed within the principal building attached to it, or
otherwise planned so as to avoid detached rows of multiple garages.
§ 250-68. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
Area, yard and building coverage requirements in the MF-1 Zone are as
specified for this Zone in § 250-9.184
§ 250-69. General provisions and requirements.
For permitted uses other than multifamily construction, the general
provisions and requirements for the R-44 Zone shall apply.185 For
B. In all C Zones, the maximum height of buildings is as specified in
§ 250-9. The extra height of roof structures (such as mechanical
equipment, antennas, air and elevator housings) is 12 feet, and such
roof structures shall not be more than 10% of the total roof area. (See
§ 250-9.)
A. For low and moderate multifamily residential use, the specifications
and restrictions as set forth in the MF-4 Zone shall apply. (See
§ 250-81.)
B. For other uses, the Planning Board shall impose requirements and
provisions not inconsistent with those required in the C-4 Zone180 and
with the use of restaurants which shall exist on a minimum of five acres,
the restrictions and requirements as specified in the B-1 Zone.181
A. As specified for the R-44 Residential Zone.182
B. Multifamily dwellings consisting of a minimum of three and a maximum
of eight dwelling units, attached in single structures.
C. Permitted uses other than multifamily housing in the MF-1 Zone shall
conform to the requirements of the R-44 Zone.
180. Editor's Note: See Art. X, C-4 Mixed Office, Research Laboratory and Multifamily
Residential Zone.
181. Editor's Note: See Art. VI, B-1 Business Zone.
182. Editor's Note: See Art. IV, R-44 Residential Zones.
183. Editor's Note: See § 250-32.
184. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-64 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-69
235:744
multifamily construction, the following specifications and restrictions shall
apply, except as modified by N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site Improvement
Standards:
A. Maximum eight, minimum three dwelling units per structure.
B. No more than four dwelling units in an unbroken building line, with a
setback of at least four feet deemed to be a satisfactory break in the
building line.
C. Maximum height: see Borough Code § 250-9.
D. Maximum density (see Borough Code § 250-9) shall be eight dwelling
units per acre of net site area, excluding public streets, and a maximum
of 17.6 bedrooms per acre of net site area, excluding public streets.
E. Each dwelling unit shall have two exterior exposures, with at least one
window in each exposure.
F. Each dwelling unit shall have two means of access to the outside. These
may consist of either two doorways or one doorway plus an operable
egress window in accord with the UCC.
G. Floors and ceilings and partitions between apartment units shall be
constructed so as to produce an airborne sound transmission loss of at
least 50 decibels. Reasonable measures shall be taken in floor and
ceiling construction to avoid disturbing levels of impact sound.
H. A space shall be provided for storage in each unit, at least 250 cubic
feet in size. [Amended 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-11]
I. Minimum buffer strip on lot lines other than public streets: 20 feet; and
50 feet adjoining a one-family zone; if wooded, it shall remain in its
natural state or shall be planted with a landscaped visual screen at least
six feet in height, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
J. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit. At least 20% of the total required parking spaces shall be
enclosed within the principal buildings, attached to them or otherwise
planned so as to avoid detached rows of multiple garages.
K. No parking is permitted within the required front yard or within a
required buffer strip.
L. The minimum width of access drives shall be 24 feet.
M. No access drive or parking spaces shall be closer than 10 feet to a
building, except where parking is under or within a building.
N. The access drive and parking areas shall be developed according to
Borough specifications for paving and curbs, as related to driveways
and parking areas.
185. Editor's Note: See Art. IV, R-44 Residential Zones.
§ 250-69 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-69
235:745
O. Appropriate facilities shall be specifically developed for recreation for
the residents of the development, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board, based on the projected needs of the residents for such
facilities, consistent with the overall design and appearance of the
development.
P. Interior streets or driveways are to be owned and maintained by the
developer or condominium association, but with the Borough police
having written approval to patrol and to prohibit parking on interior
streets or driveways.
Q. All utilities servicing the area are to be underground.
R. No inside or aboveground oil tanks are permitted.
S. Planning Board site plan review is required, as provided in § 212-21.
Such review will emphasize the objectives of the site planning design
compatibility with adjoining areas, including visual harmony and
appropriate variety in the configuration and arrangement of buildings,
open spaces and circulation and parking facilities. Submission
requirements will include completed architectural plans, including floor
plans of all buildings proposed to be built, showing exterior building
materials and specific colors; slides of all maps; a colored rendering of a
typical building; and a model of the complete site plan at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet. However, provisional plans may first be submitted
to the Planning Board for informal review and discussion. The time
period for site plan reviews, as specified in Chapter 212, will not apply
to the review of such provisional plans. The master deed, bylaws and
rules and regulations of the owners' association shall also be submitted
for Planning Board review and approval, and a review fee per unit shall
be paid in accordance with § 212-23.
T. A phasing plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review and
approval, showing staging of construction and treatment of open areas
while construction is in progress, with the objectives of maintaining the
livability of completed buildings while others are under construction
and of minimizing the area of disturbed ground.
U. A recycling plan shall be provided in accordance with state, county and
Borough requirements.
§ 250-69 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-69
235:746
ARTICLE XI
MF-2 Multifamily Residential Zone
§ 250-70. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in an MF-2 Multifamily Residential Zone are as follows:
§ 250-71. Permitted accessory uses.
The permitted accessory uses in an MF-2 Multifamily Residential Zone are
as specified for the R-15 Residential Zone.188
§ 250-72. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
Area, yard and building coverage requirements in the MF-2 Zone are as
specified for this zone in § 250-9.189
§ 250-73. General provisions and requirements.
For permitted uses other than multifamily housing, the general provisions
and requirements for the R-25 Zone shall apply. For townhouses and garden
apartments, the following specifications and requirements shall apply,
except as modified by N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site Improvement
Standards:
A. As specified for the R-25 Zone.186
B. Townhouses and garden apartments, consisting of a maximum of eight
and a minimum of three dwellings in a building, attached side-by-side or
arranged in flats.
C. Permitted uses, other than multifamily housing, in the MF-2 Zone shall
conform to the requirements of the R-25 Zone.187
A. Maximum eight, minimum three dwelling units per structure.
B. No more than four dwelling units in an unbroken line, with a setback of
at least four feet deemed to be a satisfactory break in the building line.
C. Maximum density shall be eight units per acre of net site area,
excluding streets, and a maximum of 20 bedrooms (rooms appropriate
for sleeping by the occupants on a regular basis) per acre of net site
area, excluding streets.
D. Each dwelling unit shall have two exterior exposures, with at least one
window in each exposure.
186. Editor's Note: See § 250-35.
187. Editor's Note: See Art. III, R-25 Residential Zones.
188. Editor's Note: See § 250-32.
189. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-70 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-73
235:747
E. Each dwelling unit shall have two means of access to the outside. These
may consist of either two doorways or one doorway plus an approved
egress window in compliance with the UCC and BOCA Codes.
F. Floors and ceilings and partitions between apartment units shall be
constructed so as to produce an airborne sound transmission loss of at
least 50 decibels. Reasonable measures shall be taken in floor and
ceiling construction to avoid disturbing levels of impact sound.
G. A space shall be provided for storage in each dwelling unit, at least 250
square feet in size.
H. The minimum buffer strip on lot lines other than public streets shall be
20 feet; and 50 feet adjoining a one-family residential zone. If wooded,
it shall remain in its natural state or shall be planted with a landscaped
visual screen at least six feet in height, as determined by the Planning
Board.
I. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit.
J. No parking is permitted within the required front yard or within a
required buffer strip.
K. The minimum width of access drives shall be 24 feet.
L. No access drives or parking spaces shall be closer than 10 feet to a
building, except where parking is under or within a building.
M. Access drives and parking areas shall be developed according to
Borough specifications on paving and curbs, as related to driveways
and parking areas.
N. Appropriate facilities shall be specifically developed for recreation of
the residents of the development, subject to Planning Board approval,
based on the projected needs of the residents for such facilities,
consistent with the overall design and appearance of the development.
O. Interior streets or driveways are to be owned and maintained by the
developer or condominium association. The Borough police shall have
written authorization to patrol and to enforce state and Borough
regulations on interior streets and driveways.
P. All utilities are to be underground.
Q. No inside or aboveground oil tanks are permitted.
R. Planning Board site plan review is required, as provided in § 212-21.
Such review will emphasize the objectives of site planning design
compatibility with the adjoining areas, including visual harmony and
appropriate variety in the configuration and arrangement of buildings,
open spaces and circulation and parking facilities. Submission
requirements will include completed architectural plans, including floor
§ 250-73 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-73
235:748
plans of all buildings proposed to be built, showing exterior building
materials and specified colors; slides of all maps; a colored rendering
of a typical building; and a model of the complete site plan at a scale
of one inch equals 50 feet. However, provisional plans may first be
submitted to the Planning Board for informal review and discussion.
The time period for site plan reviews, as specified in Chapter 212, will
not apply to the review of such provisional plans. The master deed,
bylaws and rules and regulations of the owners' association shall also
be submitted for Planning Board review and approval, and a review fee
per unit shall be paid in accordance with § 212-23.
S. A phasing plan shall be subject to the Planning Board for review and
approval, showing staging of construction and treatment of open areas
while construction is in progress, with the objectives of maintaining the
livability of completed buildings while others are under construction
and of minimizing the area of disturbed ground.
T. A recycling plan shall be provided in accordance with state, county and
municipal requirements.
§ 250-73 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-73
235:749

ARTICLE XII
MF-3 Multifamily Residential Zone
§ 250-74. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in a MF-3 Multifamily Residential Zone are as follows:
§ 250-75. Permitted accessory uses.
The permitted accessory uses in an MF-3 Multifamily Residential Zone are
as specified for the R-15 Residential Zone,191 except that garages, where
provided, must be enclosed within the principal building or attached to it or
otherwise planned so as to avoid detached rows of multiple garages.
§ 250-76. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
The area, yard and building coverage requirements are the same as
specified for the MF-1 Zone in § 250-9.192
§ 250-77. General provisions and requirements.
For permitted uses other than townhouses, the general provision
requirements for the R-44 Zone shall apply.193 For townhouses, the following
specifications and restrictions shall apply, except as modified by N.J.A.C.
5:21, Residential Site Improvement Standards:
A. As specified for the R-44 Zone.190
B. Village-type townhouses, consisting of a minimum of two and a
maximum of six dwelling units, attached by means of party walls,
garages or trellised courts.
A. A maximum of six, minimum of two dwelling units per structure, with
adjoining units attached by a trellised court considered as a single
structure.
B. No more than two dwelling units in an unbroken building line, with a
setback of at least four feet deemed to be a satisfactory break in the
building line.
C. The maximum density shall be 2.25 dwelling units per acre of gross site
area.
D. Each dwelling unit shall have two exterior exposures, with at least one
window in each exposure.
190. Editor's Note: See § 250-38.
191. Editor's Note: See § 250-32.
192. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
193. Editor's Note: See Art. IV, R-44 Residential Zones.
§ 250-74 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-77
235:751
E. Each dwelling unit shall have two means of access to the outside. These
may consist of either two doorways or one doorway plus an approved
egress window in compliance with the UCC and BOCA Codes.
F. A space shall be provided for storage in each unit, at least 250 square
feet in size.
G. The minimum buffer strip on lot lines other than public streets shall be
20 feet or 50 feet adjoining a one-family zone. If wooded, the buffer
shall remain in its natural state or shall be planted with a landscaped
visual screen at least six feet in height, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
H. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit. At least 20% of the total required parking spaces shall be
enclosed within the principal buildings, attached to them or otherwise
planned so as to avoid detached rows of multiple garages.
I. No parking is permitted within the required front yard or within a
required buffer strip.
J. The minimum width of access drives shall be 24 feet.
K. No access drives or parking spaces shall be closer than 10 feet to a
building, except where parking is under or within a building.
L. Access drives and parking areas shall be developed according to
Borough specifications for paving and curbs, as related to driveways
and parking areas.
M. Appropriate facilities shall be specifically developed for recreation for
the residents of the development, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board, based on the projected needs of the residents for such
facilities, consistent with the overall design and appearance of the
development.
N. Interior streets or driveways are to be owned and maintained by the
developer or any owners' association. The Borough police shall have
written authorization to patrol and to enforce state and Borough
regulations on interior streets or driveways.
O. All utilities are to be underground.
P. No inside or aboveground oil tanks are permitted.
Q. Planning Board site plan review is required, as provided in § 212-21.
Such review will emphasize the objectives of site planning design
compatibility with adjoining areas, including visual harmony and
appropriate variety in the configuration and arrangement of buildings,
open spaces and circulation and parking facilities. Submission
requirements will include completed architectural plans, including floor
plans of all buildings proposed to be built, showing exterior building
materials and specific colors; slides of all maps; a colored rendering of a
§ 250-77 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-77
235:752
typical building; and a model of the complete site plan at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet. However, provisional plans may first be submitted
to the Planning Board for informal review and discussion. The time
period for site plan review, as specified in Chapter 212, will not apply
to the review of such provisional plans. The master deed, bylaws and
rules and regulations of the owners' association shall also be submitted
for Planning Board review and approval, and a review fee per unit shall
be paid in accordance with § 212-23.
R. A phasing plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review and
approval, showing staging of construction and treatment of open areas
while construction is in progress, with the objectives of maintaining the
livability of completed buildings while others are under construction
and of minimizing the area of disturbed ground.
S. A recycling plan shall be provided in accordance with state, county and
municipal requirements.
§ 250-77 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-77
235:753

ARTICLE XIII
MF-4 Multifamily Residential Zones
§ 250-78. Permitted uses.
Townhouses and multifamily apartments or condominium developments
shall be permitted in the MF-4 Zones in accordance with the requirements
of this section and such other forms of residential housing as may be
established by way of conditional use. This zone is specifically for
establishment of low- and moderate-income multifamily housing units in
conjunction with multifamily market units.
§ 250-79. Permitted accessory uses.
The permitted accessory uses in the MF-4 Multifamily Residential Zones are
as specified in the R-15 Residential Zone194 and as in the other multifamily
residential zones.195
§ 250-80. General provisions and requirements.
§ 250-81. Zoning design standards for low- and moderate-income
units.
A. To the extent that there is no conflict with this article, the standards
and requirements as set forth in § 250-69 shall apply.
B. Within the MF-4 Residential Zone, low- and moderate-income housing
shall be required as a condition of approval.
C. Within the MF-4 Residential Zone, there shall be no economic
segregation of low- and moderate-income dwelling units and
marketplace house units.
D. All development within the MF-4 Residential Zone provided subsequent
to the adoption of this section shall provide for low- and moderateincome
housing set-asides of 20% of the total number of units proposed
within the development pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C.
3:97-6.4(b). This amendment shall not change the number or status of
low- and moderate-income housing units provided in the zone prior to
the adoption of this section. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-34;
amended 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-11]
E. All market-rate units constructed subsequent to the adoption of this
subsection shall have only one bedroom. [Added 9-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-11]
A. The following standards shall be adopted for construction of the low
and moderate-income units:
194. Editor's Note: See § 250-32.
195. Editor's Note: See §§ 250-63, 250-71 and 250-75.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-81
235:755
§ 250-82. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking requirements shall be as follows, except as modified by
N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site Improvement Standards:
§ 250-83. Recreation.
Multifamily residential development of between 10 and 50 units shall
provide 250 square feet of space in a usable configuration for play lots,
or a shaded area for the elderly or other space for recreation which is
appropriate for that development. Multifamily developments of larger than
50 units shall provide for an additional 20 square feet per unit above 50 for
(1) Minimum lot size (at crest): five acres.
(2) Maximum gross density (dwelling units by total lot area): eight.
(3) Front setback requirement: 50 feet
(4) Rear setback requirement: 35 feet.
(5) Side yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Building coverage: 30%.
(7) Maximum building height: three stories or 40 feet.
(8) Usable open space: 20%.
B. In the MF-4 Zone where residential dwelling units are not subdivided
into individual lots, the following shall be the minimum distance
between buildings:
(1) The front of one building to the front of another building: 75 feet.
(2) The front of one building to the side of another building: 60 feet.
(3) The front of one building to the rear of another building: 60 feet.
(4) The side of one building to the side of another building (other than
an attached unit): 30 feet.
(5) The side of one building to the rear of another building: 50 feet.
(6) The rear of one building to the rear of another building: 75 feet.
(7) The maximum length of a building not containing townhouses: 185
feet.
A. For each three-bedroom unit or larger: 2.0 spaces.
B. For each two-bedroom unit: 1.75 spaces.
C. For each one-bedroom unit: 1.25 spaces.
D. Parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet.
§ 250-81 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-83
235:756
such purposes. In large developments, such space shall be subdivided into
two or more usable areas, distributed throughout the development so as to
be convenient to residents. Barrier-free criteria, as stated in the UCC, must
be applied.
§ 250-84. through § 250-90. (Reserved)196
196. Editor's Note: Former §§ 250-84, Low- and moderate-income housing definitions,
requirements and regulations; 250-85, Phasing; 250-86, Developer's marketing plan;
250-87, Affordable Housing Board regulations; 250-88, Tenant/purchaser selection;
280-89, Waivers and exceptions; and 250-90, Future development, were repealed
2-21-2019 by Ord. No. 19-4. See now § 250-7.5, Affordable housing regulations.
§ 250-83 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-84
235:757

ARTICLE XIV
OSR Open Space Recreation Zone and OSM Open Space Municipal
Zone
§ 250-91. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in the OSR Open Space Recreation Zone and OSM Open
Space Municipal Zone are as follows:
§ 250-92. Permitted accessory uses.
The following accessory uses are permitted in the OSR Open Space
Recreation Zone and OSM Open Space Municipal Zone:
§ 250-93. Area, yard and building requirements.
Area, yard and building requirements for the OSR and OSM Zone shall be
as specified in § 250-9.197
§ 250-94. General provisions and requirements.
The following general provisions and requirements apply within the OSR,
and OSM Zones:
A. Open recreational uses, such as golf courses, outdoor tennis courts,
swimming pools, handball, shuffleboard courts and ball fields.
B. Natural area conservation.
C. Clubhouses, restaurants and catering establishments serving the users
of adjoining recreation facilities and/or the public in general.
D. Indoor recreation uses, such as tennis courts and swimming pools, and
also meeting rooms and conference rooms, where developed as an
adjunct to outdoor recreation facilities.
E. Maintenance buildings and facilities, where determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonably necessary for the operation of recreational
facilities and where located and screened so as not to have an adverse
effect on such recreational facilities and adjoining properties, as
determined by the Planning Board.
F. Municipal uses or facilities.
A. Signs, as permitted by Chapter 199 of the Borough of Florham Park
Code, except that the maximum size of a sign on the front or principal
facade of a clubhouse, restaurant or catering establishment shall not
exceed 5% of such facade.
B. Off-street parking, as permitted and regulated in § 250-105.
197. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-91 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-94
235:759
§ 250-95. (Reserved)
§ 250-96. (Reserved)
§ 250-97. (Reserved)
A. Provisions for off-street parking spaces, including location, design,
maintenance and operation; driveways; loading and unloading areas;
buffer areas; pedestrian walks; lighting; distance between principal
buildings; and storage facilities shall be determined by the Borough
Planning Board. All restriping shall be in accordance with original
approved plans.
B. Planning Board site plan review shall be required, as specified in
§ 212-21.
C. A recycling plan shall be provided in accordance with state, county and
municipal requirements.
§ 250-94 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-97
235:760
ARTICLE XV
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading
§ 250-98. Required.
In all zones, in connection with every business, institution, recreational,
manufacturing, research laboratory, public building, hospital, church or any
other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure
is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces and
loading and unloading areas in accordance with the requirements set forth
in this article. Such facilities shall be completed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 250-99. Responsibilities of owners.
§ 250-100. Location.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to maintain all
off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, fire zones, driveways,
aisles and accessways in good condition, free of sagging condition,
potholes and cracked pavement. All lighting, bumpers, markings, signs,
drainage, landscaping or other site plan requirements shall be similarly
maintained in workable, safe and good condition. All restriping shall be
in accordance with the original approved plans.
B. Parking spaces must be provided and maintained as long as buildings or
premises are used for the purposes indicated, and they may not be
considered as provided unless reasonable precautions are taken to
ensure their use only by persons residing on or employed in or visiting
the building or premises for which they are provided.
C. Violations of this subsection shall be repaired, replaced or satisfactorily
abated within 20 days of notice of violation by the zoning enforcement
person.
A. Parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the principal
structure. All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the
lot on which it is serving a principal use and shall not be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner.
B. In any C Zone, parking may not be located in the front yard or within 50
feet of any other street line.
C. In the PB Zones, parking may not take place in the front yard.
D. In the B-1 Zone, parking may be located in any required yard areas
except the buffer area or within 20 feet of any public street line or
within 25 feet of driveway openings or curb cuts.
E. In any C Zone, PB Zone or B-1 Zone, no parking shall be located within
ten feet of any property line in order to provide adequate space for
landscaping.
§ 250-98 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-100
235:761
§ 250-101. Lighting.
F. In parking areas for 20 or more vehicles, the Planning Board may grant
a reduction of up to two feet in the length of a parking space, where
such reduction is used to make a corresponding widening in landscaped
islands, dividing parking bays or to provide planting strips along
walkways adjoining the parking lot.
G. Oversize parking spaces for the handicapped shall be provided and
assigned according to New Jersey law. Distribution of such spaces shall
be subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
H. No motor vehicle which is uninspected or unregistered or uninsured or
in a state of disrepair or disassembly such as to make it nonoperable
shall be parked or stored in any off-street parking area or driveway in
any zone.
I. No motor vehicle shall be parked in such a manner as to block a
sidewalk in any zone.
J. No motor vehicle, while parked in a nonenclosed off-street parking area
or driveway in any zone, shall be stripped, dismantled or undergo any
type of major overhaul, including body work.
K. Whenever parking is provided in the rear of any nonresidential
structure or use, a suitable rear entrance to the structure or use shall
be provided.
L. The Planning Board, in appropriate situations, may provide an approval
condition that permits the landowner to install less than the required
amount of parking spaces, subject to future installations, when
conditions arise calling for additional parking. The resolution
permitting installation of fewer parking spaces than required shall
specify the procedures through which future installation of reserved
parking spaces may be required. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-4]
M. Restriping shall be as originally approved unless revised by application
to the appropriate board having jurisdiction.
A. All developments governed by this Code shall be lighted adequately for
safety and security, but in such a manner as to enhance aesthetics,
eliminate nuisance and avoid danger from glare. The Planning Board
shall consider and ensure that all plans adequately specify the location,
basic design, intensity, height and style of luminaries.
B. Lighting intensity.
(1) Minimum lighting intensity in footcandles shall be:
Area Average Footcandles
Parking areas 0.5
§ 250-100 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-101
235:762
§ 250-102. Markings; access.
§ 250-102.1. Landscaping.
Intersection of parking areas and
street
1
Walkways (commercial areas) 1
Walkways (residential areas) 0.2
Building entrances 1
(2) The average to minimum ratio must not exceed 4:1.
C. All direct glare is prohibited, and lighting standards shall be shielded to
restrict the maximum apex angle of the cone of illumination to 75°.
D. The height of the stantions shall not exceed 20 feet.
E. All wiring shall be underground.
A. Parking spaces, driveways, fire lanes or zones and aisles shall be clearly
marked and delineated.
B. For safety and fire-fighting purposes, free access between adjacent
parking areas shall be provided and shall conform to all Borough codes
and ordinances.
A. All parking areas in the B-1, PB and C Zones shall be landscaped
according to a plan which shall be attached to and be a part of the site
plan approval.
B. "Landscaping" shall mean all trees, shrubs and grass, together with
mulch and wood chips used for the maintenance of planted and natural
vegetation.
C. The minimum area to be landscaped shall be 10% of the total parking
area, exclusive of buffers, setbacks and areas reserved for future
parking, but inclusive of islands and indentations within the perimeter
of the parking lot.
D. All landscaping shall be aesthetically acceptable while providing for
adequate screening, protection from noise and glare, economy of
maintenance and safety for all vehicular and pedestrian traffic. All
landscaping shall consist of living materials, and all nongrass portions
shall be planted.
E. All new parking areas shall incorporate the planting and preservation
standards of the Morris County Soil Conservation District.
F. As a minimum requirement, one tree of not less than three-inch caliper
size shall be planted for each 10 parking spaces. Trees selected should
be of a size and shape to provide shade when fully grown.
§ 250-101 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-103
235:763
§ 250-103. Use of parking areas.
All off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles, and no commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on any such parking lot.
§ 250-104. (Reserved).
§ 250-105. Schedule of required spaces.
A. Fractional spaces. In the event that the number of parking spaces
required results in a fraction of a space, one more parking space shall
be provided.
B. Use variances. In the case of use variances, the Board of Adjustment
shall determine the number of spaces required after review and
recommendation by the Planning Board.
C. Mixed uses. In the event of a mixed use, the required off-street parking
shall be the sum of the required off-street parking for each use.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, or anything else to the contrary in this
chapter, the Planning Board may approve shared parking arrangements
that provide fewer than the sum of the off-street parking spaces
required for each individual use in order to meet required parking for
uses in the POD-S Zone, provided that: [Amended 9-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 8-06; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4]
(1) All uses sharing parking must be part of a planned unit
development;
(2) Rights to shared use of parking spaces shall be established by
recorded easement;
(3) The Planning Board must find that the total number of parking
spaces to be constructed will be adequate to meet the demand of
the uses to be served; and
(4) Surface and/or structured parking spaces equal to the sum of the
off-street parking spaces required for each individual use shall be
located on an approved site plan, but construction of the unneeded
spaces may be deferred pursuant to § 250-100L above.
Use
Minimum Number of Required
Spaces
Assembly halls 1 for each 4 seats
Auditoriums Same as for assembly halls
Banks 4 for each teller window and
automatic teller machine
Bowling alleys 4 for each lane
§ 250-103 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-105
235:764
Use
Minimum Number of Required
Spaces
Churches, houses of
worship
1 for each 3 seats
Clubs 1 for each 3 persons to be
accommodated by use of the building
Commercial recreation
[Added 10-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-16]
1 space per 750 square feet of floor
area for recreation or sports activity,
plus 1 space per 200 square feet of
spectator or party area, but in no
case less than 50 spaces for the
entire facility. Full outdoor athletic
fields shall require 90 spaces per
field.
Community centers Same as for assembly hall
Corporate suites [Added
4-17-2014 by Ord. No.
14-1]
1.4 per suite
*Dwellings, single-family
detached
21
*Dwellings, multifamily 2 per unit1
Golf courses 2 for each gross acre
Funeral homes, mortuaries 10, plus 1 for each 50 square feet of
gross floor area devoted to chapel or
slumber rooms
Health and wellness center 1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area, or 1 for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area if the HWC is
part of a mixed-use development and
shares parking facilities with an
office use, commercial athletic
training facility, or a hotel
Health and/or fitness club 1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area, or 1 for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area if the health
and/or fitness club is part of a mixed
use development and shares parking
facilities with an office use
Industrial uses 2 for each 3 employees on the
maximum shift, or 1 for each 150
square feet of gross floor area,
whichever number is greater
Manufacturing uses Same as for industrial uses
Nursing homes 1 for each 2 beds
§ 250-105 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-105
235:765
§ 250-106. General requirements.
Use
Minimum Number of Required
Spaces
Offices, general 1 for each 250 square feet of gross
office building area2
Offices, medical and dental
[Added 12-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-14]
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
office area
Personal care services
[Added 2-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-2]
1 space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area
Restaurants 1 for each 3 seats devoted to service
Research or laboratory
uses
1 for each employee on the maximum
shift, plus 10%
Retail stores, service
businesses
1 for each 200 feet of gross floor
area, except that basement areas
intended and used exclusively for
heating and machinery need not be
counted for purposes of this section
Schools:
Colleges 1 for each 2 students
High schools 10 for each classroom
Elementary 1 for each teacher and employee,
plus 2 per classroom
Skating rinks 1 for each 120 square feet of rink
area
Service stations 3 for each bay
Storage warehouses 1 for each employee on maximum
shift, plus 10%
Taverns 1 for each 3 seats
Wholesale stores, motor
vehicle establishments,
furniture stores
1 for each 250 square feet of gross
floor area, plus 1 for each employee
on maximum shift, plus 10%
NOTES:
1Except as modified by N.J.A.C. 5:21 and Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
2May be modified at the discretion of the Planning Board.
A. All nonresidential uses shall have off-street loading and unloading areas
provided in sufficient amount to permit the transfer of goods and
§ 250-105 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-106
235:766
§ 250-107. Minimum dimensions.
The minimum dimensions of a loading area shall be 30 feet in length and 14
feet in width, with a headroom of at least 14 feet.
products in other than a public street, public parking area or required
front yard area.
B. All such spaces shall be designed and planned in accordance with
generally accepted engineering principles and be approved by the
Borough Engineer as part of submission to the Planning Board under
site plan approval. Construction must conform to Borough public works
standards.
§ 250-106 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-107
235:767

ARTICLE XVI
Regulation of Nuisance Characteristics
§ 250-108. Compliance with article.
§ 250-109. Conditional approval.
§ 250-110. Definition; determination locations.
A. As a condition to the approval of any subdivision, site plan, construction
permit, certificate of occupancy, certificate of zoning compliance,
variance, conditional use or continuance of a nonconforming use, the
applicant shall supply evidence, satisfactory to the appropriate officer
or board, that the proposed use, structure, process or equipment will
conform fully with all of the applicable standards stated in this article
and governing control over nuisances. As evidence of compliance,
approving authorities may require certification of tests by appropriate
government agencies or by recognized testing laboratories, any costs
thereof to be borne by the applicant. The approving authority may
require that specific types of equipment, machinery or devices be
installed or that specific operating procedures or methods be followed if
the government agencies or testing laboratories examining the
proposed operation shall determine that the use of such specific types
of machinery, equipment, devices, procedures or methods are required
in order to ensure compliance with the applicable performance
standards. Permits and certificates required by other government
agencies shall be submitted to the approving authority as proof of
compliance with applicable codes.
B. For conditional uses or for use variances which must meet these
performance standards, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
shall neither approve nor recommend approval of any use until it
receives an affidavit from the applicant that all performance standards
established in this article have been complied with.
C. Failure by any approved applicant to conform to the standards herein
covering nuisances shall be cause for the Zoning Enforcement Official
and/or the Construction Official, to enforce these standards. (See
Chapter 159.)
A. In the event that a determination cannot be made at the time of
application that a proposed use, process or piece of equipment will
meet the standards established in this article, the appropriate official or
board may issue a conditional approval. The conditional approval would
be based on submission of evidence that the proposed use, process or
equipment will meet the standards established in this article after
completion of installation and operation.
B. Within 30 days after such installation is complete, the applicant shall
apply for a certificate of occupancy and give satisfactory evidence that
all standards established by this article have been met.
§ 250-108 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-110
235:769
§ 250-111. Standards.
A. Definition. A "nuisance element" is any noise, radioactivity, vibration,
surface or drainage water runoff, glare, smoke, odor, air and water
pollution, dust, unsightliness or filth which exceeds the performance
standards established under this article.
B. Location of determination. The determination of the existence of
nuisance elements shall be made at the following locations:
Nuisance
Characteristic Determination Location
Smoke Vent or smokestack
Solid particles Vent or smokestack
Odors Property line
Liquid wastes Building wall
Solid wastes Building wall
Radiation Vent or smokestack
Noise* Required setback line
Vibration Building wall
Glare Building wall
Heat/gas/vapors Vent or smokestack/ required setback line
Runoff Property line
NOTE: *See Borough Code Chapters 155 and 175.
A. Air pollution.
(1) No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities
which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property, or
which will interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment
of life and property here in the Borough. The state Air Pollution
Control Code, as augmented by regulations contained in this
article, shall be complied with. Where there is any discrepancy in
standards between this article and the Sanitary Code,198 as set
forth in this Code, the more restrictive shall apply.
(2) In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance of
which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart (20%
level), shall be emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning
equipment; provided, however, that smoke emitted during the
cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart (40% level), may be permitted for a period or periods
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Sanitation.
§ 250-110 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-111
235:770
aggregating no more than three minutes in any 15 consecutive
minutes.
(3) In any zone, no discharge of solid particles through a stack duct or
vent shall be permitted that is greater than 25% of the allowable
emission in pounds per hour established by Chapters 7 and 8 of the
State Air Pollution Control Code. No open burning shall be
permitted in any zone. All incinerators shall be approved by the
State Department of Health.
(4) Any road, parking area, driveway, truck, loading or unloading
station or any other exterior area having a substantial movement of
vehicles or equipment shall be paved or otherwise stabilized during
construction sufficiently to prevent the generation of dust from the
movement of such vehicles or equipment, subject to approval of the
Borough Engineer.
(5) In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without
instruments.
B. Wastes.
(1) No liquid waste shall be discharged into any watercourse in the
Borough except as provided in this article. If the applicant proposes
to construct facilities for the treatment of waste, he shall supply:
(a) A statement by the State Department of Environmental
Protection that such proposed facilities are in compliance with
applicable state laws and regulations.
(b) Approval by the appropriate officials of the installation of such
facilities. No liquid waste shall be discharged into the public
sewage collection and disposal system unless the appropriate
municipal or authority officials shall have first investigated the
character and volume of such waste and shall have certified
that it will accept the discharge of such waste material into the
system. The applicant shall comply with any requirements of
such officials, including the pretreating of such waste, the
installation of processing methods, the separation or screening
of wastes, the control of pH and other methods of improving
such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition to the approval
of such facilities.
(2) Each use shall assume the following responsibilities for solid waste
disposal:
(a) To provide adequate and regular collection and removal of all
refuse, except if the Borough assumes the responsibility.
(b) To comply with all applicable provisions of the Air Pollution
Control Code.
§ 250-111 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-111
235:771
(c) To comply with all provisions of the state Sanitary Code,
Chapter 8, Refuse Disposal, Public Health Council or the State
Department of Health.
(d) To permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste,
junk or other objectionable materials.
(e) To not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the
property, except as may be permitted by other Borough Code
regulations.
C. Radiation. All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are or may
be sources of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards and
requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and any
codes, rules or regulations promulgated under such act, as well as the
Radiation Protection Act, Chapter 116, Public Laws 1958, as amended,
whichever shall be the more stringent.
D. Noise. See Borough Code Chapters 155 and 175 and N.J.A.C. 7:29.
E. Vibration. In any zone, no vibrations discernible without instruments at
the measuring point shall be permitted.
F. Glare. No single standard for glare is promulgated in this chapter, due
to the impracticality of establishing such standards. It is the intent of
these performance standards to ensure that both direct and indirect
glare, to the extent possible, are eliminated or that activities producing
such glare are carried on within a structure. Necessary glare-producing
devices, such as roadway and walkway lighting, shall be designed,
constructed and maintained in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to
surrounding uses.
G. Heat. Heat is thermal energy of a radioactive, conductive or convective
nature. In any zone, any use or process shall not produce a temperature
rise discernible at the measuring point, nor discharge water into any
watercourse which shall produce a temperature increase of greater
than 3° in that watercourse.
H. Fire and explosion hazards. If it appears that any proposed use,
structure, process or resulting product or material may constitute a fire
or explosion hazard, the Planning Board may require the applicant to
supply proof of:
(1) Approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or
materials from the State Department of Labor and Industry,
indicating that adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have
been taken or installed.
(2) Approval from the Borough Fire Chief that the applicant has
complied with all applicable Borough fire prevention regulations.
I. Water runoff. Drainage from one property must be so controlled as not
to do damage to adjoining properties or adversely affect the community
§ 250-111 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-111
235:772
at large. Volumes, velocity of flow and design standards for handling
surface water runoff, both on- and off-site, will be thoroughly
considered before any site plan or subdivision approval can be granted
and will be controlled by the Borough Surface Water Management Plan.
(See Chapter 215.)
§ 250-111 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-111
235:773

ARTICLE XVII
Violations and Penalties
§ 250-112. Violations and penalties enumerated.
A. Any owner or agent and any person or corporation who shall violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, structurally alter,
enlarge, rebuild or move any building or buildings or any structure, or
who shall put into use any lot or land in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted hereunder, or who shall refuse reasonable
opportunity to inspect any premises shall be liable to a fine of not more
than $2,000 or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each and every day such violation continues
after appropriate notice shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation. [Amended 5-16-2006 by Ord. No. 10-06]
B. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land or part thereof where
anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
employed in connection therewith and who assists in the commission of
such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, as specified above.
§ 250-112 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-112
235:775

ARTICLE XVIII
Planned Office District Zones
[Added 3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 4-02; amended 12-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 22-02A]
§ 250-113. Permitted uses in POD-N Zone.
§ 250-114. County road or state highway access in POD-N Zone.
Any application for development in the POD-N Zone shall provide direct
two-way access to either Columbia Turnpike or State Highway Route 24. No
access to Elm Street is permitted.
§ 250-115. Permitted accessory uses in POD-N Zone.
All permitted accessory uses in C Zones are permitted in the POD-N Zone,
including a utility servicing the uses in the POD-S Zone.
§ 250-116. Area, yard and building height and coverage
requirements in POD-N Zone.
All lot area, width, depth, yard and building and impervious coverage
requirements for the POD-N Zone shall be in accordance with the criteria
for the C-1 Zone except as follows:
A. The following uses are permitted in the POD-N Zone subject to a floor
area ratio not to exceed 0.03:
(1) General business offices;
(2) Laboratories for nonhazardous research, experimentation or
testing;
(3) Light, nonnuisance manufacturing; and
(4) Planned commercial developments containing one or more of the
uses permitted under Subsections through (3) above.
B. Municipal facilities or uses, such as a park-and-ride facility, are
permitted uses in the POD-N Zone and are not subject to floor area ratio
restrictions.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this chapter, a
planned unit development meeting the requirements of § 250-123 below
shall be a principal permitted use in the POD-N and POD-S Zones.
[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06]
A. Floor area ratio in POD-N Zone. The maximum floor area ratio shall be
0.030 in the POD-N Zone.
B. Open space organization in POD-N Zone. Open space may be dedicated
to the Borough or may be deeded to a corporation, association or other
§ 250-113 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-116
235:777
§ 250-117. Permitted uses in POD-S Zone.
legal entity consisting of one or more of the property owners within the
planned commercial development for their use, control, management
and maintenance. Any agreement providing for private ownership shall
be reviewed and approved by the Borough Attorney to ensure that
adequate safeguards are included guaranteeing the continuance of the
agreement in perpetuity and protecting the Borough from harm. In
any event, the agreement shall give the Borough the right to perform
maintenance and assess the cost to the property owners in the event
that the property owners fail to maintain the property in accordance
with the agreement. All provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 of the
Municipal Land Use Law shall govern the establishment of the open
space organization.
A. The following uses are permitted in the POD-S Zone subject, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, to a maximum floor area of 830,000
square feet and a floor area ratio not to exceed 0.074: [Amended
9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4;
4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
(1) General business offices and medical offices, provided that medical
offices shall not exceed 28% of the maximum floor area permitted
in this section (830,000 square feet). [Amended 7-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-12]
(2) Laboratories for nonhazardous research, experimentation or
testing.
(3) Light, nonnuisance manufacturing.
(4) Facilities for higher education.
(5) Planned commercial developments containing one or more of the
uses permitted under Subsection A(1) through (4) above and/or
uses under § 250-119 below.199
B. Existing buildings which the developer does not propose to reuse shall
remain vacant and shall be razed during the term of the general
development plan. Removal and maintenance of the vacant buildings
shall be guaranteed pursuant to an agreement between the Borough
and the owner of the buildings, which agreement shall be a condition of
any GDP approval. This agreement shall run with the land and bind all
successor owners. Buildings subject to such an agreement shall not be
deemed to be floor area for purposes of this chapter and shall not be
subject to floor area ratio limits. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-4]
199. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding ancillary surface parking lots, as
amended, which immediately followed, was repealed 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-17.
§ 250-116 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-117
235:778
§ 250-118. County road or state highway access in POD-S Zone.
[Amended 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4]
Any application for development in the POD-S Zone in excess of 0.074 FAR
shall provide direct access to both Park Avenue and State Highway Route
24, except that such direct access to Route 24 is not required for hotel
development pursuant to § 250-119A below; commercial athletic training
facilities meeting the requirements of § 250-124 below; or planned unit
development pursuant to § 250-123 below. No access to Ridgedale Avenue
is permitted with the exception of controlled access for emergency, police,
and fire vehicles.
§ 250-119. Conditional uses in POD-S Zone. [Amended 9-19-2006 by
Ord. No. 8-06; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4]
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this chapter:
[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06]
(1) Commercial athletic training facilities meeting the requirements of
§ 250-124 below shall be a principal permitted use in the POD-S
Zone; and
(2) A planned unit development meeting the requirements of § 250-123
below shall be a principal permitted use in the POD-N and POD-S
Zones.
A. A hotel or hotel and conference center is a conditional use in the POD-S
Zone subject to the following standards:
(1) No hotel building shall exceed a maximum of 60 feet or six stories
in height. The following roof structures may extend up to 15 feet
above the permitted height limit, provided that such structures are
set back at least 25 feet from the perimeter of the roof and, in the
aggregate, do not cover more than 20% of the roof area of the
entire building: roof tanks and supports; elevator housings;
stairwell enclosures; mechanical equipment; decorative roof
projections; and chimneys and vent pipes. In addition, parapet
walls may extend up to five feet above the top of roof.
(2) No hotel building shall be permitted closer to:
(a) Park Avenue than 150 feet;
(b) Any interior road intersecting with and providing direct access
to Park Avenue than 100 feet;
(c) Any other property line abutting the perimeter of the POD-S
Zone than 50 feet; and
(d) Any other property line abutting another lot in the POD-S Zone
than 15 feet; provided that where a fifteen-foot setback is so
§ 250-117 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-119
235:779
provided, a minimum distance of 50 feet must be maintained
between adjoining buildings.
(3) That part of the hotel lot that is not covered with buildings,
pavement, parking areas, sidewalks, and like impervious material
shall be not less than 40% of the total lot area and shall be
appropriately landscaped subject to Planning Board approval.
(4) A hotel shall provide off-street parking at the rate of one parking
space for each guest room. Should the hotel include a restaurant
and/or bar facilities, parking spaces for those facilities shall be
provided as required in § 250-105, in addition to those spaces
required for guest rooms. Should meeting rooms, ballrooms, and
conference suites be provided as an accessory use, parking shall be
provided at the rate of one space for every 100 square feet of floor
area within such meeting rooms, ballrooms, and conference suites,
in addition to the other parking requirements for the hotel.
[Amended 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
(5) A hotel shall only be permitted on a site containing a minimum area
of nine acres. [Amended 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1;
9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15]
(6) No more than three restaurants in two buildings and no more than
18,000 square feet of freestanding restaurant space are permitted.
The restaurants may be located in separate buildings, but must be
located on the parcel listed as Lot 1.02 in Block 14.01 as of the date
this subsection is adopted. Stores, shops, and service facilities,
primarily for the use and convenience of hotel guests and/or
patrons of other uses within the hotel building are permitted as
accessory uses, if located within the hotel building. [Amended
4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1; 7-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12]
(7) Only one hotel shall be permitted in the POD-S Zone, which hotel
shall be limited to 165 guest rooms and 200,000 square feet of total
floor area within the building, exclusive of freestanding restaurant
space that is described in Subsection A(6) above. [Amended
4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1; 7-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12]
(8) Any hotel shall be part of a planned commercial development or a
planned unit development and shall be included within the general
development plan submitted for such development by the
developer. [Amended 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
(9) A hotel shall also comply with the parking requirements set forth in
§ 250-121D below. Such requirements, however, shall not be
deemed to be specifications or standards pertaining solely to a
conditional use, within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
[Amended 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
(10)No more than 20% of the total floor area of any hotel in the POD-S
Zone may be occupied by a health and/or fitness center, meeting
§ 250-119 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-119
235:780
§ 250-120. Permitted accessory uses in POD-S Zone. [Amended
4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
All permitted accessory uses in C Zones are permitted in the POD-S Zone,
together with those accessory uses, structures, and facilities permitted for
corporate suites as described in § 250-2.2.
rooms, ballrooms, and/or conference suites, or any combination of
these. [Amended 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
B. Uses permitted in § 250-117, other than commercial athletic training
facilities pursuant to § 250-124 below, and planned unit development
pursuant to § 250-123 below, which occupy gross floor area in excess of
0.074 FAR or 830,000 square feet, shall be deemed to be conditional
uses in the POD-S Zone subject to the following regulations (which
regulations, notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this
chapter, shall not apply to commercial athletic training facilities or
planned unit development):
(1) Requirement for direct connection to Route 24 for development in
the POD-S Zone exceeding 830,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Permitted uses in the POD-S Zone in excess of 830,000 square feet
of gross floor area as permitted under § 250-117, up to a maximum
floor area ratio of 0.153, are conditioned on direct connection
providing two-way access from an interchange access street in the
POD-S Zone to Route 24. The gross floor area ratio maximum for
the POD-S Zone may be increased to 0.180 pursuant to § 119B(3)
and (4) below.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection B(3) below, the floor area ratio for
uses permitted by § 250-118 shall not exceed 0.153.
(3) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39c, and subject to the limitations of
this subsection, a developer of a planned commercial development
may increase the concentration of development within the POD-S
Zone if such increase is offset by a corresponding reduction of
development in the POD-N Zone.
(4) The developer shall be permitted to increase floor area ratio in the
POD-S Zone to 0.180, provided that this increase is offset by
elimination of the commercial development permitted in the POD-N
Zone. Any increased floor area ratio is only permitted if the entire
development in the POD-N Zone is eliminated, excepting utilities to
service the POD-S Zone.
§ 250-119 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-121
235:781
§ 250-121. Area, yard setback and building height and coverage
requirements in POD-S Zone. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-4]
All lot area, width, depth, height, yard, and building and improved coverage
requirements for commercial development within the POD-S Zone shall be
in accordance with the criteria for the C-1 Zone except as follows:
A. Permitted building height shall be 60 feet, with a maximum of four
stories, for buildings not exceeding minimum required front, side and
rear yard setbacks, and 75 feet, with a maximum of five stories, where
the applicable minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks required
under this § 250-121 are increased three feet for each one foot of
building height above 60 feet, and where a minimum distance of 75 feet
is maintained between adjoining buildings. The setback requirements
specified in this section for buildings exceeding 60 feet in height shall
control notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this
§ 250-121. The following roof structures may extend up to 15 feet above
the permitted height limit, provided that such structures are setback at
least 25 feet from the perimeter of the roof and, in the aggregate, do
not cover more than 20% of the roof surface: roof tanks and supports;
elevator housings; stairwell enclosures; mechanical equipment;
decorative roof projections; and chimneys and vent pipes. In addition,
parapet walls may extend up to five feet above the top of roof.
[Amended 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-8]
B. Minimum front yard setback requirements shall be modified as follows:
(1) Along any public or private street in the POD-S Zone that intersects
with and provides direct access to Park Avenue (such a street is
referred to herein as a "Park Avenue connector street"), the
minimum front yard setback shall be 100 feet.
(2) Accessways providing access and/or egress between a Park Avenue
connector street and a commercial athletic training facility, a hotel,
one or more office buildings, corporate suites or other permitted
commercial uses, or a parking area serving any one or more of
these uses, shall not be deemed to be streets for purposes of this
§ 250-121. During site plan review, the Board shall review the
layout of such accessways to insure compliance with the design
standards set forth in § 212-24A(1). [Amended 4-17-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-1]
C. Where the side or rear lot line of any lot containing (or planned to
contain) commercial development within the POD-S Zone abuts another
lot containing (or planned to contain) such development, the minimum
side and rear yard setback requirement shall be 15 feet; provided,
however, that a minimum distance of 50 feet must be maintained
between adjoining buildings.
D. Parking requirements shall be modified as follows:
§ 250-121 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-121
235:782
§ 250-122. FAR limits in POD Zones. [Amended 9-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 8-06; 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4]
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this chapter, the
floor area ratio limits within the POD Zones shall not apply to parking
structures, including but not limited to buildings and/or structures related
to park-and-ride facilities; freestanding buildings or structures for
mechanical or utility equipment, including but not limited to sewage
treatment facilities; hotels or hotel and conference centers; vacant building
subject to an agreement for removal and maintenance pursuant to
§ 250-117.B above; buildings and/or structures accessory to any open space
(1) Parking shall be permitted in the front yard with buffering and
subject to a setback of 150 feet from Park Avenue and 50 feet from
all other streets. Parking serving the hotel and restaurants may be
set back 90 feet from Park Avenue. [Amended 7-16-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-12]
(2) Notwithstanding the requirements of § 250-100E, there shall be no
minimum required setback between parking areas and property
lines along lot lines which form a common boundary between lots
to be developed for commercial uses within the POD-S Zone, so
long as cross easements are created to allow shared parking
between or among such lots.
E. Improved lot coverage limits established in the C-1 Zone shall not apply
to individual lots developed for commercial uses within the POD-S
Zone, provided that the total improved coverage for all lots containing
commercial development within the POD-S Zone shall not exceed 40%.
F. Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 250-16A, lots in the PODS
Zone may be developed without frontage on a public street, so long as
such lot is provided with access to a public street by means of an
improved driveway measuring 30 feet in width; the perpetual right to
access and egress over the improved driveway is granted by a recorded
permanent easement; such easement is reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board Attorney and Borough Engineer to insure adequate
provision for future maintenance of the driveway; and such driveway is
adequate to accommodate fire trucks and other emergency vehicles. On
any such lot, the minimum front yard requirement shall be 100 feet and
the setback shall be measured from the nearest property line to the
front of the building as identified on the site plan. Such lots need not
comply with minimum lot width requirements, but must meet all area,
yard, setback, height, and coverage requirements applicable to the
POD-S Zone.
G. Planned unit development shall be governed by this § 250-121 except as
otherwise provided in § 250-123C below.
H. Commercial athletic training facilities shall be governed by § 250-124
and not by this § 250-121.
§ 250-121 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-122
235:783
use; buildings and/or structures included within any commercial athletic
training facility; and/or buildings and/or structures included within a
planned unit development. Within a planned commercial development, floor
area ratio limits shall apply to the total floor area (other than floor area
which is excluded under this section, herein called "excluded floor area")
within the planned commercial development but shall not apply so as to
limit the extent of floor area on individual lots. The gross floor area (other
than excluded floor area) of a planned commercial development in the PODS
Zone may, pursuant to a general development plan, equal but shall not
exceed as a permitted use 830,000 square feet and as a conditional use
may equal 1,730,000 square feet. The total gross floor area of a planned
commercial development (other than the excluded floor area) may equal
but not exceed 2,030,000 square feet if permitted commercial development
in the POD-N Zone is eliminated pursuant to § 250-119B(3) and (4) of this
article.
§ 250-123. Planned unit development in POD-N and POD-S Zones.
[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06]
A. Required Components of PUD.
(1) Any planned unit development in the POD-N and POD-S Zones shall
contain the following components:
(a) A mandatory open space component consisting of at least 200
acres. The open space component shall be either permanently
deed restricted to open space use or dedicated to the
municipality for open space purposes, including athletic fields
and other active recreation uses, and/or facilities for municipal
utilities. Lands dedicated to the Borough shall be no closer
than 50 feet to the wetlands line.
(b) A commercial use component containing up to but not more
than 830,000 square feet of gross floor area occupied by any
one or more of the uses permitted under § 250-117A(1)
through (4) above; in addition to the above-permitted 830,000
square feet of gross floor area, the commercial use component
may also contain i) a hotel and conference center in
conformance with the requirements of § 250-119A above, and
ii) corporate suites in conformance with the requirements of
§ 250-123C(2) below. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-4; 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
(c) A commercial athletic training facilities component comprising
at least 20 acres.
(d) An age-restricted residential housing component consisting of
single-family detached and/or multifamily age-restricted
housing units at a density not exceeding 2.00 units per acre.
Density shall be computed on the basis of all land area within
the PUD, except land area included within the commercial use
§ 250-122 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-123
235:784
component or the commercial athletic training facilities
component. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the residential
housing component shall not contain more than 425 agerestricted
housing units. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-4; 7-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12]
(e) A supportive and special-needs housing component consisting
of a mix of one-bedroom and two-bedroom supportive housing
units not to exceed 98 bedrooms and one group home with a
maximum of four bedrooms for special needs adults who
require full-time supervision. [Added 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-17]
(2) Except as provided in Subsection B below with regard to utility
improvements, no part of the commercial use component,
commercial athletic training facilities component, age-restricted
residential housing component, or supportive and special-needs
housing component of any planned unit development may be
located in the POD-N Zone. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-17]
B. Requirements for mandatory open space component. Mandatory open
space within the PUD shall be located on the north side of Route 24.
Mandatory open space may contain active recreation uses as well as
utility improvements and easements servicing permitted development
in the PUD and/or the surrounding community.
C. Requirements for commercial use component. [Amended 3-18-2008
by Ord. No. 08-4; 4-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1]
(1) In general. All development within the commercial use component
shall comply with the area, yard, setback, height, and coverage
requirements of § 250-121 above, except that hotel and conference
center development shall instead be governed by § 250-119A,
corporate suites shall instead be governed by § 250-123C(2) below,
and maximum improved coverage within the commercial use
component of the PUD shall not exceed 40% of the total land area
occupied by the commercial use component. Except for a hotel and
conference center, and corporate suites, total gross floor area
within the commercial use component of the PUD shall not exceed
830,000 square feet.
(2) Requirements for corporate suites.
(a) No more than 256 corporate suites units shall be permitted
within the POD-S Zone. [Amended 7-16-2015 by Ord. No.
15-12]
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 250-121F above, any
building containing corporate suites shall be situated on a lot
fronting on Park Avenue.
§ 250-123 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-123
235:785
(c) Minimum lot size for corporate suites shall be eight acres.
(d) The minimum building setback from any Park Avenue
connector street shall be 65 feet.
(e) The minimum building setback from Park Avenue shall be 150
feet.
(f) The minimum building setback from all other property lines
shall be 50 feet.
(g) The minimum parking setback from Park Avenue shall be 150
feet, 50 feet from other streets and 10 feet from other property
lines.
(h) A parking garage provided beneath a building containing
corporate suites shall not be counted as a story, provided that
the garage floor is at or below the adjacent grade of Park
Avenue.
(i) Parking shall be provided for corporate suites in conformance
with the requirements of chapter § 250-105.
(j) Except as otherwise provided above, corporate suites shall
conform to the height, lot width, yard, building coverage, and
improved coverage requirements applicable to commercial
development in the POD-S Zone as set forth in § 250-121
above.
(k) Prior to a certificate of occupancy issued for any corporate
suite, there may be a direct internal vehicular connection
between the corporate suite and the other facilities within the
planned unit development, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board. Such connection shall be in addition to access
to Park Avenue.
(l) The corporate suites shall be designed and operated in such a
manner that both the amenities provided indoors and outdoors
shall be an integral part of the facility that distinguishes it from
residential rental apartments and hotels.
(m) Indoor gross floor area devoted to the indoor accessory
amenities and facilities described in the "corporate suites"
definition200 shall be within the range of from 6% to 8% of the
gross floor area occupied by all suites/occupancy units,
accessory hallways, elevators and stairways within the
building, as well as supporting mechanical areas (referred to
as "suites gross floor area" or "SGFA"). Outdoor area devoted
to the outdoor accessory amenities and facilities described in
200. Editor's Note: See § 250-2.2, Definitions.
§ 250-123 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-123
235:786
the "corporate suites" definition shall equal at least 12% of the
SGFA.
D. Requirements for commercial athletic training facilities component.
The commercial athletic training facilities component shall comply with
the standards set forth in § 250-124 below.
E. Requirements for age-restricted residential housing component.
[Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-4; 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-17]
(1) All housing units within the age-restricted residential housing
component shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Minimum number of low- and moderate-income housing units:
18 units.
(b) Minimum building setback from Park Avenue right-of-way: 150
feet.
(c) Minimum building setback from all other streets, public or
private, providing direct access to any nonresidential use
within the PUD: 50 feet from right-of-way line for public
streets; 50 feet from curbline for private streets.
(d) Minimum building setback to all perimeter boundaries of the
PUD: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum building setback from all other property lines: 20
feet.
(f) Minimum parking setback from Park Avenue right-of-way: 150
feet.
(g) Minimum parking setback to all other streets, public or
private, providing direct access to any nonresidential use
within the PUD: 50 feet from right-of-way line for public
streets; 50 feet from curbline for private streets.
(h) Minimum parking setback to all perimeter boundaries of the
PUD: 50 feet.
(i) Subject to the exceptions below, the minimum building setback
from all streets or alleyways providing direct access to a
garage at the rear of a residential building (such streets or
alleyways are herein referred to as "garage accessways") shall
be 8.5 feet measured from the curbline; the minimum building
setback from all other streets, public or private, providing
direct access only to age-restricted housing units within the
PUD shall be 20 feet, measured from the right-of-way line for
public streets and from the curbline for private streets.
Notwithstanding the foregoing:
§ 250-123 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-123
235:787
[1] For single-family detached age-restricted housing units,
encroachments within minimum building setbacks shall be
permitted as provided in § 250-123E(2)(e) and (f) below.
[2] For multifamily age-restricted housing units, open covered
porches, uncovered patios and decks, balconies, and
stoops may extend seven feet into the required setback
from streets other than garage accessways; uncovered
steps may extend up to two feet from the street sidewalk,
measured from the sidewalk edge closest to the building;
and planter boxes may extend up to the street sidewalk
edge located closest to the building.
(j) Minimum building setback from all parking spaces serving
age-restricted residential uses within the PUD: 15 feet. This
requirement shall not apply to parking on streets or in
driveways.
(k) Minimum parking setback from all streets, public or private,
providing direct access only to age-restricted residential uses
within the PUD: 10 feet from right-of-way line for public
streets; 10 feet from curbline for private streets. This
requirement shall not apply to on-street parking.
(l) Maximum aggregate building coverage within the agerestricted
residential housing component: 25%. (Such
coverage shall be calculated based on the total land area
within the age-restricted residential housing component of the
PUD.)
(m) Maximum aggregate improved tract coverage within the agerestricted
residential housing component: 50% (such coverage
shall be calculated based on the total land area within the agerestricted
residential housing component of the PUD);
provided, however, that total improved coverage for the entire
POD-S Zone shall not exceed 40%.
(n) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this
chapter, roof projections such as chimneys, spires, cupolas,
towers, and flagpoles shall be permitted to extend up to 10 feet
beyond the highest point of the roof, provided that the area of
all such projections does not exceed 10% of the total roof area.
(2) Single-family detached age-restricted housing units shall comply
with the following additional requirements: [Added 4-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-5]
(a) Such housing units may be located on private streets, provided
that such streets meet minimum requirements of the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) Minimum lot area: 5,500 square feet.
§ 250-123 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-123
235:788
(c) Minimum lot width: 55 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 110 feet.
(e) Minimum front yard: 20 feet, provided that:
[1] Open, covered porches, balconies, stoops and uncovered
patios and decks may extend seven feet into the required
front yard;
[2] Notwithstanding the provisions defining setback lines in
§ 250-2.2 of this chapter, uncovered steps may extend up
to two feet from the street sidewalk, measured from the
sidewalk edge closest to the building; and
[3] Planter boxes may extend up the street sidewalk edge
located closest to the building.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet, provided that open, covered
porches, uncovered steps, balconies, stoops and uncovered
patios and decks may extend six feet into the required twentyfoot
rear yard, and where the rear yard abuts a garage
accessway, the minimum setback shall be 8.5 feet measured
from the garage accessway curbline.
(g) Minimum side yards: six feet (one), 15 feet (both). Walls
attached to a dwelling unit, up to six feet in height, are
permitted within a minimum side yard.
(h) Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories/35 feet.
(i) Accessory buildings and swimming pools are not permitted on
any lot containing a single-family detached age-restricted
housing unit.
(3) Multifamily age-restricted housing units shall comply with the
following additional requirements: [Added 4-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-5]
(a) Minimum distance between buildings: 24 feet between
townhouse buildings; 30 feet between other multifamily
buildings; and 30 feet between a townhouse building and
another (nontownhouse) multifamily building. Porches,
balconies, stoops and walls up to six feet in height attached to
a building may project up to eight feet into minimum required
distances between buildings, provided that no two adjoining
townhouse buildings with an allowable projection between
them shall be less than 16 feet apart. As used in this
subsection, "townhouse" shall mean a multifamily dwelling unit
with no dwelling units above or below it. Uncovered steps shall
be permitted within minimum distances between buildings.
§ 250-123 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-123
235:789
§ 250-124. Commercial athletic training facilities in POD-S Zone.
[Added 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 8-06]
Commercial athletic training facilities in the POD-S Zone shall comply with
the following standards.
(b) Maximum building height: three stories/45 feet for buildings
without parking underneath; three stories/55 feet for buildings
with parking underneath. All multifamily age-restricted
housing units within the PUD must be constructed with a
gable, hip, gambrel, mansard or other similar style pitched
roof.
F. Requirements for supportive and special-needs housing component.
[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-17]
(1) Minimum lot size shall be eight acres.
(2) Minimum building setback from Park Avenue right-of-way shall be
50 feet.
(3) Minimum building setback from other streets shall be 50 feet.
(4) Minimum building setback from all other property lines shall be 25
feet.
(5) Minimum parking setback from Park Avenue right-of-way shall be
100 feet, 50 feet from other streets and 15 feet from other property
lines.
(6) Maximum building coverage shall be 25% (Such coverage shall be
calculated based on the total land area within the supportive and
special needs housing component of the PUD.)
(7) Maximum impervious coverage shall be 45% (Such coverage shall
be calculated based on the total land area within the supportive
and special needs housing component of the PUD.)
(8) Minimum distance between buildings shall be 25 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories/35 feet.
(10) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:21 and Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
However, the Planning Board shall have the discretion to grant a de
minimis exception from RSIS standards based on the anticipated
reduced parking demand for supportive and special needs housing.
A. Minimum tract area: 20 acres.
B. Minimum building setback from Park Avenue right-of-way: 1,000 feet.
§ 250-123 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-124
235:790
C. Minimum building setback from all other streets, public or private: 100
feet from right-of-way line for public streets; 100 feet from curbline for
private streets.
D. Minimum building setback from all other property lines (except street
rights-of-way): 50 feet.
E. Minimum parking setback from Park Avenue right-of-way: 1,000 feet.
F. Minimum parking setback from all other streets, public or private: 50
feet from right-of way line for public streets; 50 feet from curbline or
pavement edge for private streets.
G. Minimum number of parking spaces: 1.6 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of floor area, but excluding floor area occupied by practice fields.
H. Maximum permitted building coverage: 35%.
I. Maximum total improved coverage: 40%.
J. Maximum permitted building height: 60 feet, except that maximum
permitted height for air-supported domes or buildings for indoor
practice fields shall be 125 feet.
K. Commercial athletic training facilities may be located on a lot without
frontage on a public street so long as:
(1) Such lot is provided with access to a public street by means of an
improved private street or driveway measuring at least 24 feet in
width, with the perpetual right to access and egress over the
improved private street or driveway granted by a recorded
permanent easement;
(2) Such easement is reviewed and approved by the Planning Board
Attorney and Borough Engineer to ensure adequate provision for
future maintenance of the public street or driveway; and
(3) Such private street or driveway is adequate to accommodate fire
trucks and other emergency vehicles.
L. Outdoor lighting shall be permitted for athletic fields within commercial
athletic training facilities subject to the following:
(1) Maximum height: 100 feet.
(2) All lighting fixtures shall be equipped with hoods to minimize
spillage beyond the perimeter of the athletic field.
§ 250-124 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-124
235:791

ARTICLE XIX
MF-5 Multifamily Residential Zone
[Added 12-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-19]
§ 250-125. Permitted uses.
Townhouses and garden apartments, consisting of a maximum of 10 and a
minimum of three dwellings in a building, attached side by side or arranged
in flats. This zone is specifically for establishment of very-low-, low- and
moderate-income multifamily housing units in conjunction with market rate
units.
§ 250-126. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 250-127. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
§ 250-128. General provisions and requirements.
A. Those accessory uses permitted in the R-15 Zone with the exception of
those permitted in § 250-32C, D and F.
B. Clubhouse and other private recreation facilities for the use of the
residents and their guests.
C. Uses customary, incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses shall
be permitted accessory uses.
A. Minimum site area: five acres.
B. Maximum gross density: nine units per acre.
C. Minimum setback from existing public street: 50 feet.
D. Minimum setback from other tract boundaries: 40 feet.
E. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
F. Maximum improved lot coverage: 50%.
G. Maximum building height: three stories and 45 feet.
H. Minimum building separation: 20 feet.
A. All development within the MF-5 Multifamily Residential Zone shall
provide for low- and moderate-income housing set-asides of 20% of the
total number of units proposed within the development pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 3:97-6.4(b), as may be amended and the
requirements of § 250-84 through 250-89 of this chapter, as may be
amended. The affordable units shall be split with 50% affordable to
moderate-income families and 50% affordable to low-income families,
of which 13% shall be affordable to very-low-income families.
§ 250-125 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-128
235:793
B. The minimum building separation distances of the MF-5 Multifamily
Residential Zone shall apply whether buildings are in condominium
ownership or on their own individual lots.
C. Patios, decks, overhangs, chimneys, bay windows, and other
architectural features that do not increase the habitable floor area of a
structure shall be permitted to protrude up to five feet into required
yard setbacks and building separation areas.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21,
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
E. The minimum width of access drives and private roads shall be 24 feet
and be pursuant to RSIS.
F. Appropriate facilities shall be specifically developed for recreation of
the residents of the development, subject to Planning Board approval,
based on the projected needs of the residents for such facilities and
consistent with the overall design and appearance of the development.
At a minimum, 30 square feet per dwelling unit shall be provided in
indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, such as but not limited to a
clubhouse, pool, or deck area.
G. Planning Board site plan review is required, as provided in § 212-21.
Such review will emphasize the objectives of site planning design
compatibility with the adjoining areas, including visual harmony and
appropriate variety in the configuration and arrangement of buildings,
open spaces and circulation and parking facilities.
§ 250-128 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-128
235:794
ARTICLE XX
MF-7 Multifamily Residential Zone
[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1]
§ 250-129. Permitted uses.
§ 250-130. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 250-131. Area, yard and building coverage requirements
A. Townhouses and garden apartments, consisting of a maximum of 10 and
a minimum of three dwellings in a building, attached side-by-side or
arranged in flats. This zone is specifically for establishment of low- and
moderate-income multifamily housing units in conjunction with market
rate units.
B. All uses permitted in the PB-2 Professional and Business Office Zone in
conformity with the regulations of that zone.
A. Uses customary, incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses shall
be permitted accessory uses.
B. Accessory uses permitted in the PB-2 Professional and Business Office
Zone when the principal use is a use permitted in that zone.
A. Minimum lot area: 45,000 square feet.
B. Maximum density: seven dwelling units per acre.
C. Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
E. Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
F. Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
G. Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
H. Maximum Building Height: 35 feet / 2 1/2 stories.
I. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
J. Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
K. Minimum distance between buildings: 30 feet.
L. Parking requirements shall be pursuant to the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
M. Buffer requirements: There shall be a minimum landscaped buffer of 30
feet from residentially developed property and 10 feet from
nonresidentially developed property.
§ 250-129 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-132
235:795
§ 250-132. General provisions and requirements
A. All development within the MF-7 Multifamily Residential Zone shall
provide for an affordable set-aside of 14.2% of the total number of
dwelling units proposed within the development, and said affordable
unit shall be reserved for a moderate-income household.
B. All affordable housing controls and standards are subject to the rules of
the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) or any subsequent state
agency. The development, marketing and sale of the affordable units
shall be pursuant to applicable state regulations and §§ 250-84 through
250-90 of this chapter, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 250-132 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-132
235:796
ARTICLE XXI
R-7 One-Family Residence Residential Zone
[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2]
§ 250-133. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses and accessory uses in the R-7 One-Family Residence
Residential Zone are as specified for the R-15 Residential Zone in §§ 250-31
and 250-32.
§ 250-134. Schedule of area, yard and building requirements for the
R-7 Zone.
Item Required
Minimum lot area 7,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 60 feet
Minimum lot depth 115 feet
Minimum front yard setback 40 feet
Minimum side yard — each 10 feet
Minimum side yard — combined 20% of lot width
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum street side yard — corner lot 40 feet
Maximum building coverage *see table201
Maximum improved lot coverage 60%
Accessory building standards Same as R-15 zone
201. Editor’s Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-133 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-134
235:797

ARTICLE XXII
U University/College Zone
[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2]
§ 250-135. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in a U University/College Zone are as follows:
§ 250-136. Permitted accessory uses.
The permitted accessory uses in a U University/College Zone are as follows:
§ 250-137. Development standards.
Item Required
Minimum lot area 50 acres
Minimum setback from property lines 75 feet
Maximum building height 4 stories and 60 feet
Maximum building coverage 35%
Maximum improved lot coverage 60%
A. Colleges and universities.
B. Single-family dwellings pursuant to standards in the R-44 Zone.
C. Churches and similar places of worship subject to the provisions of
§ 250-15.
D. Public schools, municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds, or other
municipal facilities as deemed necessary and appropriate by the
Borough Council.
A. Off-street parking lots.
B. Those uses which are naturally and normally incidental and subordinate
to the principal use of the property.
§ 250-135 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-137
235:799

ARTICLE XXIII
MF-6 Multifamily Residential Zone
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-11]
§ 250-138. Permitted uses.
§ 250-139. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 250-140. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
§ 250-141. General provisions and requirements.
A. Multifamily buildings with apartments. This zone is specifically for the
establishment of very-low-, low- and moderate-income multifamily
housing units in conjunction with market-rate units.
B. All of the uses permitted in the B-1 Business Zone. The uses permitted
in the B-1 Business Zone shall be subject to the parameters and
standards of the B-1 Business Zone.
A. Surface and garage parking spaces.
B. Private recreation facilities for the use of the residents and their guests.
C. Uses customary, incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses shall
be permitted accessory uses.
D. Accessory uses permitted in the B-1 Business Zone when the principal
permitted use is pursuant to the B-1 Business Zone.
A. Minimum site area: five acres.
B. Maximum gross density: 23.68 dwelling units per acre and a maximum
of 126 dwelling units.
C. Minimum setback from existing public street: 20 feet.
D. Minimum setback from other tract boundaries: 30 feet.
E. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
F. Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
G. Maximum building height: three stories over podium parking and 55
feet.
H. Minimum building separation: 50 feet.
A. All development within the MF-6 Multifamily Residential Zone shall
provide for low- and moderate-income housing set-asides of 20% of the
total number of units proposed within the development pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 3:97-6.4(b), as may be amended, and the
requirements of §§ 250-84 through 250-89, as may be amended. The
§ 250-138 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-141
235:801
affordable units shall be split, with 50% affordable to moderate-income
families and 50% affordable to low-income families, of which 13% shall
be affordable to very-low-income families.
B. The minimum building separation distances of the MF-6 Multifamily
Residential Zone shall apply whether buildings are in condominium
ownership or on their own individual lots.
C. Decks, overhangs, chimneys, bay windows, and other architectural
features that do not increase the habitable floor area of a structure shall
be permitted to protrude up to five feet into required yard setbacks and
building separation areas.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21,
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
E. The minimum width of access drives and private roads shall be 24 feet
and shall be in accordance with RSIS.
F. Appropriate facilities shall be specifically developed for recreation of
the residents of the development, subject to Planning Board approval,
based on the projected needs of the residents for such facilities and
consistent with the overall design and appearance of the development.
G. Planning Board site plan review is required, as provided in § 212-21 of
the Borough Code. Such review will emphasize the objectives of site
planning design compatibility with the adjoining areas, including visual
harmony and appropriate variety in the configuration and arrangement
of buildings, open spaces and circulation and parking facilities. Flat
roofs on residential buildings are not permitted unless they are
substantially concealed with decorative pitched architectural roof
treatment.
§ 250-141 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-141
235:802
ARTICLE XXIV
MF-8 Multifamily Residential Zone
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
§ 250-142. Permitted uses.
§ 250-143. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 250-144. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
§ 250-145. General provisions and requirements.
A. Multifamily buildings with apartments. This zone is specifically for the
establishment of very-low-, low- and moderate-income multifamily
housing units in conjunction with market-rate units.
B. All of the uses permitted in the PB-2 Professional and Business Office
Zone. The uses permitted in the PB-2 Professional and Business Office
Zone shall be subject to the parameters and standards of the PB-2
Professional and Business Office Zone.
A. Surface and garage parking spaces.
B. Private recreation facilities for the use of the residents and their guests.
C. Uses customary, incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses shall
be permitted accessory uses.
D. Accessory uses permitted in the PB-2 Professional and Business Office
Zone when the principal permitted use is permitted in the PB-2
Professional and Business Office Zone.
A. Minimum site area: two acres.
B. Maximum gross density: 22.5 dwelling units per acre.
C. Minimum setback from existing public street: 30 feet.
D. Minimum setback from other tract boundaries: 30 feet.
E. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
F. Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
G. Maximum building height: three stories over podium parking and 55
feet.
H. Minimum building separation: 50 feet.
A. All development within the MF-8 Multifamily Residential Zone shall
provide for low- and moderate-income housing set-asides of 20% of the
total number of units proposed within the development pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 3:97-6.4(b), as may be amended, and the
§ 250-142 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-145
235:803
requirements of §§ 250-84 through § 250-89, as may be amended. The
affordable units shall be split, with 50% affordable to moderate-income
families and 50% affordable to low-income families, of which 13% shall
be affordable to very-low-income families.
B. The minimum building separation distances of the MF-8 Zone shall
apply whether buildings are in condominium ownership or on their own
individual lots.
C. Decks, overhangs, chimneys, bay windows, and other architectural
features that do not increase the habitable floor area of a structure shall
be permitted to protrude up to five feet into required yard setbacks and
building separation areas.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21,
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), including any
amendments thereto.
E. The minimum width of access drives and private roads shall be 24 feet
and shall be pursuant to RSIS.
F. Appropriate facilities shall be specifically developed for recreation of
the residents of the development, subject to Planning Board approval,
based on the projected needs of the residents for such facilities and
consistent with the overall design and appearance of the development.
G. Planning Board site plan review is required, as provided in § 212-21 of
the Borough Code. Such review will emphasize the objectives of site
planning design compatibility with the adjoining areas, including visual
harmony and appropriate variety in the configuration and arrangement
of buildings, open spaces and circulation and parking facilities. Flat
roofs on residential buildings are not permitted unless they are
substantially concealed with decorative pitched architectural roof
treatment.
§ 250-145 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-145
235:804
ARTICLE XXV
MF-9 Multifamily Residential Zone
[Added 5-17-2017 by Ord. No. 18-9]
§ 250-146. Permitted uses.
Townhouses and garden apartments, consisting of a maximum of 10 and a
minimum of three dwellings in a building, attached side by side or arranged
in flats. This zone is specifically for establishment of very-low-, low- and
moderate-income multifamily housing units in conjunction with market-rate
units.
§ 250-147. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 250-148. Area, yard and building coverage requirements.
§ 250-149. General provisions and requirements.
A. Surface and garage parking spaces.
B. Private recreation facilities for the use of the residents and their guests.
C. Uses customary, incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses shall
be permitted accessory uses.
A. Minimum site area: five acres.
B. Maximum gross density: 10 dwelling units per acre.
C. Minimum setback from existing public street: 50 feet.
D. Minimum setback from other tract boundaries: 25 feet.
E. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
F. Maximum improved lot coverage: 50%.
G. Maximum building height: three stories and 45 feet.
H. Minimum building separation: 25 feet.
I. Minimum distance from parking area to building: eight feet.
A. All development within the MF-9 Multifamily Residential Zone shall
provide for low- and moderate-income housing set-asides of 20% of the
total number of units proposed within the development pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 3:97-6.4(b), as may be amended, and the
requirements of §§ 250-84 through 250-89, as may be amended. The
affordable units shall be split, with 50% affordable to moderate-income
families, and 50% affordable to low-income families, of which 13% shall
be affordable to very-low-income families.
§ 250-146 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-149
235:805
B. The minimum building separation requirements of the MF-9
Multifamily Residential Zone shall apply whether buildings are in
condominium ownership or on their own individual lots.
C. Decks, overhangs, chimneys, bay windows, and other architectural
features that do not increase the habitable floor area of a structure shall
be permitted to protrude up to three feet into required yard setbacks
and building separation areas.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21,
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), including any
amendments thereto.
E. The minimum width of access drives and private roads shall be 24 feet
and shall be pursuant to RSIS.
F. Appropriate facilities shall be specifically developed for recreation of
the residents of the development, subject to Planning Board approval,
based on the projected needs of the residents for such facilities and
consistent with the overall design and appearance of the development.
G. Planning Board site plan review is required, as provided in § 212-21 of
the Borough Code. Such review will emphasize the objectives of site
planning design compatibility with the adjoining areas, including visual
harmony and appropriate variety in the configuration and arrangement
of buildings, open spaces and circulation and parking facilities. Flat
roofs on residential buildings are not permitted.
§ 250-149 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 250-149
235:806
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 253
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Borough Council — See
Ch. 1.
§ 250-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 250-149
253:807

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 3-2-1988 by Ord. No. BH-2-88]
§ 253-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Florham Park of a general and permanent nature, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 253 through 281, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the
Borough of Florham Park," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 253-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 253-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 253-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 253-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Florham
Park" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 253-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
§ 253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 253-6
253:809
a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 253-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 253-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 253-9. Severabifity of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 253-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 253-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 253-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 253-12
253:810
§ 253-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 253-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 253-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to July 15,
1985.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance:
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)202
202. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 253-13B, the following sections were amended or added:
§§ 259-1, 259-6A, 259-8, 265-99A, 274-4 and 274-11. A complete description of each
change is on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health.
§ 253-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 253-13
253:811
Chapter 258
EMERGENCY FUEL OIL AND FURNACE REPAIR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mechanical systems — See Ch. 152.
§ 253-13 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 253-13
253:812
ARTICLE I
Residential Tenants
[Adopted 10-1-2008 by Ord. No. BH 03-08]
§ 258-1. Procurement of fuel oil deliveries; conditions.
The Borough Health Officer, or other officer designated by the Health
Officer, shall, whenever necessary to protect the health and safety of
residential tenants, act as agent for a landlord in engaging a fuel oil dealer
to deliver fuel oil at a reasonable price per gallon and to refire the burner
to restore the proper heating of any residential property rented by said
landlord; provided, however, that at least 12 hours have elapsed, if the
outside air temperature is between 33° F. and 55° F., inclusive, or at
least four hours have elapsed, if the outside air temperature is 32° F. or
less, since the tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal officer
or agency prior to which complaint a bona fide attempt has been made
to notify the landlord of the lack of heat and the landlord has failed to
take appropriate action. "Lack of heat" means maintaining less heat than
required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
§ 258-2. Procurement of repairmen and parts for heating
equipment; conditions.
The Health Officer of Florham Park Borough, or other officer designated
by the Health Officer, shall, whenever necessary to protect the health and
safety of residential tenants, act as agent for the landlord in the engaging of
a repairman and the ordering of any parts necessary to restore to operating
condition the furnace, boiler or other equipment essential to the proper
heating of any residential unit rented by said landlord; provided, however,
that at least 24 hours have elapsed since the tenant has lodged a complaint
with the local Board of Health, prior to which a bona fide attempt has
been made by the tenant to notify the landlord of the failure of the heating
equipment, the landlord has failed to take appropriate action, and the
outside air temperature is less than 55° F.
§ 258-3. Billing methods.
Any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel oil or refires the burner in accordance
with § 258-1, or any repairman who restores the operating condition of a
furnace or boiler, or who provides equipment and services essential to the
proper heating of any residential unit in accordance with § 258-2 of this
article may bill the landlord directly, or the Borough may issue to the fuel
oil dealer or repairman who delivered the fuel oil or made the repairs a
voucher for monies due.
§ 258-4. Negligence or failure of landlord to act; penalty; recovery
by Borough.
Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
Borough action pursuant to § 258-1 or 258-2, or both, shall be liable to a
§ 258-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 258-4
253:813
civil penalty of not more than $300 for each affected dwelling unit in the
residential property. Such penalty shall be recovered by the Borough in a
civil action by summary proceedings under the Penalty Enforcement Law
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.203). Any action to collect or enforce such penalty
may be brought in the Superior Court or Municipal Court. The amount of
such penalty shall be paid to the municipality and shall be used for general
municipal purposes.
§ 258-5. Enforcement; reimbursements; responsibility for costs.
In any penalty proceeding brought pursuant to this article, the Court shall
also order the landlord or his agent to reimburse the municipality for actual
costs for any fuel oil delivered, the service charge for refiring the boiler, if
any, and any charges for parts necessary to restore to operating condition
the furnace, the boiler or any equipment essential to the proper heating of
any residential unit, including any service charges. The Court shall further
be empowered to issue any appropriate injunctive order and to authorize
immediate collection of reimbursable costs due the municipality out of
the goods and chattels of the landlord, including all sums due, or which
may come due, as present or future rents. Any landlord who prevails in
such action shall be entitled to reimbursement by the municipality for all
reasonable costs and expenses. Such landlord, however, shall still remain
responsible for the cost of any fuel oil delivered, any charge for refiring
the burner, any parts ordered, and any charges for restoring the heating
equipment, incurred by the Borough.
§ 258-6. Immunity of Borough.
The Borough of Florham Park and its employees shall not be liable to
any person or for damage to property in enforcing this article, except for
gross negligence or malfeasance of any Borough official, and under no
circumstances shall the Borough be held liable for damages from lack of
heat in a residential unit.
§ 258-7. Applicability exception.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to owner-occupied residential
rental properties containing five units or less.
203. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1999, c. 274. See N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 258-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 258-7
253:814
Chapter 259
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD AND
BEVERAGE MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 72.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages by
underaged persons — See Ch. 105.
Retail establishments — See Ch. 191.
Sanitation — See Ch. 265.
Vending machines — See Ch. 274.
§ 259-1. Adoption of standards.
Chapter 259 shall be entitled "Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Machines," and is hereby adopted pursuant to the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated 26:1A-1 through 26:1A-7 et. seq., and Chapter 8:24-1.1
through 8:24-10.2 of the New Jersey Administrative Code and the
supplements and additions thereto.
§ 259-1.1. Public posting of evaluation placard. [Added 5-28-2014
by Ord. No. BOH 01-14]
Every establishment must post the most current evaluation placard
according to the following requirements. The evaluation placard must be
posted in one of the following prominent locations clearly visible to the
patron:
§ 259-2. License required.
No person shall operate a retail food establishment, as defined in Chapter
8:24 of the New Jersey Administrative Code or vending machine, as defined
below, unless a license to operate the same shall have been issued by the
Department of Health. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in such establishments.
§ 259-3. Definitions; fees.
Fees for a license or license approval issued pursuant to this chapter are
hereby established as follows:
A. The main entrance door from four to six feet off the ground or floor;
B. A front window within five feet of the main entrance;
C. A display case mounted on the outside wall within five feet of the main
entrance.
D. If there is no direct entrance to the street, the Health Department shall
determine an appropriate posting location in prominent public viewing.
§ 258-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 259-3
253:815
A. Risk Type 1 food establishment.
(1) Definition: any retail food establishment that:
(a) Serves or sells only prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous
foods;
(b) Prepares only non-potentially hazardous foods; or
(c) Heats only commercially processed, potentially hazardous
foods for hot holding and does not cool potentially hazardous
foods. Such retail establishments may include, but are not
limited to, convenience store operations, hot dog carts, and
coffee shops.
(2) Annual fee: $100.
B. Risk Type 2 food establishment.
(1) Definition: any retail food establishment that has a limited menu;
and
(a) Prepares, cooks, and serves most products immediately;
(b) Exercises hot and cold holding of potentially hazardous foods
after preparation or cooking; or
(c) Limits the complex preparation of potentially hazardous foods,
including the cooking, cooling, and reheating for hot holding,
to two or fewer items. Such retail establishments may include,
but are not limited to, retail food store operations, schools that
do not serve a highly susceptible population, and quick service
operations, depending on the menu and preparation
procedures.
(2) Annual fee: $200.
C. Risk Type 3 food establishment.
(1) Definition: any retail food establishment that:
(a) Has an extensive menu which requires the handling of raw
ingredients; and is involved in the complex preparation of
menu items that includes the cooking, cooling, and reheating
of at least three or more potentially hazardous foods; or
(b) Prepares and serves potentially hazardous foods, including the
extensive handling of raw ingredients; and whose primary
service population is a highly susceptible population. Such
establishments may include, but are not limited to, full-service
restaurants, diners, commissaries, and catering operations; or
hospitals, nursing homes, and preschools preparing and
serving potentially hazardous foods.
§ 259-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 259-3
253:816
(2) Annual fee: $400.
D. Risk Type 4 food establishment.
(1) Definition: a retail food establishment that conducts specialized
processes such as smoking, curing, canning, bottling, acidification
designed to control pathogen proliferation, or any reduced oxygen
packaging intended for extended shelf life where such activities
may require the assistance of a trained food technologist. Such
establishments include those establishments conducting
specialized processing at retail.
(2) Annual fee: $400.
E. Mobile food and drink.
(1) Definition: any motor vehicle or any vehicle cart, or bicycle of any
kind including hand-carried portable containers, in which food or
drink is transported, stored or prepared at temporary locations.
(2) Annual fee: $100.
F. Temporary retail food establishment.
(1) Definition: any food establishment which operates at a fixed
location for a temporary period of time not to exceed seven days in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar
organizational meetings, mobile retail food establishments as well
as agricultural markets.
(2) Fee (per event): $50.
G. Vending machine.
(1) Definition: any self-service device which, upon insertion of a coin,
paper currency, token, card, key or by any other means, dispenses
unit servings of food, either in bulk or in packages without the
necessity of replenishing the device between each vending
operation.
(2) Annual fee:
(a) Prepackaged only: $20.
(b) Gumball: $5.
(c) All others: $40.
H. Late fee (all food licenses): 1/2 of the license fee.
I. Food establishment plan review fee. A permit applicant or operator
shall submit to the health authority properly prepared plans and
specifications for review and approval before and pay the prescribed
fee:
§ 259-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 259-3
253:817
§ 259-4. License expiration and renewal.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire annually on December
31 of each year, and the fee therefor shall not be prorated from the date of
issuance. Applications for renewal thereof shall be submitted, together with
the required fee, prior to December 15 of each year. Late fees shall become
effective after January 1. Seasonal vendors must secure their licenses at
least 7 days prior to opening. Mobile retail food trucks shall be subject to
inspection prior to operation.
§ 259-5. Transferability of license.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable, nor shall
they be construed as authorizing the licensee or licensees to carry on the
business at any place other than that specified in the license itself.
§ 259-6. Revocation of license.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Board of
Health for any good or sufficient reason, provided that due notice thereof
shall be given to the licensee, and a hearing held before the Board of Health,
at which time an opportunity shall be afforded the licensee to show cause
why the license should not be revoked.
§ 259-7. Food handler's certificate. [Added 7-1-2015 by Ord. No.
BH2015-01204]
(1) The construction of a retail food establishment: $300;
(2) The conversion of an existing structure for use as a retail food
establishment: $300; or
(3) The remodeling of a retail food establishment or a change of type of
retail food establishment or food operation if the health authority
determines that plans and specifications are necessary to ensure
compliance with these rules: $150.
J. No fee will be charged to any Florham Park Borough municipal
department or affiliation.
K. A waiver of fee for temporary food licenses only shall be granted to
those applicants that provide proof of state or federal nonprofit status.
A. Certificate required. Any person engaged or employed in the business
or service of preparing, processing or serving food or drink intended for
human consumption at Risk Type 2, 3, or 4 food establishments shall
apply to the Borough of Florham Park Health Department within seven
days of the commencement of his said employment for a food handlers'
certificate. Applicants will be required to attend the next regularly
scheduled food handlers' training course given by the Borough's Health
204. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 259-7 as § 259-8.
§ 259-3 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 259-7
253:818
§ 259-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
to exceed $2,000. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and
each day the same is violated shall be deemed to be taken as a separate and
distinct offense.
Department or a comparable course approved by the Borough Health
Department. Existing employees shall have six months from enactment
of this section to attain a food handler's certificate.
B. Course of instruction required. The food handler's certificate shall not
be issued or granted to any person unless the person seeking such food
handler's certificate shall have first completed a course of general
instruction in health education, sanitation, personal hygiene, food
protection, dishwashing procedures and other related health matters.
C. Records of employees to be maintained by employer. All employers
engaged in the business or service of preparing and processing food
intended for human consumption shall at all times keep and maintain
accurate records of the name and address of each employee, date of
employment and date of issuance and certificate number of said food
handler's certificate, which records shall be available at all times for
inspection by the Health Officer or his duly authorized representatives.
D. Employment of persons without certificates prohibited. No employer
shall continue to employ any person in connection with the preparation,
processing or service of food and drink intended for human
consumption at a retail level unless the person so employed shall have
applied for and obtained a food handler's certificate within the period
as specified in § 259-7.
E. Renewal of certificates. All food handlers' certificates shall be renewed
every two years after completion of a food handler's course as identified
in § 259-7.
F. Exemptions. The requirement for a food handler's certificate shall not
apply to a temporary retail food establishment; any employee who is a
certified food protection manager as recognized by the Conference for
Food Protection; or, persons engaging in food handler's activities on
behalf of nonprofit institutions, churches or other charitable
organizations unless said food handling activities are conducted on a
regular basis.
G. Food handler training fees established.
(1) Food handler's certificate course: no fee.
(2) Certified food protection manager's course as recognized by the
Conference for Food Protection sponsored by the Borough of
Florham Park Health Department: $200.
§ 259-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 259-8
253:819
Chapter 260
(RESERVED)
Chapter 261
FEEDING OF WILDLIFE AND WATERFOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Feeding of and playing with stray dogs and
cats — See Ch. 262.
§ 261-1. Findings.
It has been well established that the feeding of wild animals and waterfowl
is both detrimental to the animal and causes a public health nuisance and
safety hazard that is detrimental to the health and general welfare of the
public.
§ 261-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WILD ANIMAL — Includes any animal, which is not normally domesticated
in this state, including but not limited to bears, coyotes, deer, foxes,
groundhogs, oppossums, raccoons, skunks, and waterfowl.
WATERFOWL — Any bird that frequents the water, or lives about rivers,
lakes, etc., on or near the sea; an aquatic fowl, including but not limited to
ducks, geese, swans, heron and egrets.
§ 261-3. Feeding of wild animals and waterfowl prohibited.
A. No person shall purposely or knowingly, as said terms are defined in
Title 2C of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, feed, bait or in any manner
provide access to food to any wild animal or waterfowl in said Borough
on lands either publicly or privately owned. This section shall not apply
to the feeding of farm animals.
B. No person shall purposely or knowingly leave or store any refuse,
garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or supplement, salt,
seed or birdseed, fruit or grain in a manner that would constitute an
attractant to any wild animal or waterfowl.
C. No person shall fail to take remedial action to avoid contact or conflict
with wild animals, which may include the securing or removal of
outdoor trash, cooking grills, pet food, bird feeders or any other similar
food source or attractant after being advised by the Borough to
§ 259-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 261-3
261:820
§ 261-4. Feeding of other songbirds and backyard birds permitted.
Feeding of other songbirds and other backyard birds shall be permitted
outdoors at such times and in such numbers that:
§ 261-5. Enforcement.
undertake such remedial action. Further, after an initial contact or
conflict with a wild animal, no person shall continue to provide, or
otherwise fail to secure or remove, any likely food sources, or
attractants, including but not limited to outdoor grills, pet food or bird
feeders.
D. Nothing in this section shall apply to:
(1) Any agent to the Borough authorized to implement an alternative
control method set forth in any approved community-based deer
management plan and possessing a special deer management
permit issued by the New Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife in
accordance with the provisions of P.L. 2000, c.46;205 or
(2) Any hunter engaging in baiting for the purpose of hunting pursuant
to a valid hunting license issued in accordance with the provisions
of Title 23 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
A. Such feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance that affects
the rights of surrounding property owners and renders other persons
insecure in the use of their property; and
B. Such feeding does not create an accumulation of droppings on the
property and surrounding properties; and
C. Such feeding does not become an attractant to rodents or others wild
animals; and
D. Bird feeders are placed at least five feet above the ground.
A. Each property owner shall have the duty to remove any above-named
materials or devices placed on the owner's property in violation of this
chapter.
B. Failure to remove such materials or devices or to make such
modifications within 24 hours after notice from the Borough shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
C. Health Department personnel, animal control officers and all police
officers of the Borough of Florham Park are hereby given full power and
authority to enforce this chapter.
D. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
205. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 23:4-42.6.
§ 261-3 FEEDING OF WILDLIFE AND WATERFOWL § 261-6
261:821
§ 261-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a fine
of not less than $50 or more than $500 for each offense, together with the
costs of prosecution plus any additional fees charged by the Animal Control
Officer. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 262
FEEDING OF AND PLAYING WITH STRAY DOGS AND CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Feeding of wildlife and waterfowl — See Ch.
262.
§ 262-1. Purpose.
The feeding of or playing with stray dogs and cats which may be
unvaccinated poses public health risks to persons coming into contact with
such animals.
§ 262-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STRAY DOG OR CAT — One that does not wear a metal license issued by
the Florham Park Health Department.
§ 262-3. Feeding of or playing with stray dog or cat prohibited.
No person shall feed or play with a stray dog or cat. Residents who observe
stray dogs or cats should notify the Florham Park Health Department.
§ 262-4. Enforcement.
§ 262-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a fine
of not less than $50 or more than $500 for each offense, together with the
costs of prosecution plus any additional fees charged by the Animal Control
A. Health Department personnel, animal control officers and all police
officers of the Borough of Florham Park are hereby given full power and
authority to enforce this chapter.
B. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 261-6 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 262-5
262:822
Officer. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 263
HANCOCK CEMETERY
§ 263-1. Purpose.
The Hancock Cemetery, a historical piece of land formerly a family owned
cemetery, has been dedicated to the Borough of Florham Park. Since there
are still family plots available for burials, establishment of a fee for
interments has been established in accordance with the laws of the state.
§ 263-2. Fees.
The fee for a permit for a burial in the Hancock Cemetery shall be paid to
the Borough of Florham Park, and is hereby fixed as follows:
Chapter 265
SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Cats — See Ch. 96.
Dogs — See Ch. 108.
Outdoor fires — See Ch. 137.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 142.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Nuisances — See Ch. 159.
Oil- and gas-burning equipment — See Ch.
163.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 188.
Retail establishments — See Ch. 191.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 208.
Food establishments — See Ch. 259.
A. Fee per interment: $200.
§ 262-5 HANCOCK CEMETERY § 263-2
263:823

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 265-1. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be supplemental to the
provisions of the statute with respect to Health and Vital Statistics (N.J.S.A.
26:3-31 et seq.) and the State Sanitary Code (as revised and enacted in June
22, 1953, by the Public Health Council of the state), including any changes
or additions which may have been or which may hereafter be enacted.
§ 265-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BACTERIA COUNT — The number of bacteria as determined by Standard
Methods, American Public Health Association.
BOARDING HOME FOR CHILDREN — Any dwelling or building where one
or more children under the age of 18 years are housed without the presence
of their parents or legal guardians.
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health of the Borough of
Florham Park.
CARRIER — Any person who is a bearer or transmitter of communicable
disease germs without manifest symptoms and is himself immune to the
disease.
CONFINE — As applied to animals, the restriction of the animal to the
premises of the owner or other approved institution for the purpose of
avoiding contact with other animals or persons.
DISEASE, CONTAGIOUS DISEASE and COMMUNICABLE DISEASE —
Those diseases specified in the list enumerated in the State Sanitary Code
or by declaration of this Board.
ENFORCING OFFICIAL or INSPECTOR — The Health Officer, the Sanitary
Inspector and any other official authorized by the Board of Health to enforce
this code.
FAMILY UNIT — A room occupied by one or more persons living as a
single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a
boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel.
FOOD — Every article used as food or drink for human consumption and
every ingredient of such article, and shall include milk and ice cream,
preparations of milk and cream, confectionery and condiments.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and RETAIL FOOD-HANDLING
ESTABLISHMENT — Any bakery, bar or cocktail lounge, cannery,
confectionery, creamery, convenience store, dairy, delicatessen, grocery,
hotel, lunchroom or luncheonette, meat market, restaurant, soda fountain,
vending machine or other place used in the production, preparation,
§ 265-1 SANITATION § 265-2
265:825
manufacture, packing, storing, transportation, selling, serving, processing
or handling of food for human consumption, intended for sale or distribution
or use.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, incinerator, refuse-burning
equipment, boiler, apparatus, device, mechanism, stack or structure used in
the process of burning fuel, refuse or any other combustible material.
GARBAGE — Every accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, liquid or
otherwise, that attends the preparation and serving of food and the decay
and spoilage that attends dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds,
fruits or vegetables.
INTERNAL-COMBUSTION ENGINE — An apparatus in which the
combustion of liquid or solid fuel takes place.
ISOLATION — The placing apart of a person or animal affected with or
exposed to a communicable disease for the purpose of preventing contact
with other persons or animals and the establishment of restrictions directly
surrounding such persons or animals.
LICENSE AND PERMIT — The permission, in writing, of this Board, issued
according to its usual practices with respect to particular activities, as
required by this Board or by any law.
NUISANCE — Any act or failure to act or the continuance of conditions
which, in the opinion of the Board, are prejudicial to the health and wellbeing
of the residents of the Borough and is so declared, including
particularly such specific nuisances as are set forth in this Sanitary Code or
in subsequently issued amendments or regulations, and such further acts or
conditions as are declared to be nuisances under the State Sanitary Code
and Regulations.
NURSERY SCHOOL and DAY SCHOOL — Any house or other place where
five or more children under the age of six years are received, cared for
or kept, unattended by either of their parents or legal guardians, for the
purpose of providing such child or children with food or lodging or
instruction or supervision, for periods less than one day. This shall not
include care by any person of a child related by blood or marriage or care of
a child by any institution maintained by the state or by any municipality or
by any incorporated charitable society or a nursery school maintained by a
religious organization and carried on in its buildings used for religious and
related purposes.
OPEN FIRE — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into
the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney.
REGULATION — A declaration or statement issued by the Board to
interpret, to modify or to amplify the provisions of this Sanitary Code and all
amendments thereto, for more effective administration incident to the work
of the Board or for proper coordination with the State Sanitary Code and its
regulations.
§ 265-2 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-2
265:826
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — The chart set forth in Article III hereof,
known as the "Ringelmann Smoke Chart," published by the United States
Bureau of Mines.
RUBBISH AND REFUSE MATTER — The residue of any material used as
fuel for heating or cooking purposes after combustion has taken place;
broken or discarded crockery; glassware; rags; household utensils; house
sweepings; bottles; tin cans; lawn and garden clippings; weeds and
discarded shrubbery; but not building material or fixtures, earth or stones.
SMOKE — Small gasborne and airborne particles in sufficient number to be
observable arising from a process of combustion.
STACK or CHIMNEY — A flue, conduit or opening permitting particulate
or gaseous emissions into the open air or constructed or arranged for such
purpose.
§ 265-3. Inspections.
§ 265-4. Abatement of nuisances.
A. All places or premises shall be subject to inspection at least once a year,
at a reasonable hour by the Sanitary Inspector or Health Officer, when
he has reason to believe that any section of this chapter or of the State
Sanitary Code is being violated.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the Sanitary Inspector from having full access to any place or
premises as to which an inspection is being made.
A. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by Article II of this chapter, is found
to exist on any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private
premises, structure or place, notice, in writing, shall be given to the
owner thereof to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be
specified in the notice. The time fixed for compliance shall be a
reasonable time under all of the circumstances.
B. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be found, such notice
shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or occupant
thereof or posted on the premises, and such action shall be considered
proper notification to the owner, tenant and occupant thereof.
C. If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided by this
chapter, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health
may proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or
abated in a summary manner, by such means as the Board shall deem
proper, and all expenses incurred incident thereto shall be paid by the
owner, tenant or occupant who failed to abate the nuisance.
D. Upon failure to pay such expenses so incurred, the Board of Health may
institute an action at law to recover the money.
§ 265-2 SANITATION § 265-5
265:827
§ 265-5. Expiration, renewal and transferability of permits and
licenses.
§ 265-6. Conflict with other provisions.
Whenever, in this chapter, any provisions or whenever any subsequently
issued regulation of the Board of Health shall be found to be contrary to or
inconsistent with the State Sanitary Code, regulations or rules of the State
Department of Health in effect now or as may hereafter be adopted, the
provisions of the State Code, regulations and rules shall control.
A. All permits and licenses required by this chapter, except those referred
to in Article VI of this chapter, shall expire on December 31 of each
year.
B. Renewal permits and licenses shall be issued upon application and
compliance with requirements of this chapter and regulations of the
Board of Health.
C. No permit or license may be transferred.
§ 265-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-6
265:828
ARTICLE II
Nuisances206
§ 265-7. Enumeration of prohibited acts.
The following matters, things, conditions or acts, and each of them, are
hereby declared to be nuisances and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of the Borough, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
commit, maintain or allow any of the same to exist:
A. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become detrimental
to or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of the Borough.
B. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become an
annoyance to or may interfere with the comfort or general well-being of
any of the inhabitants of the Borough.
C. Pollution or existence of a condition which causes or threatens pollution
of any water in this Borough in such manner as to cause or threaten
injury to any of the inhabitants of the Borough either in their health,
comfort or property.
D. The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air or from any fire into the open air of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mist or gases as to
cause injury, detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of the Borough
or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety.
E. The growth, existence or presence of ragweed, poison oak or poison ivy
on any plot of land, lot, highway, right-of-way or any other public or
private place.
F. The existence of any pool, ditch, gutter, drain, body of water,
watercourse, cesspool, ash pit, garbage or rubbish receptacles,
manure, animal or vegetable matter or other refuse or filth which could
become the source of noxious odor or otherwise offensive to the senses
or injurious to the public health or that could become a feeding or
breeding place for mosquitoes or other insects, rodents or other
vermin.
G. Allowing any wastewater, sewage or other liquid substance or nauseous
or offensive matter of any kind to run into any ditch, drainpipe or storm
sewer which empties its contents into or near any brook, stream, pond,
body of water, spring or running water or upon any vacant lot or lots,
swamp or other ground, public or private, in the Borough.
H. Casting, throwing, leaving or depositing upon or in any street or other
public or private way or public or private property or public building
any garbage, offal, rubbish, carcass of dead animal or other refuse or
filth, except for such temporary occupation as may be normally and
206. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 159, Nuisances.
§ 265-7 SANITATION § 265-7
265:829
§ 265-8. Noise.207
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause, suffer or permit to be
made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him
or it or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in the Borough any
unnecessary noises or sounds by means or methods which are physically
annoying to persons or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural
in their use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort or which
are injurious to the life, health, peace or comfort of any inhabitant of the
Borough or any portion thereof. (See Borough Code § 155-1.)
§ 265-9. Spitting on street and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalk or street
or upon any part of the interior or exterior of any public building or public
conveyance or other public place.
reasonably proper for purposes of transport and collection of such
refuse, provided that such refuse, while awaiting collection, is kept
in suitable containers or wrappers so that it is inoffensive and
noninjurious to public health.
I. The existence or presence of any abandoned, stored or unused icebox,
refrigerator or other receptacle in any building or upon any property
without first removing doors or other means of ingress or egress.
207. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 155, Noise.
§ 265-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-9
265:830
ARTICLE III
Smoke
§ 265-10. Inspection of fuel-burning equipment.
Fuel-burning equipment may be inspected by the Sanitary Inspector as
often as he deems it necessary to determine that such equipment is in such
condition that it can be operated in compliance with the provisions of the
Sanitary Code of the Borough.
§ 265-11. Prohibited emissions; exceptions.
§ 265-12. Standard for grading smoke.
The standard to be used for the purpose of grading the shade or appearance
of smoke under this chapter shall be the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
§ 265-13. Order to correct or repair; failure to comply.
§ 265-14. Repeated violations.
Any person who owns, operates or is in charge of fuel-burning equipment
and who has been convicted of two or more violations of any of the
provisions of § 265-11 within any consecutive twelve-month period may
be directed to show cause at a hearing before the Board of Health why
A. No person shall permit smoke, the shade or appearance of which is
darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into
the open air from any fuel-burning equipment, internal-combustion
engine, open fire, stack or chimney.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Smoke emitted from fuel-burning equipment broken down as a
result of causes which a reasonably prudent person could not have
foreseen.
(2) Smoke emitted during the cleaning of a firebox or the building of a
new fire, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not
darker than No. 3 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period or
periods aggregating no more than three minutes in any 15
consecutive minutes.
A. If, as the result of inspection, it is found that fuel-burning equipment is
in such condition that it cannot be operated within the provisions of this
chapter, the Sanitary Inspector shall give notice, in writing, to the
person owning, operating or in charge of such equipment of such
condition and order correction, repair or replacement of the equipment.
B. Failure to comply with this order within 30 days from its date shall be a
violation of this chapter, and, upon failure to comply with the order, the
Sanitary Inspector is authorized to seal the equipment.
§ 265-10 SANITATION § 265-14
265:831
the equipment causing such violations should not be sealed. The Board of
Health shall give at least 10 days' written notice of such hearing. Failure to
present evidence that adequate means and methods have been employed to
correct the cause of such violations shall be authorization for the Board to
order the equipment sealed until such time as satisfactory corrective action
shall have been taken.
§ 265-15. Operation of sealed equipment prohibited.
No person shall operate fuel-burning equipment placed under seal by the
Board of Health or at its direction unless permission is granted by the Board
in writing.
§ 265-14 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-15
265:832
ARTICLE IV
Buildings, Lands and Disposal Facilities
§ 265-16. Erection or conversion of inadequate or defective
buildings.
No person shall erect or cause to be erected or converted, by change or
alteration, any building or structure which, or any part of which, shall be
inadequate or defective in respect to strength, ventilation, light, drainage or
any other usual, proper or necessary provision or precaution, nor shall the
builder, lessee, tenant or occupant of any such building or structure cause
or allow any matter or thing to be done in or about any such building or
structure dangerous or injurious to life or health.
§ 265-17. Design requirements for buildings; fallout shelters.
A. No owner, agent or lessee of any building, or any part thereof, shall let,
lease or hire out the same or any portion thereof to be occupied by any
person or allow the same to be occupied as a place in which anyone may
dwell or lodge, except when the building or such parts thereof shall
have:
(1) At least one window or skylight directly to the outside air and a
total area of such openings equaling not less than 10% of the floor
area of such room.
(2) In every room used for sleeping purposes, not less than 400 cubic
feet of air space and 50 square feet of floor space for each adult
occupant and at least 250 cubic feet of air space and 30 square feet
of floor space for each child occupying such room.
(3) Potable water at sufficient pressure and quantity for each family
unit.
(4) Plumbing fixtures consisting of a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower,
lavatory and flush toilet properly connected to the water supply for
each family unit.
(5) Facilities for the discharge of all household waste into a public
sewerage system approved by the State Department of Health or
into an individual subsurface sewage disposal system approved by
the Sanitary Official.
(6) In each bathroom or water closet, at least one outside window
which can be opened or shall be provided with suitable automatic
mechanical means of ventilation, and the floor shall be constructed
of nonpermeable material.
(7) Provided and accommodated and are in all respects in that
condition of cleanliness and wholesomeness for which this chapter
or any law of the state provides or in which they or either of them
require such premises to be kept.
§ 265-16 SANITATION § 265-17
265:833
§ 265-18. Heat supply required.
No owner, agent or lessee shall let, lease or hire out any building or any
part thereof to be occupied by any person or allow the same to be occupied
for more than 24 hours, unless an adequate supply of heat is furnished
from a permanent installation, except that gas heaters may be installed, but
not without permanent connections and proper venting, nor shall kerosene
stoves or other fuel-burning devices be used without proper venting.
§ 265-19. Vacation of unfit buildings.
Whenever it shall be decided by the Board of Health that any building, or
part thereof, is unfit for human habitation by reason of the same having
been determined by the Board to be in a condition dangerous to health or
life or to be likely to cause sickness to the occupant or occupants or to any
other person, and notice of such decision shall have been served upon the
owner or agent or lessee or occupant, including, where required, an order
directing all persons therein to vacate such building or any part thereof,
such building or any part thereof shall, within 10 days thereafter, be vacated
or, in case of special emergency, within such shorter time as in the notice
may be specified.
§ 265-20. Privy vaults.
No privy vault shall be constructed or reconstructed within the Borough.
§ 265-21. Approval of structures by Sanitary Inspector.
No building or septic system or other structure shall be erected within the
Borough without approval for that purpose being first applied for and notice
of such approval being given in writing by the Sanitary Inspector.
§ 265-22. Lavatories for businesses.
Whenever a person maintains a place of business within the Borough and
employs one or more persons, it shall be his duty to provide for the use
of such persons employed adequate and easily accessible water closets
and lavatories of such type and in such condition as shall conform to
the Sanitary Code and which shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition so that the same shall not constitute a health menace to the
employees or other persons.
§ 265-23. Toilet facilities for temporarily occupied land.
Whenever any land in the Borough is to be temporarily occupied for any
purpose whatsoever by a person employing more than five persons, it shall
be the duty of such person to provide toilet facilities of a type acceptable to
the Board of Health for the employees.
B. The foregoing provisions shall not be applicable to fallout shelters.
§ 265-17 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-23
265:834
ARTICLE V
Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse208
§ 265-24. Receptacles required.
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant and occupant of every dwelling, food
establishment or public place or other premises in the Borough where
garbage, refuse, rubbish and ashes may accumulate shall provide and keep
on the premises suitable receptacles with tight-fitting covers for receiving
and holding garbage and decaying refuse or matter of any kind. The
capacity of such receptacles shall be not less than that required to contain
all of the normal accumulation of such wastes from such dwelling or
establishment between regular collection periods.
§ 265-25. Maintenance of receptacles.
Every receptacle and place in which garbage or other offensive or decaying
refuse or matter shall be kept at any time shall constantly be maintained
by the persons having charge thereof in a reasonably clean and inoffensive
condition. No such receptacle or place shall be filled to a point higher
than its sides at any time. All such receptacles shall be watertight and
shall be securely covered at all times so that the contents thereof will be
inaccessible to animals, fowl or flies.
§ 265-26. Frequency of removal.
All garbage and decaying refuse shall be removed from the premises of
every food establishment or public place at least once each day of operation
and removed from every dwelling or apartment as frequently as is
determined by the Board of Health to be necessary to avoid constituting a
menace to community health, safety and well-being.
§ 265-27. Dumping; open burning.
§ 265-28. Maintenance of sidewalks, gutters and streets.
All owners, lessees, agents, tenants and occupants of any lot or land in this
Borough shall keep the sidewalks, gutters and streets in front of such lots
A. No garbage, refuse, rubbish, snow, ice or any other waste of any kind
whatsoever shall be dumped or deposited upon any public or private
property or thoroughfare within the Borough or used as fill.
B. No garbage shall be burned in any open fire or outdoor incinerator.209
C. All garbage shall be disposed of in conformance with Borough Code
Chapter 142, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
208. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 142, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
209. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 137, Art. II, Open Fires.
§ 265-24 SANITATION § 265-28
265:835
and lands free from filth, slops, dirty water, rubbish and all other things
dangerous to health.
§ 265-28 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-28
265:836
ARTICLE VI
Health Board Permits
§ 265-29. Permit required.
Whereas certain commercial services or enterprises conducted in the
Borough are considered to involve potential hazard to the health and
welfare of the Borough residents unless acceptable standards of cleanliness
are maintained with respect to quarters, equipment, methods and
materials, the Board of Health hereby designates particular types of
commercial and business enterprises over which it considers it essential
to exercise some measure of sanitary control and directs that the person
responsible for the conduct of such enterprises in the Borough shall apply
for, obtain and display a Health Board permit as set forth in this article.
§ 265-30. Business required to obtain permits.
A Board of Health permit shall be obtained and displayed by every business
or enterprise licensed by the State of New Jersey and for which the N.J.A.C.
provides for jurisdiction by a local Board of Health. These include, but are
not limited to:
A. Animal hospitals, kennels, pounds and shelters.
B. Bakeries and bake shops.
C. Confectioneries.
D. Dry-cleaning plants.
E. Delicatessen stores.
F. Food establishments.
G. Grocery stores.
H. Hotels and rooming houses.
I. Ice vendors and ice-vending machines.
J. Laundries.
K. Meat and fish markets.
L. Pet shops and other places where animals, birds, fowl or reptiles are
raised or kept for sale.
M. Vendors of potable water.
N. Tanning facilities.
O. Child-care centers.
§ 265-29 SANITATION § 265-31
265:837
§ 265-31. Application; conditions; inspection.
Every person engaged in or desiring to engage in the operation of a
commercial service or enterprise above specified shall apply for a Health
Board permit, which, if granted, will indicate satisfactory compliance with
sanitary requirements as of the date of issuance of such permit and will
authorize continued operation at the named location and under the same
ownership during continued observance of sanitary standards satisfactory
to the Board of Health and during continued compliance with all applicable
health codes or regulations and laws of the state that are enforceable by this
Board. The premises and operations of any business applying for or holding
all Health Board permits shall be subject to inspection at any reasonable
time by the Sanitary Inspector.
§ 265-32. Revocation.
If any person granted a Health Board permit or if any employee, servant
or agent of such permit holder shall violate any ordinance, code, regulation
or special order of the Board of Health or regulation or law of the state in
the conduct of the service or business for which the permit was granted,
such permit may be revoked or renewal refused at the discretion of the
Board; and after the date of such revocation, such service or business shall
not operate in the Borough until the conditions that cause revocation are
rectified; and the owner or persons in charge of such commercial service
and any offending employees of such establishment may be prosecuted for
such violation or code or law as shall have occurred.
§ 265-33. Compliance with other standards.
The owners, managers and employees of all commercial services and
business enterprises required under this article to have Health Board
permits are hereby notified that the quarters in which they conduct
operation, the equipment they employ, the methods followed and the quality
and wholesomeness of materials used shall in all respects conform to the
detailed specifications set forth in the State Sanitary Code or in other state
laws or regulations or codes applicable to the given type of business or
service in which they are engaged, and, further, they shall conform to such
provisions of the State Building Code, the State Plumbing Code and with the
applicable Articles of the Sanitary Code.
§ 265-34. Expiration.
All Health Board permits granted under this article shall automatically
expire upon removal of the business to a different address than that
specified in the permit or upon a change of ownership or upon cessation of
active operations and, in any event, on December 31 of each year.
§ 265-35. Fees.
A fee of $50 shall be charged for the issuance of a Health Board permit to a
qualified commercial service or business establishment or enterprise having
§ 265-31 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-35
265:838
a fixed address in the Borough and engaged in business or activities of the
kind or type specified as being required to have such permits.
§ 265-36. Procedure for requiring additional businesses to obtain
permits.
When it shall be determined by the Board that any particular type of
commercial services not specifically listed in § 265-30 affects the public
health and well-being, the Board may, by resolution and public
announcement, thereafter require all existing and all new enterprises
furnishing such commercial services to comply with this article as fully as if
such type of service had been listed at the time of enactment of this chapter.
§ 265-35 SANITATION § 265-36
265:839

ARTICLE VII
Animals
§ 265-37. Keeping large animals; permit required; duration; fee.
§ 265-38. Keeping rabbits and fowl; permit required; duration; fee;
excluded animals.
A. No person shall keep swine in the Borough.
B. All persons desiring to keep one or more horses, cattle, sheep, goats or
other large animals within the Borough shall, before keeping the same,
apply to the Board of Health, in writing, stating the type and number of
animals to be kept and the size and location of facilities for housing and
pasturing any such animals. The Board shall have authority to limit the
animal population density on any premises in keeping with ecological
conditions to limit or prevent the effects of animal waste pollution.
C. No person shall keep any such animals until such application is
approved by the Board and a written permit is issued to the applicant by
the Board.
D. Permits, when issued, shall be for one calendar year or any portion
thereof.
E. The annual fee for such permit shall be $25 for each animal.
A. All persons desiring to keep more than two rabbits, guinea pigs,
hamsters, chinchillas or other domesticated animals or pigeons, ducks,
geese, poultry or other fowl shall provide a suitable house or coop and
shall, before keeping the same, apply to the Board of Health, in writing,
stating the type and number of animals to be kept and the size and
location of facilities for housing and pasturing any such animals. The
Board shall have authority to limit the animal population density on any
premises in keeping with ecological conditions to limit or prevent the
effects of animal waste pollution.
B. All persons desiring to keep any of the foregoing shall, before doing so,
apply in writing to the Board, stating the species and number to be kept
and the location and description of the house or coop.
C. No person shall keep any of the foregoing unless and until the
application is approved by the Board and a written permit issued.
D. Permits, when issued, shall be for one calendar year or any portion
thereof.
E. The annual fee for such permits shall be $25.
F. Dogs and cats are excluded from this section.
§ 265-37 SANITATION § 265-39
265:841
§ 265-39. Maintenance of premises.
All persons keeping one or more of the animals, pigeons or fowl referred
to in §§ 265-37 and 265-38, including dogs, cats and birds, shall keep the
premises clean and free from the accumulation of solid or liquid excrement
or other filth and free from any condition where noxious or offensive odors
may be present and free from any condition which may breed flies, other
insects, rodents or other vermin.
§ 265-40. Noise from animals.
No person owning, occupying or having charge of any house, stable, coop
or other building or premises shall keep or allow therein or thereon any
animal, fowl or pigeon which shall, by noise or otherwise, disturb the quiet
and repose of any person therein or in the vicinity thereof to such an extent
as to affect the health and comfort of such person.
§ 265-41. Running at large.
No person owning or keeping any animal or fowl shall permit it to run at
large.
§ 265-42. Watering, feeding and housing.
All persons owning or keeping animals, fowl or pigeons shall maintain
adequate facilities to provide sanitary water, proper feeding equipment and
sanitary housing.
§ 265-43. Removal of uneaten food; cleaning of troughs.
All food not eaten at the end of each day shall be removed, and feeding
vessels and troughs shall be thoroughly cleaned.
§ 265-44. Removal of animals detrimental to public health.
No person shall continue to keep animals of any kind or fowl of any kind
or birds of any kind in any building or upon any premises in the Borough
where the Board of Health may deem such keeping of animals, fowl or
birds detrimental to the public health. In cases where conditions warrant
the issuance of an order to discontinue the keeping of animals, fowl or
birds at a particular premises or portion thereof, such order shall be issued
in writing and posted upon the premises. The owner or person in charge
of the animals, fowl or birds shall remove or cause the animals, fowl or
birds, as the case may be, to be removed from such premises or portion
thereof within such time as the Board may provide in the order. In cases
where immediate removal is deemed essential to public welfare, the Health
Officer or Sanitary Inspector may require immediate compliance without
the issuance of any order.
§ 265-39 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-45
265:842
§ 265-45. Noncompliance; removal by enforcing official.
In any case of noncompliance with any order of the Board with respect
to removal of animals, fowl or birds, the Sanitary Inspector is authorized
to arrange for the removal, maintenance or destruction of the offending
animals, fowl or birds in such manner as he deems appropriate.
§ 265-46. Disposal of dead animals.
The owner or person in charge of any animal, fowl or bird which may die
by accident or disease shall forthwith cause the carcass to be disposed of
within 24 hours in a manner that is not detrimental to the health and wellbeing
of the community.
§ 265-47. Conditions for keeping of horses.
No permit shall be issued for the keeping of one or more horses, nor shall
one or more horses be kept on any property in the Borough, unless the
premises on which the horse or horses are kept comply with the following
conditions. (see also § 265-37B):
§ 265-48. Inspection of premises where horses are kept.
As a condition for the obtaining of a permit for the keeping of one or more
horses in the Borough, the premises on which such horse or horses are kept
shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Sanitary Inspector of the
Borough.
A. No stable, building, storage space, lean-to or other facility used for the
housing of such horse or horses shall be closer than 50 feet to any
dwelling house, including the dwelling house on the premises on which
the horse is kept.
B. No manure or urine shall be stored within 20 feet of the property line of
the premises on which the horse or horses are stored nor within 50 feet
of any building on property either adjoining or in the approximate
vicinity of the property on which the horse or horses are housed.
§ 265-45 SANITATION § 265-48
265:843

ARTICLE VIII
Rabies
§ 265-49. Confinement of animals biting persons; release from
isolation.
§ 265-50. Procedure for animals bitten by rabid animals.
Any person knowing or suspecting that any animal in his possession has
been bitten or attacked by an animal known to have or suspected of having
rabies shall immediately confine such animal and notify the Board of Health
or, if no official can be reached, the Police Department. Upon receipt of such
notification, the Health Officer shall direct what further steps shall be taken
with respect to such animal.
§ 265-51. Confinement and report of animals suspected of having
rabies.
It shall be the duty of every person who detects in any animal the symptoms
of rabies to confine the animal and immediately notify the Board of Health
of his suspicions and of the whereabouts of the confinement.
A. Any person owning or being in charge of any animal which has bitten or
attacked any person shall immediately and closely confine such animal
so that it may not approach or be approached by any other animal or
any unfamiliar person until it has been inspected by the Health
Inspector of the Board of Health; and as soon as it is reasonably
possible, but no longer than 12 hours after such bite or attack, the
owner or person in charge of such animal shall report to the Board of
Health the principal facts of the incident, or, if no Board of Health
official can be reached, the report shall be made to the Police
Department.
B. Upon receipt of such notification, the Health Officer shall order the
examination of the animal by a licensed veterinarian. The Health Officer
shall also serve formal notice, as required under the state law, that the
animal must be confined for at least 10 days after the date of the bite or
attack, except that, if, upon evaluation, the Health Officer believes that
other immediate or special action is necessary, he is empowered to take
such action and shall immediately advise the Board of such action. The
veterinarian report must be sent to the Health Officer within five days
of a bite.
C. At the end of the isolation period, if, in the opinion of the Health Officer,
the animal is found to be normally healthy, it may be released from
isolation. No such animal shall be destroyed during the isolation period,
except by permission of the Board of Health.
§ 265-49 SANITATION § 265-52
265:845
§ 265-52. Report of dead animals suspected of being rabid.
It shall be the duty of any person who suspects or has reason to suspect that
a dead animal within his knowledge or possession has been rabid or has
been bitten by an animal known to have been rabid to immediately report
these suspicions to the Board of Health.
§ 265-53. Report by person bitten or treating physician.
Any person who has been bitten or attacked by any animal in the Borough
and any physician or other such person who has been consulted by or
has treated any person who has been bitten or attacked by any animal
shall, within 12 hours of becoming aware of such incident, report the
circumstances to the Board of Health or the Police Department.
§ 265-52 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-53
265:846
ARTICLE IX
Communicable Diseases
§ 265-54. Report by physicians.
It shall be the duty of every physician treating an individual who resides in
the Borough to report diseases in accordance with Chapter 14 of the State
Sanitary Code.
§ 265-55. Report of certain diseases required.
It shall be the duty of each individual or his parent or guardian or other
responsible person to report to the Board of Health, all diseases in
accordance with Chapter 14 of the State Sanitary Code.
§ 265-56. Hospitalization or isolation.
Hospitalization or isolation shall be carried out as provided by the State
Sanitary Code.
§ 265-54 SANITATION § 265-56
265:847

ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 265-57. Violations and penalties.
§ 265-58. Recovery.
All penalties may be sued for and be recovered by and in the name of
the Board of Health in the manner prescribed and in accordance with the
applicable procedure detailed in Chapter 17 of Title 24 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented, or Chapter 3 of Title
26 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented.
§ 265-59. Disposition of recovered penalties.
All penalties recovered in any prosecution for a violation of this chapter
shall be collected by the Board and delivered to the Chief Financial Officer
of the Borough or may be made payable to the Chief Financial Officer by
order of any court imposing such penalty.
§ 265-60. Order to abate.
Whenever any person shall violate any provision of this chapter or of the
State Sanitary Code of the state or any other state law or regulation which
the Board is required to enforce, the Board, in its discretion and within its
power, instead of immediately prosecuting such person for such violation,
may direct an order to such person commanding him to discontinue or abate
such violation within such reasonable time as may be fixed by the Board and
stated in the order. Such order shall be in writing and served personally or
by registered mail, and the person receiving such order shall have the right
to be heard either in person or by attorney. The granting of a hearing is not
intended to waive any right of the Board to demand penalties for infractions
nor to delay the Health Officer in requiring immediate compliance with any
provision of this chapter.
A. Penalties for violating or refusing or neglecting to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided
herein or specifically provided by state law or specifically provided
under the State Sanitary Code, shall be, upon conviction, not more than
$1,250 nor less than $200, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge
before whom the complaint is made; and for the second and each
subsequent offense within the space of six months, the penalty shall be
imposed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-78. [Amended 6-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 11-02]
B. After notification has been given that a violation of this chapter has
taken place or exists, each day that such violation shall continue or
refusal or neglect to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
persist shall be considered a separate offense with a like penalty
therefor.
§ 265-57 SANITATION § 265-61
265:849
§ 265-61. Order to dispose of unfit food.
In instances where the Health Officer finds food of any kind on sale or
display in a condition or of a quality which he deems unfit for human
consumption, he may order the owner to cease immediately its continued
sale or display and forthwith to dispose of such food or foodstuffs in a
manner provided by law as he may specifically direct. Neither the Health
Officer nor the Board shall be liable for the value of any food or foodstuffs
that shall have been thus condemned and ordered destroyed; and the
person responsible for having sold or offered for sale such unfit food or
foodstuffs shall be held, at the discretion of the Board, for such legal action
as is provided under this chapter.
§ 265-61 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 265-61
265:850
Chapter 269
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 269-1. Adoption of standards.
This chapter establishes a code, supplementary to the New Jersey State
Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems (N.J.A.C.
7:9A, effective January 1, 1990), regulating the location, design,
construction, installation, maintenance, repair and/or alteration of
individual subsurface sewage disposal systems (i.e., septic systems) for
nonindustrial uses in the Borough of Florham Park.
§ 269-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth:
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health of the Borough of
Florham Park or its authorized agent.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE - INSTALLATION — A certificate issued by
the Board of Health certifying that an individual subsurface sewage disposal
system has been installed in such a manner as to meet the Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems and the standards of this
chapter, including all the terms and conditions of approval imposed by the
Board of Health pursuant to the issuance of the certificate of compliance.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE - LOCATION AND DESIGN — A certificate
issued by the Board of Health certifying that a proposed individual
subsurface sewage disposal system or an alteration of any such system is
in compliance with the provisions of Standards for Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems and the standards of this chapter.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A system of collecting and conveying sewage
from various premises for treatment and disposal at a sewage disposal plant
approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 269-3. Title of standards.
The standards established and adopted by this chapter are described and
commonly known as N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Standards for Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems, and have been placed on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health for use and examination by the public.
§ 269-4. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board
of Health for use and examination by the public.
§ 265-61 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 269-5
269:851
§ 269-5. Administration of standards.
The Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems shall
constitute the Board of Health's minimum requirements for the location,
design, construction, installation, maintenance, repair and/or alteration of
individual subsurface sewage disposal systems. Administration of those
standards shall apply except to the extent that higher standards are fixed
by this chapter and any amendments hereto which may be made by the
Board of Health in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Further,
more stringent standards may be established by this chapter and any
amendments hereto (which may be adopted from time to time by the
Board of Health), as approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 269-6. Permit required; issuance; approval of construction and
repairs; restrictions.
§ 269-7. Application requirements.
A. No person shall locate, construct, install, repair or alter any individual
subsurface sewage disposal system until a certificate of compliance -
location and design is issued by the Board of Health.
B. A certificate of compliance - location and design shall be issued only on
compliance with this chapter, on forms provided by the Board of Health
and upon payment of the fee required.
C. Any individual subsurface sewage disposal system for which a
certificate of compliance - location and design has been issued shall not
be placed in operation until such time as the Board of Health issues a
certificate of compliance - installation.
D. A certificate of compliance - installation shall be issued only upon
determination by an authorized agent of the Board of Health that a new
system or an alteration of an existing system has been constructed in
accordance with the provisions of this section and upon payment of all
required fees, including any fees for additional inspections required
pursuant to § 269-11H hereof.
E. Deviations from the standard. The Board of Health, subsequent to
approval of the State Department of Environmental Protection, may
approve deviations from the standard when site conditions indicate that
such deviations are desirable or necessary and will not threaten public
health or environmental quality. The applicant should consult with the
Board of Health regarding specific problems requiring possible
deviation from the standard. Any deviation from the standard requires
the approval of the Board of Health and the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. Prior to applying for a certificate of compliance - location and design,
any person proposing to construct a new subsurface sewage disposal
§ 269-5 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 269-7
269:852
system, expand an existing system or alter the disposal field, disposal
bed, disposal trenches or seepage pit of an existing subsurface sewage
disposal system shall conduct the necessary soil investigations required
by this standard. All investigations shall comply with the following:
(1) All permeability tests, water table investigations and soil log
information shall be conducted, performed and provided at the sole
expense of the applicant.
(2) No test for the determination of soil characteristics shall be
reported in any application for a certificate of compliance - location
and design for a new individual subsurface sewage disposal system
or for the alteration of an existing individual subsurface sewage
disposal system unless the test is conducted in accordance with
this chapter.
(3) At least 15 days prior to the planned performance of the soil
testing, the applicant shall make a formal written request for
witnessing said investigations with the Board of Health. The
written request, at a minimum, shall include the following:
(a) Lot and block number where the tests are to be conducted.
(b) Plan of the area illustrating wetlands, watercourses, water
mains and any other land features within 100 feet of the
proposed disposal area that may limit the location of the
disposal system as provided in Subchapter 4 of the standard.
(c) Soil information map, superimposed on the above-referenced
drawing, as obtained from the Morris County Soil Survey or
other acceptable source.
(d) The proposed location and number of test pits to be excavated
and a statement as to the permeability test method to be used.
(e) A check, payable to the Borough of Florham Park Board of
Health, in accordance with the fee schedule herein for
witnessing soil tests.210
(f) Tentative/proposed date for performing the tests.
(4) At least 48 hours prior to the proposed date of testing, the
applicant shall confirm acceptance of the application by the Board
of Health and verify scheduling of the inspector/authorized agent.
B. All applications or a certificate of compliance - location and design shall
be made on the forms provided by the Board of Health. A plan of the
proposed individual subsurface sewage disposal system shall be signed
and sealed by a professional engineer and shall accompany each
application. The plan shall show locations of all existing and proposed
features as outlined in the standard and as requested by the Board of
210. Editor's Note: See § 269-11.
§ 269-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 269-7
269:853
§ 269-8. Use or operation; sale or occupancy.
No disposal system shall be placed in use or operation, nor shall any new
dwelling, building or addition be sold or occupied, where sanitation relies
upon an individual subsurface sewage disposal system, until the Board of
Health has issued a certificate of compliance - installation for the completed
disposal system.
Health. The minimum plan scale shall be one inch equals 30 feet, and
the minimum contour elevation interval shall be two feet. A key map
with a scale of one inch equals 200 feet shall be included on the plan.
C. At least 72 hours prior to the commencement of construction for any
new system, expanded system or modification or alteration of an
existing subsurface sewage disposal system, the applicant shall provide
written notification to the Board of Health as to the person in
responsible charge of the construction. This notification shall be
accompanied by check in accordance with the fee schedule herein for
the required inspections211 and shall indicate the estimated starting
and finishing dates.
D. Inspection.
(1) The construction of the system must be inspected and approved by
the authorized agent of the Board of Health. At a minimum, the
following inspection shall be performed:
(a) Upon completion of excavation for the disposal bed prior to
placing stone.
(b) Upon completion of all pipe installation prior to backfilling.
(c) Upon completion.
(d) Any additional inspections considered necessary by the
authorized agent based upon the observations and findings of
prior inspections.
(e) Any additional inspections required pursuant to the certificate
of compliance - location and design.
(2) It is incumbent upon the holder of the certificate of compliance -
location and design to schedule all required inspections. The Board
shall not be held responsible for any delays associated with
scheduling or providing inspections. A certificate of compliance -
installation shall not be issued for any system that is not
constructed, inspected and approved in accordance with this
chapter.
211. Editor's Note: See § 269-11.
§ 269-7 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 269-9
269:854
§ 269-9. Hearings.
In case any permit or certificate provided for in this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after written request therefor is made by the applicant, and, upon such
hearing, the Board shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination
and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ 269-10. Stop-work orders.
§ 269-11. Fees.
The following fees for inspections and reinspections and charges for filing
applications and plans for permits that are issued pursuant to this chapter
are fixed and established as follows. Fees based on time shall be per unit or
major fraction thereof and construed as a minimum.
A. The Board of Health may order all work in or about any individual
subsurface sewage disposal system to be stopped forthwith, except
such work as necessary to remedy the violation, whenever in the
Board's opinion the work is not being performed in accordance with the
certificate of compliance - location and design or established standards.
Under such circumstances, should the Board or authorized agent
determine that certain work must be completed and/or performed to
remedy a potential public health, environmental or safety hazard, the
Board may direct the performance of same without compromising or
otherwise negatively affecting the Board's rights and obligations under
this chapter.
B. Whenever a stop-work order is issued, the person to whom the
certificate of compliance - location and design was issued must provide
the following information to the satisfaction of the Board before
construction may resume:
(1) Cause of the circumstances resulting in the stop-work order and
steps to be implemented to assure such circumstances will not be
repeated.
(2) Identification of any remedial work to be done to remedy improper
work and consent to perform same.
(3) Payment of additional fees as may be determined by the Board to
be required for additional inspections.
A. For filing an application and plans for a permit to locate and construct
an individual subsurface sewage disposal system: $200.
B. For filing an application and plans for a permit to alter or repair an
existing individual subsurface sewage disposal system: $125.
C. For each inspection and witnessing of soil profiles and permeability
tests performed for the purpose of obtaining subdivision approval:
§ 269-9 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 269-11
269:855
§ 269-12. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Health may adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary or advisable in connection with this
chapter.
§ 269-13. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 274
(1) Per lot: $100; or
(2) Per hour: $50.
D. For each inspection and witnessing of soil profiles and permeability
tests performed for construction, repair or alteration of any system:
(1) Per lot: $100; or
(2) Per hour: $50.
E. For each inspection requested by an owner or occupant of a premises,
per hour: $50.
F. For each interim inspection of septic system work in progress, per 1/2
hour: $25.
G. For each final inspection of work as constructed: $30.
H. For each reinspection of an individual subsurface sewage system or
part thereof caused by failure to locate, construct or alter the same in
accordance with this chapter and the terms of the permit issued
therefor, per hour: $50.
A. Any person who is convicted of violating this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty or a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment in the Morris
County Jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or community service for a
period of time not to exceed 90 days, or any combination of these
sanctions.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating this chapter within one year of
the date of a previous violation of this chapter and was fined for the
previous violation may be sentenced by the court to an additional
penalty as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court
for the repeated offense shall not exceed the maximum fine fixed for a
violation of the chapter and shall be calculated separately from the
penalty imposed for the subsequent violation of the chapter.
C. Any person convicted for the violation of this chapter who is in default
of the payment of any fine imposed therefor may be imprisoned in the
county jail for any term not to exceed 90 days or be required to perform
community service for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 269-11 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 269-13
269:856
VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement and recreation facilities — See
Ch. 77.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 80.
Solicitation, canvassing and sales — See Ch.
179.
Poolrooms and billiard parlors — See Ch. 184.
Retail establishments — See Ch. 191.
Food establishments — See Ch. 259.
Sanitation — See Ch. 265.
§ 269-13 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 269-13
269:857

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
§ 274-1. Adoption of standards for food and beverage vending
machines.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof, prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks, authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith and fixing penalties for violations is hereby established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of said statute is made a
part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 274-2. Title of standards.
The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey" (January 1, 1993). A copy of this code is on file in the office of the
Board of Health.
§ 274-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Code of the Borough of Florham Park, including the
Board of Health Code, have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health and shall remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 274-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
article or the code established therein shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to a penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each
violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 274-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 274-4
269:859

ARTICLE II
Permits and Licenses
§ 274-5. Permit or license required; compliance with standards.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person or for any body corporate
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to:
§ 274-6. Application; transferability.
§ 274-7. Fees. [Amended 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 23-01]
A. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other
means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
permit from the Board of Health to do so or without complying with all
of the provisions of the code as adopted or amended by the Board of
Health.
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality one or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other means,
dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Board of Health or without
complying with all of the provisions of the code as adopted or amended
by the Board of Health.
A. Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 274-5 shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the code, as
adopted or amended by the Board of Health.
B. Such permits and licenses are not transferable.
A. The fees for permits and licenses required by § 274-5 for the purpose of
raising revenue, for regulation and control to be paid annually to the
Borough of Florham Park, are hereby fixed as follows: [Amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. BH 02-07; 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. BH 02-10]
(1) Prepackaged only: $20.
(2) Gumball: $5.
(3) All others: $40.
B. Permit and license fees shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough.
§ 274-5 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 274-8
269:861
§ 274-8. Expiration.
All permits and licenses issued under authority of this article shall expire on
December 31 of each year.
§ 274-9. Suspension, revocation and reinstatement.
Permits and licenses issued under authority of this article may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health pursuant to the
provisions of the code as adopted or amended by the Board of Health.
§ 274-10. Effect on interstate commerce and government activities.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 274-11. (Reserved)
§ 274-8 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 274-11
269:862
Chapter 278
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Drainage facilities — See Ch. 113.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 125.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Surface water management — See Ch. 215.
Water — See Ch. 244.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 269.
§ 278-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of public noncommunity and nonpublic water systems and fixing fees and
prescribing penalties for violations, being known as the "Standards for
the Construction of Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems,"
N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., and "Safe Drinking Water Act," N.J.S.A. 58-12A-1
et seq., January 1978, and N.J.A.C. 7:10, Subchapter 12, is hereby adopted.
§ 278-2. Title of standards.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Standards for the Construction of Public
Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems," N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.,
and "Safe Drinking Water Act," N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq., January 1978, and
N.J.A.C. 7:10, Subchapter 12.
§ 278-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Standards for the Construction of Public
Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems, N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and
the Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq., January 1978, and
N.J.A.C. 7:10, Subchapter 12, have been placed on file at the Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file in said
office for the use and examination by the public.
§ 278-4. Permit required; application; issuance and denial.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any public noncommunity or
nonpublic water system until a permit for the location has been issued
by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection,
Office of the Commissioner.
B. Application for a permit to locate, construct or alter any public
noncommunity or nonpublic water system shall be made to the Board of
Health by the well driller or the owner of the property on forms
§ 274-11 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § 278-4
278:863
§ 278-5. Fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ 278-6. Installation of wells.
furnished by said Board. The application shall be signed by the well
driller and the property owner.
C. No permit to locate and construct a new public noncommunity or
nonpublic water system shall be issued until the design and location of
the well and sewage disposal system on said property has been
approved by the Sanitary Inspector, nor shall a permit be issued to alter
an existing or construct a public noncommunity or nonpublic water
system where there is danger of pollution of said water supply from any
source.
D. In case any permit or certificate required by this chapter is denied by
the Board of Health, a hearing shall be held within 30 days after request
therefor is made by the applicant. Upon such hearing, the Board of
Health may affirm, modify or reverse its previous determination within
15 days after the date of such hearing.
A. For the filing of an application and plans to the Department of Public
Works for a permit to locate and construct a public noncommunity or
nonpublic water system or to alter an existing public noncommunity or
nonpublic water system: $500.
B. For the issuance of a permit by the Department of Public Works to
locate and construct or alter public noncommunity or nonpublic water
system: $100.
C. For each inspection by the Department of Public Works or its agent
after the first inspection of a water system or part thereof caused by
failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of the aforesaid
code: an inspection fee of $150 per hour.
D. For all other inspections by the Department of Public Works or its agent
(relative to the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act): an inspection fee
of $150 per hour, including certificate of occupancy inspection.
A. The actual on-site work of drilling, construction, altering and repairing
a well shall be under the supervision of a person in possession of a valid
license issued by the New Jersey Well Drillers Examining and Advisory
Board.
B. During construction, the area surrounding the well shall be maintained
in a clean condition, and surface drainage shall be diverted away from
the well. When unattended, the well opening must be covered and
secured.
C. Casing depths. The minimum depth of casing shall be 50 feet.
§ 278-4 FLORHAM PARK CODE § 278-6
278:864
§ 278-7. Inspections.
§ 278-8. Well record.
When the work is completed, the owner or well driller shall submit a well
record on forms furnished by the Board of Health. Said record must be
certified by a professional engineer or licensed well driller. Application
for a certificate of occupancy shall not be approved until the record is
fully completed and submitted. If inspection or site visit is required by the
Department of Public Works or its agent there shall be a fee of $150 per
hour charged.
§ 278-9. Effect on other wells.
Should a well supplying water for any other purpose than a residence
diminish the supply of any existing well in the area, the Board of Health may
require that the number of gallons per minute being pumped from said well
be reduced so that the supply in the existing well or wells shall be restored
to normal.
D. Sealing.
(1) The annular space outside of the casing shall be filled with a neat
portland cement grout or a one-to-one ration cement; said grout
shall be of approved consistency extending from the bottom of the
casing to the surface slab and shall be placed on one continuous
operation from the bottom upward to keep voids to a minimum.
(2) An alternate method of sealing is as follows:
(a) Prepare grout as required and in sufficient quantity to fill the
fifty-foot drilled hole to within two or three feet of the surface.
(b) Plug the distal end of the first length of casing with a material
that can be drilled out, such as wood, plastic, soft metal, etc.
(c) Drop the casing through the grout, centering it in the hole. It
may be necessary to drive in the 50 feet of casing.
(d) Drill out the plug and finish drilling the well to the water table.
E. After construction of the well, it shall be properly developed so as to
obtain the best practical yield and quality of water to be derived
therefrom. The water produced shall be visibly free of sand and/or silt.
A. The contractor shall notify the Sanitary Inspector at least two days in
advance, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, for the inspection of the
grouting and installation of the casing.
B. Any test the Sanitary Inspector or the professional engineer may
require shall be performed by the water supply contractor at no cost to
the Board of Health.
§ 278-6 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § 278-10
278:865
§ 278-10. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Health may adopt such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary in connection with this chapter and Standards for the
Construction of Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems, New
Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 278-11. (Reserved)
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-05 Tabled
2-05 3-15-2005 Towing/wrecker operators Ch. 228
3-05 3-15-2005 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
4-05 3-15-2005 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 72
5-05 3-15-2005 Appropriation NCM
6-05 3-15-2005 Water amendment Ch. 244
7-05 3-15-2005 Bond NCM
8-05 3-29-2005 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
9-05 4-26-2005 2005 salaries NCM
10-05 4-26-2005 Prohibiting the feeding of
wildlife and waterfowl
Ch. 261
11-05 4-26-2005 Prohibiting feeding of and
playing with stray dogs and
cats
Ch. 262
12-05 Tabled
13-05 4-12-2005 Bond NCM
14-05 4-12-2005 Bond NCM
15-05 4-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
16-05 4-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
17-05 4-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
§ 278-10 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:866
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-05 4-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
19-05 5-17-2005 Towing/wrecker operators
amendment
Ch. 228
20-05 5-17-2005 Acceptance of historic
structure
NCM
21-05 5-17-2005 Exchange of lands NCM
22-05 6-21-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
23-05 Tabled
24-05 7-19-2005 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
establishments amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. BH 01-08
25-05 7-19-2005 Public records: fees
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. I
26-05 7-19-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-1
27-05 7-19-2005 Mechanical systems
amendment
Ch. 152
28-05 7-19-2005 2005 - 2007 police salaries NCM
29-05 8-23-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
30-05 9-20-2005 Borough Administrator
amendment
Ch. 4
31-05 9-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
32-05 10-18-2005 Bond NCM
33-05 10-18-2005 Appropriation NCM
34-05 10-18-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: proper handling of
yard waste
Ch. 142, Art. IV
35-05 10-18-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: disposal of pet solid
waste
Ch. 142, Art. III
36-05 12-20-2005 Storm sewers Ch. 207
37-05 12-20-2005 2005 - 2007 Department of
Public Works salaries
NCM
38-05 11-22-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-06 2-21-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:867
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-06 2-21-2006 Open space and recreation
land acquisition
amendment
Ch. 166
3-06 2-21-2006 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216, Art. III
4-06 Not introduced
5-06 3-7-2006 Acquisition of land NCM
6-06 5-16-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
7-06 4-25-2006 Bond NCM
8-06 9-19-2006 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 212 and 250
9-06 4-25-2006 Exceeding Municipal
Budget Cap Bank
established
NCM
10-06 5-16-2006 Fine for violations
amendment
Chs. 1, 144, 208,
228, 244, 250
11-06 5-16-2006 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
12-06 5-31-2006 Appropriation NCM
13-06 5-31-2006 Appropriation NCM
14-06 5-31-2006 Bond NCM
15-06 5-31-2006 2006 salaries NCM
16-06 6-20-2006 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
17-06 6-20-2006 Bond NCM
18-06 7-18-2006 Borough Administrator
amendment
Ch. 4
19-06 8-15-2006 Municipal Housing Liaison Ch. 6
20-06 8-15-2006 Exchange of property NCM
21-06 9-19-2006 Dogs amendment Ch. 108
22-06 9-19-2006 Cats amendment Ch. 96
23-06 9-19-2006 Illicit connections Ch. 146
24-06 9-19-2006 Stormwater control Ch. 213
25-06 9-19-2006 Water amendment Ch. 244
26-06 Tabled
§ DL-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:868
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
27-06 10-17-2006 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
28-06 10-17-2006 Exchange of property
amendment
NCM
29-06 11-28-2006 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. BH 01-08
30-06 11-28-2006 Financial agreement
between Borough and New
Jersey Sports and
Exposition Authority
NCM
31-06 12-19-2006 Acquisition of land NCM
33-06 12-19-2006 Fees amendment Chs. 47; 77; 80;
190; 224
34-06 12-19-2006 Sewerage fees amendment NCM
35-06 12-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 238
36-06 12-19-2006 Public property: regulation
of banners and other
displays
Ch. 189, Art. I
07-1 2-20-2007 Trees Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-14
07-2 3-20-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
07-3 2-20-2007 Exchange of property NCM
07-4 6-19-2007 Storm sewers amendment Ch. 207
07-5 2-20-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
07-6 3-20-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 25
07-7 Tabled
07-8 Tabled
07-9 11-27-2007 Acceptance of property NCM
07-10 Tabled
07-11 8-21-2007 Bond amendment NCM
07-12 5-15-2007 Town Center Task Force Ch. 60
07-13 6-19-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:869
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-14 5-15-2007 Exceeding budget limit and
establishing cap bank
NCM
07-15 5-22-2007 2007 salaries NCM
07-16 6-19-2007 Lease agreement NCM
07-17 6-19-2007 Bond NCM
07-18 7-24-2007 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
07-19 7-24-2007 Acceptance of easement NCM
07-20 7-24-2007 Acceptance of property NCM
07-21 Tabled
07-22 9-18-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
07-23 11-27-2007 Bond NCM
07-24 Bond NCM
BH 01-07 12-5-2007 Food establishments
amendment
Ch. 259
BH 02-07 12-5-2007 Vending machines: permits
and licenses amendment
Ch. 274, Art. II
BH 03-07 12-5-2007 Hancock Cemetery Ch. 263
BH 04-07 12-5-2007 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
establishments amendment
Repealed by BH
01-08
BH 05-07 12-5-2007 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
08-1 2-26-2008 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment
Ch. 212
08-2 2-26-2008 Swimming pools
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 216; 250
08-3 2-26-2008 Towing/wrecker operators
amendment
Ch. 228
08-4 3-18-2008 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 212; 250
08-5 2-26-2008 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
08-6 3-18-2008 Cats amendment; dogs
amendment
Chs. 96; 108
§ DL-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:870
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-7 Tabled
08-8 3-18-2008 Acceptance of rights-of-way NCM
08-9 3-18-2008 Vacation of right-of-way NCM
08-10 3-18-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
08-11 3-18-2008 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment
Ch. 212
08-12 4-29-2008 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
08-13 4-29-2008 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
08-14 4-29-2008 Public utility poles and
facilities
Ch. 176
BH 01-08 5-7-2008 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
establishments
Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-8
BH 02-08 5-7-2008 Food establishments
amendment
Ch. 259
08-15 5-20-2008 Raffles amendment Ch. 190
08-16 5-20-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
08-17 5-20-2008 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment
Ch. 212
08-18 5-20-2008 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 103
08-19 6-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
08-20 6-17-2008 Appropriation NCM
08-21 6-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
08-22 7-23-2008 Filming Ch. 120
08-23 7-23-2008 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
08-24 7-23-2008 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment
Ch. 212
08-25 Tabled
08-26 8-21-2008 2008 salaries NCM
08-27 8-21-2008 Solicitation, canvassing and
sales amendment
Ch. 179
08-28 8-21-2008 Raffles amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:871
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BH 03-08 10-1-2008 Emergency fuel oil and
furnace repair: residential
tenants
Ch. 258, Art. I
08-29 10-28-2008 Street vacation NCM
08-30 10-28-2008 Length of Service Awards
Program amendment
Ch. 34
08-31 Defeated
08-32 10-28-2008 Reappropriation NCM
08-33 10-28-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
08-34 11-25-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
08-35 12-16-2008 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 56, Art. I
08-36 12-16-2008 Towing/wrecking operators
amendment
Ch. 228
08-37 Tabled
08-38 Tabled
08-39 Tabled
08-40 12-16-2008 Administration of
government amendment;
Sewerage Authority
repealer; sewers
amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 2; 58
(reference only);
193; 244
08-41 12-16-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
09-1 2-17-2009 Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 29
09-2 2-17-2009 Dissolution of Sewerage
Authority
Chs. 2, 144, 193,
and 212 (Editor's
Notes only)
09-3 2-17-2009 Bond NCM
09-4 2-17-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
09-5 5-5-2009 Raffles amendment Ch. 190
09-6 5-5-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 238
09-7 5-19-2009 Solicitation, canvassing and
sales amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 179; 250
§ DL-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:872
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-8 6-23-2009 2009 salaries NCM
09-9 6-23-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
09-10 6-23-2009 Bond NCM
09-11 6-23-2009 Bond NCM
09-12 6-23-2009 Bond NCM
09-13 Tabled
09-14 Tabled
09-15 9-15-2009 Background checks Ch. 82
09-16 10-20-2009 Bond NCM
09-17 10-20-2009 Bond NCM
09-18 Tabled
09-19 11-24-2009 Historic Preservation
Commission amendment
Ch. 31
10-1 2-16-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 188
10-2 3-16-2010 Regulation of banners and
other displays amendment
Ch. 189, Art. I
10-3 3-16-2010 Purchase of property NCM
10-4 4-13-2010 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
10-5 4-27-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
10-6 4-27-2010 Authorization of grant of
easement
NCM
10-7 4-13-2010 Amendment to lease
agreement
NCM
10-8 4-27-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
10-9 4-27-2010 Signs amendment Ch. 199
10-10 6-15-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
10-11 6-15-2010 Fertilizer application Ch. 118
10-12 Tabled
10-13 7-27-2010 Salaries NCM
10-14 8-16-2010 Transfer of property NCM
BH 01-10 9-1-2010 Retail food establishments
and food and beverage
machines
Ch. 259
BH 02-10 9-1-2010 Vending machines
amendment
Ch. 274
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:873
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-15 9-21-2010 Grant of easement NCM
10-16 9-21-2010 Planning Board
amendment; Zoning Board
of Adjustment amendment
Chs. 42; 62
10-17 9-21-2010 Bond NCM
10-18 10-19-2010 Bond NCM
10-19 11-23-2010 Bond NCM
10-20 10-19-2010 Public records: fees
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. I
10-21 12-21-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 175
10-22 12-21-2010 Private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 214
10-23 12-21-2010 Separation and recycling of
solid waste; subdivision
and site plan review
amendment
Chs. 142, Art. II;
212
10-24 12-21-2010 Sidewalk cafe amendment Ch. 208, Art. VI
11-1 2-15-2011 Riparian zones Ch. 192
11-2 3-29-2011 Transfer of lands NCM
11-3 2-15-2011 Exhibitions, shows and
carnivals
Ch. 117
11-4 3-29-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11-5 6-21-2011 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
11-6 5-17-2011 General capital project NCM
11-7 5-17-2011 General capital project NCM
11-8 5-17-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11-9 5-17-2011 2011 salaries See Ch. 54
11-10 6-21-2011 General capital project NCM
11-11 6-21-2011 General capital project NCM
11-12 7-19-2011 Taxicabs and limousines Ch. 224
11-13 7-19-2011 Appropriation NCM
11-14 8-23-2011 Firesafety amendment Ch. 134
11-15 9-6-2011 Refunding bond NCM
§ DL-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:874
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BH 01-11 9-7-2011 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
establishments amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-8
11-16 8-23-2011 Public records: fees
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. I
11-17 8-23-2011 General capital project NCM
11-18 8-23-2011 Appropriation NCM
11-19 10-18-2011 Signs amendment Ch. 199
12-1 2-16-2012 Dogs amendment Ch. 108
12-2 3-22-2012 Cable television franchise NCM
12-3 4-30-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
12-4 4-30-2012 2012 salaries for nonunion
and part-time employees
See Ch. 54
12-5 4-30-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
12-6 4-30-2012 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
12-7 4-30-2012 Bond NCM
12-8 4-30-2012 General capital project NCM
12-9 6-21-2012 Service charges for
Florham Park Sewer Utility
See Ch. 193, Art.
III
12-10 5-17-2012 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 103
12-11 6-21-2012 Purchase of property NCM
12-12 6-21-2012 2012 salaries for nonunion
and part-time employees
amendment
See Ch. 54
12-13 7-5-2012 Authorization of capital
projects
NCM
12-14 7-24-2012 2012 salaries for nonunion
and part-time employees
amendment
See Ch. 54
12-15 10-18-2012 Appropriation NCM
12-16 11-20-2012 False 9-1-1 calls Ch. 117A
12-17 12-13-2012 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
13-1 2-7-2013 Bond NCM
13-2 2-21-2013 Races Ch. 189A
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:875
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-3 3-28-2013 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 25
13-4 5-28-2013 Bond NCM
13-5 5-28-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
13-6 6-20-2013 Bond NCM
13-7 Not adopted
13-8 8-15-2013 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
establishments repealer
Ch. 260 (reference
only)
13-9 9-5-2013 2013 salaries for nonunion
and part-time employees
See Ch. 54
13-10 10-17-2013 Garage sales Ch. 140
13-11 9-19-2013 Purchase of property NCM
13-12 10-17-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-13 11-21-2013 Approved streets
amendment
Ch. 208, Art. V
13-14 12-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-15 12-12-2013 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 188
14-1 4-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
14-2 2-20-2014 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
14-3 3-20-2014 Bond NCM
14-4 4-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
14-5 5-15-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
BOH
01-14
5-28-2014 Retail food establishments
and food and beverage
machines amendment
Ch. 259
14-6 9-18-2014 2014 salaries for nonunion
employees
See Ch. 54
14-7 6-19-2014 Pool utility capital project NCM
14-8 6-19-2014 2014 summer camp fees NCM
14-9 6-19-2014 Historic Preservation
Commission amendment
Ch. 31
14-10 6-19-2014 Bond NCM
14-11 Tabled
14-12 7-17-2014 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:876
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-13 7-17-2014 Service charges for
Florham Park Sewer Utility
See Ch. 193, Art.
III
14-14 7-17-2014 Trees Ch. 229
14-15 8-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 238
14-16 10-16-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
14-17 12-10-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
15-1 2-26-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
15-2 3-26-2015 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
15-3 Not adopted
15-4 3-26-2015 Athletic Code of Conduct Ch. 81
15-5 3-26-2015 Parks and playgrounds:
rules and regulations
Ch. 171, Part 2
15-6 5-21-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
15-7 6-11-2015 2015 summer camp fees NCM
15-8 6-11-2015 2015 salaries for nonunion
employees
See Ch. 54
15-9 6-11-2015 Appropriation NCM
15-10 6-11-2015 Acceptance of real property NCM
BH2015
-01
7-1-2015 Retail food establishments
and food and beverage
machines amendment
Ch. 259
15-11 9-24-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
15-12 7-16-2015 Signs amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 199; Ch. 250
15-13 8-26-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
15-14 8-26-2015 Signs amendment Ch. 199
15-15 9-24-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
15-16 9-24-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
15-17 9-24-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 188
15-18 9-24-2015 Firesafety amendment Ch. 134
15-19 9-24-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
15-20 Not adopted
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:877
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-21 10-22-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
approved streets
amendment
Ch. 208, Art. V
15-22 10-22-2015 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 103
15-23 12-17-2015 Public utility poles and
facilities amendment;
street openings
amendment; swimming
pools amendment
Ch. 176; Ch. 208;
Ch. 216
15-24 11-22-2015 Appropriation NCM
15-25 11-22-2015 2015 salaries for nonunion
employees amendment
See Ch. 54
16-1 2-25-2016 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 212; Ch. 250
16-2 2-25-2016 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 20
16-3 2-25-2016 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
16-4 3-24-2016 Alarm systems: leased line
emergency alarm system
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I
16-5 3-24-2016 2016 summer camp fees NCM
16-6 4-7-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
16-7 4-21-2016 Bond NCM
16-8 4-21-2016 2016 salaries NCM
16-9 4-21-2016 General capital project NCM
16-10 4-21-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-11 5-19-2016 General capital project NCM
16-12 Tabled
16-13 7-14-2016 Sewerage fees amendment NCM
16-14 8-16-2016 General capital project NCM
16-15 9-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 238
16-16 9-15-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 2
16-17 12-15-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
§ DL-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:878
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-18 10-20-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-19 11-17-2016 2016 salaries for nonunion
employees
See Ch. 54
16-20 12-15-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
16-21 12-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 238
16-22 12-15-2016 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
17-1 2-16-2017 Electric and/or natural gas
aggregation program
NCM
17-2 2-16-2017 Overdue and unpaid sewer
bills amendment
NCM
17-3 2-16-2017 General capital project NCM
17-4 3-23-2017 Water amendment Ch. 244
17-5 4-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
17-6 4-20-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
17-7 4-20-2017 Appropriation NCM
17-8 4-20-2017 2017 salaries for nonunion
employees
See Ch. 54
17-9 4-20-2017 Restoration funding NCM
17-10 4-20-2017 Wetland and flood hazard
area remediation funding
NCM
17-11 5-1-2017 Tax exemption agreement NCM
17-12 6-22-2017 Telecommunications
facilities in public rights-ofway;
public utility poles
and facilities amendment
Ch. 227A; Ch. 176
17-13 8-10-2017 Capital improvement NCM
17-14 9-21-2017 Bond NCM
17-15 9-21-2017 Appropriation NCM
17-16 10-19-2017 Fire Department vehicle
funding
NCM
17-17 11-16-2017 2017 salaries for nonunion
employees
See Ch. 54
17-18 12-14-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
17-19 12-14-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:879
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-1 2-15-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
18-2 2-15-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
18-3 3-15-2018 2018 summer camp fees NCM
18-4 3-15-2018 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 216
18-5 4-19-2018 General Capital Projects NCM
18-6 4-19-2018 General Capital Projects NCM
18-7 4-19-2018 2018 Salaries for Nonunion
Employees
See Ch. 54
18-8 4-19-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
18-9 5-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
18-10 5-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
18-11 5-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
18-12 5-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
18-13 5-18-2018 Acceptance of Property NCM
18-14 Tabled
18-15 6-14-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
18-16 6-14-2018 Capital Budget Amendment NCM
18-17 7-12-2018 Capital Budget Amendment NCM
18-18 9-20-2018 Capital Appropriation NCM
18-19 9-20-2018 Water Amendment Ch. 244
18-20 10-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
18-21 10-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
18-22 Tabled
18-23 12-13-2018 2018 Salaries for Nonunion
Employees
See Ch. 54
19-1 2-21-2019 Summer Program Fees NCM
19-2 2-21-2019 Swimming Pools
Amendment
Ch. 216
19-3 2-21-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
19-4 2-21-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250
19-5 3-21-2019 Appropriation NCM
19-6 4-18-2019 2019 Salaries for Nonunion
Employees
See Ch. 54
19-7 4-18-2019 Subdivision and Site Plan
Review Amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 FLORHAM PARK CODE § DL-1
278:880
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-8 4-18-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
19-9 4-18-2019 Capital Projects NCM
19-10 4-18-2019 Garbage, Rubbish and
Refuse: Litter Control
Ch. 142, Art. V
19-11 6-13-2019 Capital Projects NCM
19-12 6-13-2019 Subdivision and Site Plan
Review Amendment;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 212; Ch. 250
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject
Disposition
Supp. No.
19-13 9-19-2019 Capital Improvement NCM 112
19-14 10-17-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks: Street
Openings
Amendment
Ch. 208,
Art. III
112
19-15 11-21-2019 Salaries NCM 112
19-16 12-12-2019 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 25 112
19-17 12-12-2019 Self-Funded Health
Plan
Ch. 56 112
19-18 12-12-2019 Property
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 188 112
19-19 12-12-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 244 112
19-20 12-12-2019 Acceptance of
Property
NCM 112
20-1 2-20-2020 Swimming Pools
Amendment
Ch. 216 113
20-2 2-20-2020 2020 Summer
Program Fees
NCM 113
§ DL-1 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS § DL-1
278:881