Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE.
This book shall be known and may be cited as The Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Flemington, 1976, and is herein referred to
as the revision.
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK OR BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the municipal clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the borough
government established or designated by ordinance or this revision as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the borough
government assigned to such organizational unit by the borough council.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this revision, so long as it has been
adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so
long as it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Flemington in the County of
Hunterdon and State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the mayor and
councilmen of the borough.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
1:1
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this revision.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION.
For the purpose of this revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the borough are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
Whenever a specific time is used in this revision, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Any citation of a statute, law, or ordinance contained in this revision shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the revision identified by
an Arabic numeral and divided by subject matter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY.
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this revision is declared
to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or paragraph
shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative,
remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed
to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or paragraphs of
this revision.
§ 1-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1-4
1:2
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 2-1. BOROUGH CLERK.
§ 2-1.1. Appointment; Department of Administration. [New; Ord.
No. 2013-6]
There shall be a Borough Clerk appointed by the Council for a term of
three years. Prior to the appointment, the Borough Clerk shall be qualified
by training and experience to perform the duties of their office. The Clerk
and the temporary acting Deputy Clerk shall constitute the Department of
Administration.
§ 2-1.2. Clerk of Council and Committees. [New; Ord. No. 2013-6]
The Borough Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and its committees.
The Clerk or a person assigned by the Clerk shall attend all meetings of the
Council and take minutes. The minutes of each meeting of the Council shall
be signed by the officer presiding at the meeting.
§ 2-1.3. Ordinances and Resolutions. [New; Ord. No. 2013-6]
§ 2-1.4. Custodian of Records. [New; Ord. No. 2013-6]
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and
documents of the Borough, except those committed by ordinance to any
other office or transferred thereto by the Council. The Clerk shall, upon
request and upon the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by resolution
of the Council for the use of the Borough, furnish a certified copy of any
such paper in his custody under the corporate seal of the Borough.
a. The Clerk shall record all ordinances of a permanent character in books
to be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance the Clerk shall
record and certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law.
Each ordinance so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk,
who shall attest that it was duly adopted upon the date stated, and
when so signed the recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record
of the ordinance. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to record, sign
or certify as herein required shall not impair or affect the validity of any
ordinance which has been duly adopted.
b. At the close of each year the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of the
Borough Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances, or
true copies thereof, which then remain in force and effect. The Clerk
shall also properly index the record books, compilation or codification
of ordinances.
§ 1-4 GENERAL § 2-1.5
1:3
§ 2-1.5. Corporate Seal. [New; Ord. No. 2013-6]
The Clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the Borough to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document on record in his
office, or to certify any act or paper which from the records in his office
appears to have been a public act of the Borough or a public document. The
Clerk shall not affix the seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any other
instrument, writing or other paper unless required by law or ordinance.
§ 2-1.6. Insurance; Surety Bonds; Contracts. [New; Ord. No. 2013-6]
The Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Council, shall:
§ 2-1.7. Administrative Rules and Regulations; Filing and
Publication. [New; Ord. No. 2013-6]
No rule or general regulation made by any department, officer, agency
or authority of the Borough, except such as relates to the organization
or internal management of the municipal government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Borough Clerk. The Clerk shall
maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations which shall
be available for public inspection in their office during business hours.
§ 2-1.8. Other Laws and Ordinances. [New; Ord. No. 2013-6]
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance and subject to the supervision and direction of the Mayor and
Borough Council, the Clerk shall:
a. Be the depository for and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished
by or on account of any officer or employee, except their own bond
which shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; of all insurance
policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the
Borough or to protect it against any claim, demand or liability
whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies,
equipment and materials to which the Borough may be a party.
b. Be the depository for and custodian of all performance bonds running to
the Borough as obligee, or any other form of security given by any
contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on account of work
done or to be done in or for the Borough with the exception of Planning
Board.
c. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Borough.
d. Report to the Borough Council annually, at such time as the Council
may require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each
surety bond and contract of insurance; the nature and terms of
outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective
expiration dates.
§ 2-1.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-1.8
1:4
§ 2-2. DEPUTY BOROUGH CLERK.
§ 2-2.1. Established.
There may be appointed a deputy Borough Clerk.
§ 2-2.2. Term of Office.
The term of office may begin on January 1 and expire one year thereafter, on
December 31 or may begin on any other date and extended for any period
as the Council may decide.
§ 2-2.3. Nomination and Appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate and appoint the deputy Borough Clerk, with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council.
§ 2-2.4. Powers and Duties.
The deputy Borough Clerk shall have duties as determined by the Council
in its discretion.
§ 2-2.5. Compensation.
Compensation shall be stipulated in the yearly salary ordinance.
§ 2-3. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-3.1. Bill of Demand.
Any person claiming payment from the municipality shall present a detailed,
duly certified bill of demand to the Clerk. In the alternative, the claimant
shall furnish an affidavit.
§ 2-3.2. Certification.
The Clerk shall see that the signature of the officer designated by the
Council as responsible for placing the order, appears on every claim to
certify that the materials have been received or the services rendered.
a. Perform all the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance.
b. Administer the provisions of Borough Ordinances with reference to the
licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are required
by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
c. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to them by the
Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 2-1.8 GENERAL § 2-3.3
1:5
§ 2-3.3. Filing of Claims.
Approved claims shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall present them to the
Borough Council for formal approval at a regular meeting.
§ 2-3.4. Approval; Disapproval.
The Council may reject any claim, stating the reason for rejection. Any
disapproved claim shall be referred back to the Clerk with any instructions
the Council may give. Each approved claim shall be endorsed by the
members of the Borough Council and each disapproved claim shall give the
objectors' reason.
§ 2-3.5. Record of Claims.
The Clerk shall record all claims in the official minutes indicating Council
approval or disapproval. The Clerk shall indicate the date of approval on the
claims.
§ 2-3.6. Preparation of Checks.
The Clerk shall prepare the checks for payment immediately after
certification and approval. The checks shall be signed by the Mayor and
Clerk and countersigned by the treasurer or other chief financial officer. The
Clerk shall record all checks in proper books of account and then mail or
otherwise distribute the checks to the claimants.
§ 2-3.7. Payrolls.
The appropriate department heads shall prepare the payrolls for all
employees. The payrolls shall be duly certified by the person authorized
to certify that the services have been rendered and the amount specified
is in fact due to the employee. The payroll shall then be approved by the
department head responsible and presented to the Council for approval.
The Clerk and utilities Clerk shall draw funds by check from the current
funds in an amount totaling their payroll for each bi-weekly period, and
deposit such funds in the Borough payroll account the day prior to each
payday.
§ 2-4. POLICE DEPARTMENT.1
§ 2-4.1. Establishment of Police Department.
A police department is hereby established in the Borough of Flemington,
Hunterdon County, New Jersey, under the name of "The Borough of
Flemington Police Department."
1. Editor's Note: See Chapter 7 Traffic, Section 7-15 for employment guidelines of off-duty
Police Officers for roadway construction and utility work.
§ 2-3.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-4.2
1:6
§ 2-4.2. Composition of Police Department.
The Borough of Flemington Police Department shall consist of the following:
§ 2-4.3. Designation of Appropriate Authority.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Mayor and Borough Council
of the Borough of Flemington is hereby designated as the "appropriate
authority." The Mayor and Council shall act in all matters relating to the
police function in the Borough of Flemington as a body.
§ 2-4.4. Powers and Duties of Chief of Police.
The chief of police shall be the head of the Borough of Flemington Police
Department and he shall be directly responsible to the Mayor and Borough
Council of the Borough of Flemington for the efficiency and routine day
to day operations thereof. The chief of police shall, pursuant to policies
established by the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Flemington:
§ 2-4.5. Police Commissionership Established.
There shall be a police commissioner of the Borough of Flemington.
a. One Chief of Police;
b. Up to two Lieutenants of Police, with a minimum of one;
c. Up to four Sergeants of Police, with a minimum of two;
d. Up to four Corporals of Police (no minimum);
e. As many patrol officers as deemed necessary to keep the community
safe and secure.
a. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition of the force and its officers and personnel;
b. Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
police force;
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
d. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the police force to be exercised under his
direction and supervision; and,
e. Report at least monthly to the Mayor and Common Council of the
Borough, in writing, on the operation of the force during the preceding
month, and make such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor
and Common Council of the Borough.
§ 2-4.2 GENERAL § 2-4.6
1:7
§ 2-4.6. Qualifications of Police Commissioner.
The police commissioner shall at all times be a member of the governing
body of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-4.7. Term of Office of Police Commissioner.
The term of office of police commissioner for all years excepting 1986,
shall begin on January 1 and expire one year thereafter on December 31.
For year 1986, the term of police commissioner shall begin on the date of
appointment and expire on December 31, 1986.
§ 2-4.8. Nomination and Appointment of Police Commissioner.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, appoint the police commissioner.
§ 2-4.9. Powers and Duties of Police Commissioner.
The police commissioner shall be a line of communication between the chief
of police and the Mayor and Borough Council. The police commissioner
shall meet and communicate with the chief of police as and when reasonably
requested by the chief of police and shall convey all such communication to
the Mayor and Borough Council within a reasonable time thereafter.
§ 2-4.10. Compensation of Police Commissioner.
The police commissioner shall serve without compensation over and above
the compensation to which such commissioner is entitled to receive as
member of the governing body of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-4.11. Appointment of Police Department Members.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, appoint police department members.
§ 2-4.12. Qualifications of Members of Police Department.
No person shall be appointed as a member of the Borough of Flemington
Police Department who does not possess the qualifications set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.
§ 2-4.13. Promotion of Police Department Members.
a. Promotions within the Borough of Flemington Police Department shall
be made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129 and where applicable, N.J.S.A.
40A:14-122.6;
b. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council, promote members of the Borough of Flemington
Police Department to superior position within such department.
§ 2-4.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-4.14
1:8
§ 2-4.14. Probationary Appointments and Promotions.
Each person appointed to membership in the Borough of Flemington Police
Department or promoted to superior rank within such department shall
be designated as a probationer and shall be required to serve for a
probationary period of 12 months next succeeding his designation. The
probationary period of 12 months may be extended by the Mayor and
Borough Council, upon recommendation of the chief of police that such
action is for the good of the service for an additional 12 months. Upon the
expiration of said probationary period, said probationer may be appointed
permanently. During the time of such probationary service, the probationer
shall be under the direct supervision of the chief of police. Said probationer
will comply strictly with all the rules and regulations of the department.
§ 2-4.15. Rules and Regulations.
The Mayor and Borough Council shall by resolution, from time to time as in
its judgment may seem necessary, adopt and amend rules and regulations
for the government and discipline of the police department and the
members thereof. Said rules and regulations may fix and provide for the
enforcement of such rules and regulations and the enforcement of penalties
for the violation of such rules and regulations and all members of the police
department shall be subject to such rules, regulations and penalties.
§ 2-4.16. Continuance of Existing Rules and Regulations.
Such rules and regulations as are in effect at the time of passage of this
section shall continue to be in effect until further action of the Mayor
and Borough Council by resolution, provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be construed as making such rules and regulations a part of
this section.
§ 2-4.17. Discipline of Police Department Members.
Disciplinary action shall be taken against members of the police department
in accordance with the following:
§ 2-4.18. Special Law Enforcement Officers.
a. The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to §§ 2-4.15 and 2-4.16 of
this section, or
b. As provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147. The "proper authorities" to hold
hearings pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 is the Mayor and Council or
their designee.
a. Not more than 15 Class I, two Class II and one Class III Special Law
Enforcement Officers as such terms are used and defined in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8, et seq., may be appointed; [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-10]
§ 2-4.14 GENERAL § 2-4.18
1:9
§ 2-4.19. Powers and Duties of Class I Special Law Enforcement
Officers.
Class I Officers shall perform routine traffic detail, spectator control and
similar duties. Additionally, Class I Officers shall have the power to issue
summonses for disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses,
violations of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes. The use of a firearm by any Class I Officer is strictly prohibited
and no Class I Officer shall be assigned any duties which may require the
carrying and use of a firearm.
§ 2-4.20. Powers and Duties of Class II Special Law Enforcement
Officers.
Class II officers shall exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a
permanent, regularly appointed full-time police officer. The use of a firearm
by a Class II officer is authorized but only after such officer has been fully
certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the police
training commission established in the department of law and public safety.
§ 2-4.21. Powers and Duties of Class III Special Law Enforcement
Officers. [Added 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-102]
Class III officers shall exercise full powers and duties similar to those of
a permanent, regularly appointed full-time police officer while providing
security at a public or nonpublic school on the school premises during hours
when the public or nonpublic school is normally in session or when it is
occupied by public or nonpublic school students or its teachers.
§ 2-4.22. Terms of Appointments of Special Law Enforcement
Officers.
Special law enforcement officers may be appointed to a term not to exceed
one year, or to a term of four months or less.
§ 2-4.23. Qualifications of Special Law Enforcement Officers.
All special law enforcement officers shall have the qualifications set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10.
b. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council, appoint all special law enforcement officers.
2. Editor's Note: Former §§ 2-4.21 through 2-4.26 were redesignated as §§ 2-4.22 through
2-4.27 pursuant to this ordinance.
§ 2-4.18 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-4.24
1:10
§ 2-4.24. Direction and Control of Special Law Enforcement
Officers.
Every special law enforcement officer shall be under the supervision and
direction of the chief of police of the Borough of Flemington Police
Department.
§ 2-4.25. Confirmation of Previous Appointments of Members to the
Flemington Borough Police Department.
The appointments of all members of the Borough of Flemington Police
Department as heretofore made are hereby confirmed, and all such
members of said police department as constituted prior to the adoption of
this section, be and they are hereby confirmed in their said appointments
and shall, upon the adoption of this section, hold and retain the rank which
they have heretofore held and enjoyed prior to the adoption of this section.
Nothing herein shall be construed to require appointments or promotions
by ordinance.
§ 2-4.26. Compensation.
The compensation of all members of the Borough of Flemington Police
Department and special law enforcement officers shall be fixed by section.
§ 2-4.27. Employment of Off-Duty Police Officers. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
See Chapter 7, Traffic, for employment guidelines of off-duty Police Officers
for roadway construction and utility work.
§ 2-5. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-5.1. Established.
There shall be a fire department which shall consist of a chief, one assistant
chief, a fire marshal and not less than 40 or more than 80 members, who
shall at the time of their election to membership be not less than 18 nor
over 40 years old.
§ 2-5.2. Board of Fire Officers.
The chief, assistant chief and fire marshal shall constitute a board of fire
officers, which shall meet monthly or more frequently for the transaction of
business for the good of the department.
§ 2-5.3. Retirement from Service.
Any member who reaches the age of 50 years may be retired from service
by the board of fire officers by and with the consent of the Council, and in
like manner any member who becomes physically unfit for active service.
§ 2-4.24 GENERAL § 2-5.4
1:11
§ 2-5.4. Record Keeping.
The board of fire officers shall devise forms or methods of keeping records
and shall see that records are kept of all alarms of fire, fire losses, methods
of extinguishment, drills, hose, apparatus, minor equipment, condition of
hydrants and starting of motors. It shall formulate regulations for fire
service and measures for fire prevention.
§ 2-5.5. Officers.
The chief and assistant chief shall be elected by the department and the fire
marshal shall be appointed by the Mayor, both subject to the approval of the
Common Council and no person shall be eligible for chief, assistant chief or
fire marshal, who has not been a member of the department for at least two
years.
§ 2-5.6. Chief, Duties.
The chief shall have general supervision of the department when it is not in
actual duty at a fire. His supervision shall be subject to and not conflict with
such rules for the government and management of the department as may
from time to time be adopted by the board of fire officers. In all cases of fire
the chief or in his absence his assistant shall have full power and command.
The chief shall schedule all necessary practice drills and cause the several
pieces of apparatus to be worked in the most advantageous manner.
§ 2-5.7. Fire Marshal; Duties.
The fire marshal shall control such measures of fire prevention and public
safety undertaken by the department.
§ 2-5.8. Control over Fire House.
The fire department shall have exclusive right to and control over the rooms
set aside for the social or business purposes of the department in the fire
house.
§ 2-5.9. Use of Apparatus.
In the event of emergency or widespread conflagration, the chief or other
head of the fire department upon the request of the chief of the fire or police
departments or the Mayor of any other municipality for assistance, may
provide and render such assistance, by supplying fire aid in the protection
of life and property, or assist in quelling any riot or disorder or in
suppressing any conflagration, and while so acting the members of the fire
department supplying such aid shall have the same powers and authority
as have the members of the fire department of the municipality in which
such aid is being rendered. Any member of the Borough of Flemington
Fire Department rendering assistance or aid under the provisions of this
section who shall meet death in the performance of duty, or who shall suffer
sickness, injury or death in carrying out the provisions hereof, shall be
§ 2-5.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-5.9
1:12
entitled to the same rights as though such sickness, injury or death had
occurred within the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-5A. LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM (LOSAP).
§ 2-5A.1. Length of Service Awards Program Created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members
of the Borough of Flemington Fire Department for their loyal, diligent,
and devoted services to the residents and businesses of the Borough of
Flemington.
§ 2-5A.2. Administration of Plan; Contributions to Plan.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Borough of Flemington pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388;
and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey, the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, and this section.
§ 2-5A.3. Criteria for Contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the criteria as follows:
A year of service shall be credited under a service award program for each
calendar year of which an active member of the Borough of Flemington Fire
Department volunteer accumulates at least 100 points.
100 points per year = 100 percent of award.
§ 2-5A.4. Estimated Cost of Program.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
The annual contribution shall be $1,150.00 per eligible member. The cost to
the Borough of Flemington is $34,500.00 per calendar year beginning year
2002.
§ 2-5A.5. Point Schedule for Volunteer Service.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services to the Borough of Flemington Fire Department in accordance with
the following schedule.
§ 2-5.9 GENERAL § 2-5A.5
1:13
LOSAP Point Schedule
Borough of Flemington Fire Department
(§ 2-5A5)
Category Points
Response to fire calls:
0 to 10% 0
11% to 20% 10
21% to 30% 20
31% to 40% 30
41% to 50% 40
51% to 60% 50
61% and above 60
Longevity:
2—4 years 2
5 years 5
6—10 years 10
11-15 years 15
16—20 years 20
21—25 years + 25
Ex-Chief 5
Presently serving as an officer: (Chief, Ass't,
Capt., Lieut., Engineer)
5
Administrative Dept. Officers 5
Active Dept. Committees 2 (10 pts. Max)
Qualified Driver/Operator 5
State or County fire training certificates 15
Department meetings 2
Department drills 2
Parades 5
Worknights 5
Funerals 5
Thanksgiving Coin Toss 10 pts. per day (5 for 1/2
day)
X-mas lights (up and down) 5 pts. per day
Fire Prevention "show-n-tells" 5
§ 2-5A.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-5A.5
1:14
LOSAP Point Schedule
Borough of Flemington Fire Department
(§ 2-5A5)
Category Points
Extra credit per O.I.C.'s approval 2
100 pts. per year = 100% of award
§ 2-5A.6. Records and Certification.
The Flemington Fire Department shall be responsible for maintaining
records and providing certification as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-190 and
191.
§ 2-5A.7. Voter Approval Required.
This section shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election held on November 6, 2001.3
§ 2-6. BOROUGH AND REVIEWING ENGINEERS.
§ 2-6.1. Definition.
THE BOROUGH ENGINEER — Shall mean the engineer regularly appointed
by the Borough to advise it on engineering matters pursuant to law.
§ 2-6.2. Disqualification.
When the Borough Engineer has performed any services on an engineering
matter for a client other than the Borough and the project is required by law
or practice to be submitted by the Borough to the Borough Engineer for his
consideration, the Borough Engineer shall be disqualified from considering
any such project.
§ 2-6.3. Appointment of Reviewing Engineer.
If the Borough Engineer is disqualified in accordance with § 2-6.2, the
Council shall appoint a reviewing engineer, who shall be an engineer
licensed by the State of New Jersey. The appointment shall be made in the
same manner in which the Borough Engineer is appointed.
§ 2-6.4. Duties of the Reviewing Engineer.
The reviewing engineer shall consider the particular engineering matter
from which the Borough Engineer has been disqualified and report to the
Borough in the same manner as the Borough Engineer would, except for
3. Editor's Note: This section was approved by Borough of Flemington voters in the
November 6, 2001 general election.
§ 2-5A.5 GENERAL § 2-6.4
1:15
his disqualification. The reviewing engineer shall consider only the matter
from which the Borough Engineer has been disqualified, and the reviewing
engineer's appointment shall terminate at the conclusion of his study and
report.
§ 2-7. MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
§ 2-7.1. Appointment, Term, Compensation, Etc.
There shall be a municipal attorney for the Borough of Flemington, who
shall be appointed and shall hold office for such term and receive such
compensation as is provided by law.
§ 2-8. MUNICIPAL COURT.
a. There is hereby established a municipal court for the Borough of
Flemington pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq., which shall be known as
the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Flemington."
b. The municipal court of the Borough of Flemington shall have an official
seal which shall bear the impress of the name of the court.
c. The court created hereby shall be presided over by a judge, who shall
be known as the judge of the municipal court of the Borough of
Flemington, and who shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2A:8-5. The judge of the municipal court of the Borough shall
serve for a term of three years from the date of his appointment to fill a
vacancy caused other than by expiration of term shall be made for the
unexpired term only.
d. The judge of the municipal court of the Borough shall possess the
qualifications set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:8-7.
e. The judge of the municipal court of the Borough shall be compensated
by an annual salary to be paid by the Borough, which salary shall be
fixed by ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the
Borough of Flemington. The compensation so paid shall be in lieu of any
and all other fees.
f. There shall be a clerk of the municipal court of the Borough who shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Common
Council of the Borough. Said clerk shall serve a term of one year from
date of his or her appointment and until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified. The clerk of the municipal court of the
Borough shall receive an annual salary as fixed by ordinance. The
Mayor and Common Council of the Borough may, by ordinance or
resolution, provide for other necessary clerical and other assistance for
the municipal court and provide for their compensation. The Mayor and
Common Council of the Borough may, by ordinance or resolution,
designate any officer or employee of the Borough to serve as clerk of
the municipal court with or without additional compensation.
§ 2-6.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-8
1:16
§ 2-8.1. Application Fee for Representation by Municipal Public
Defender.
§ 2-9. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-9.1. Established.
There shall be a board of health in the Borough which shall consist of
seven members. The members of the board of health shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. Members
shall be appointed for terms of four years, except that of the members first
appointed one shall hold office for one year, one for two years, one for three
years, and two for four years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be made
in the same manner as original appointments, and all such appointments
shall be for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-9.2. Powers and Duties.
The board of health shall have the power and authority to adopt ordinances
relating to the protection of the health of Borough residents, and shall
have all the jurisdiction conferred upon boards of health by Title 26 of the
Revised Statutes. The board of health shall elect a president and a vice
president from its members, and shall appoint a secretary who may be a
member of the board.
g. The municipal court of the Borough and the municipal judge thereof
shall have, possess and exercise, all of the functions, powers, duties and
jurisdiction conferred by law upon said court and judge.
h. The office of prosecutor of the municipal court of the Borough is hereby
established. The prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Common Council of the Borough and shall
serve for a term of one year from his or her appointment, or until his
successor is appointed and qualified. The prosecutor of the municipal
court of the Borough shall receive an annual salary as fixed by
ordinance.
i. The prosecutor of the municipal court of the Borough shall appear and
participate in all contested cases in the municipal court wherein a
police officer of the Borough is the complaining witness.
a. Fee. Any person applying for representation by the municipal public
defender shall pay an application fee of $200.00. The court may require
that the fee be paid at once or in installments over a period of four
months of less.
b. Waiver. The judge of the municipal court may waive the fee or part of
the fee, but only upon a clear and convincing showing that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking representation.
§ 2-8 GENERAL § 2-9.3
1:17
§ 2-9.3. Compensation.
The members of the board shall serve without compensation. The secretary
appointed by the board may receive compensation set by the board,
commensurate with the duties performed.
§ 2-9.4. Health Officer; Appointment.
The board may appoint a health officer or a sanitary inspector (not a
member of the board), who shall be legally licensed by the State
Department of Health.
§ 2-10. SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 2-10.1. Commission; Personnel; Appointment.
There shall hereby be established a commission known as the Shade Tree
Commission of the Borough of Flemington. The commission shall consist
of five members and two alternate members. The members and alternate
members shall be appointed by the Mayor with consent of the Council,
shall be residents of the municipality, and shall serve without compensation,
except as hereinafter provided.
§ 2-10.2. First Commission; Subsequent Commissions; Terms.
The first commissioners shall be appointed within 60 days after the
ordinance providing for the commission shall become effective, and their
terms of office shall commence upon the day of their appointment and be for
the respective periods of one, two, three, four and five years, beginning on
January 1 next succeeding such appointment. The term of each appointee
shall be designated in this appointment. All subsequent appointments,
except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full terms of five years, to take effect
on January 1.
The alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall serve during the absence
or disqualification of any regular member or members. The initial term of
"Alternate No. 2" shall be four years and the initial term of "Alternate No.
1" shall be five years. The terms of the first alternate members appointed
pursuant to this section shall commence on the day of their appointment
and shall expire on the fourth or fifth December 31 next ensuing after the
date of their appointments, as the case may be. An alternate member may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed
in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
§ 2-10.3. Organization.
The commission shall organize within 30 days after the appointment of
its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year, and
§ 2-9.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-10.3
1:18
thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as chairman, and
the appointment of a secretary, who need not be a member.
§ 2-10.4. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of any
commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term, by the authority having
power to make the original appointments.
§ 2-10.5. Powers of Commission.
The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Flemington shall have power
to:
§ 2-10.6. Cost of Trees and Improvements, Charge and Lien on
Property; Exceptions.
Except as hereinafter provided the initial cost of all trees planted by the
commission, the cost of planting the same, the cost of the posts and boxes
or guards used for the protection thereof, and the cost of the removal of
any tree or part thereof dangerous to public safety shall, if the commission
shall so determine, in accordance with uniform rules and regulations
promulgated for this purpose, be a charge upon the real estate in front of
which such tree or trees shall be planted or removed as an improvement
thereof. Such cost if it is so determined that it is to be paid by the owner
shall, unless paid directly to the commission be certified by it to the
collector of taxes of the municipality; shall thereupon become and be a lien
upon said real estate, shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the
a. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located, or
which may hereafter be planted, in any public highway, park or
parkway, except such as are on State or county property unless
permission is given by the appropriate authority, including the planting,
trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof;
b. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection;
c. Move or require the removal of any tree, or part thereof, dangerous to
public safety;
d. Encourage arboriculture;
e. Administer treatment to, or remove, any tree situated upon private
property which is believed to harbour a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the
municipality and enter upon private property for that purpose, with the
consent of the owner thereof, provided the suspected condition is first
confirmed by certificate issued by or on behalf of the Department of
Agriculture.
§ 2-10.3 GENERAL § 2-10.6
1:19
owner or owners thereof, and be collected in the same manner as other
taxes against that property.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
§ 2-10.7. Planting and Removal of Trees; Notice and Hearing;
Emergencies.
In every case where the property of an abutting owner will be chargeable
with the cost of the planting of any shade tree or trees the commission
shall give notice of the meeting at which it is proposed to consider said
planting by publishing the notice at least once, not less than 20 days
before the meeting, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality, or by
personal service of a copy of the notice upon the abutting owner at least
ten days before the meeting. The notice shall specify the street, streets, or
portions thereof, on which such planting is proposed and require all persons
who may object thereto to present their objections in writing at the office
of the commission at or before the meeting. Before final action shall be
taken all objections so filed shall be considered. The commission shall give
reasonable notice of its intention to remove, or cause the removal of, a tree,
or part of a tree, dangerous to public safety, unless public safety requires
immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
§ 2-10.8. Public Improvements Affecting Trees; Consent of
Commission; County Park Commissions Unaffected.
No statute giving any person or State, county or municipal board, body or
official, power or authority to lay any sidewalk along, or to open, construct,
curb or pave any street, or to do any similar act, shall be construed to
permit or authorize any interference with or injury to a highway shade tree
without the consent of the shade tree commission within whose jurisdiction
such tree shall be located. In all cases such commission shall reasonably
co-operate with such person, board, body or official for the general public
good.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be held to take away or diminish any
of the powers or authority of any county park commission over the trees or
shrubbery in any county park or parkway within its jurisdiction, or to give to
any other commission or board any power or authority with respect to such
trees or shrubbery.
§ 2-10.9. Annual Appropriation; Estimate; Amount.
During the month of December in each year, the shade tree commission
shall certify to the governing body of the municipality, the estimated sum
a. A planting to replace a tree or trees theretofore planted by the
commission;
b. A planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other educational
demonstration.
§ 2-10.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-10.9
1:20
necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the ensuing fiscal year,
which shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of the
following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for; namely,
§ 2-10.10. Penalty; Jurisdiction of Courts; Copy of Ordinance As
Evidence.
a. Expenses of commission members in discharging official duties
including expenses incident to attendance at professional meetings;
b. Purchase of trees and shrubbery; and
c. Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of services
for the prudent promotion of the work.
The governing body of the municipality shall annually appropriate such
sum as it may deem necessary for said purposes.
a. The commission may prescribe a fine for the violation of each of its
ordinances in an amount not exceeding $1,500.00 for each violation,
and the courts which now or hereafter shall have jurisdiction over
actions for the violation of ordinances of the municipality in which the
commission has been or shall be appointed shall have jurisdiction in
actions for the violation of such ordinances as the commission shall
enact.
The ordinances shall be enforced by like proceedings and process
and the practice for the enforcement thereof shall be the same as
that provided by law for the enforcement of the ordinances of the
municipality in which the commission exists.
The property maintenance inspector and/or zoning official authorized
by law to serve and execute process in the aforementioned courts shall
be the officers to serve and execute any process issued out of any court
under this section.
A copy of any ordinance of the commission, certified to under the hand
of its secretary, or chairman shall be received in any court of this State
as full and legal proof of the existence of the ordinance, and that all
requirements of law in relation to the ordaining, publishing and making
of the same, so as to make it legal and binding, have been complied
with, unless the contrary be shown.
b. In addition to the penalties authorized by Subsection a of this §, the
commission may require a person who removes or otherwise destroys a
tree in violation of a municipal ordinance to pay a replacement
assessment to the municipality. The replacement assessment shall be
the value of the tree as determined by the appraisal of a trained forester
or Certified Tree Expert retained by the commission for that purpose. In
lieu of an appraisal, the commission may adopt a formula and schedule
based upon the number of square inches contained in a cross section of
the trunk of the tree multiplied by a predetermined value per square
§ 2-10.9 GENERAL § 2-10.10
1:21
§ 2-10.11. Disposition of Penalties.
All moneys collected in the municipality, either as fines or penalties, for any
violation of a rule or regulation of a shade tree commission, or as a charge
against real estate, under any provision of this section, shall be forthwith
paid over to the municipal officer empowered to be custodian of the funds
of the municipality.
§ 2-10.12. No Liability for Death or Injury.
Nothing in this section contained shall be construed to make the shade
tree commission or any member thereof, or any volunteer participating in
a community forestry program as provided for by Section 4. of P.L. 1996,
c. 135 (C.13:1L-17.4), responsible for the death or injury of any person, or
for an injury to any property or highway tree or shrub. Liability for any
such death or injury shall be governed by the provisions of Section 16 of
P.L. 1996, c. 135 (C.59:4-10) and any other relevant provisions of the "New
Jersey Tort Claims Act," N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 2-10.13. Large Tree Preservation.
inch, not to exceed $27.00 per square inch. The square inch cross
section shall be calculated from the diameter at breast height and, if
there is a multiple stem tree, then each trunk shall be measured and
an average shall be determined for the tree. For the purposes of this
subsection, "diameter at breast height" shall mean the diameter of the
tree taken at a point four and one-half feet above ground level. The
commission shall modify the value of the tree based upon its species
variety, location and its condition at the time of removal or destruction.
c. Any public utility or cable television company that clears, moves, cuts,
or destroys any trees, shrubs, or plants for the purpose of erecting,
installing, moving, removing, altering or maintaining any structures or
fixtures, necessary for the supply of electric light, heat or power,
communication, or cable television services upon any lands in which it
has acquired an easement or right-of-way, shall not be subject to any
penalty imposed by a commission pursuant to paragraphs a or b of this
section. This subsection shall not exempt any public utility or cable
television company from any penalty or replacement assessment
imposed for negligent actions.
a. Statement of Purpose. The Borough of Flemington finds that:
1. Flemington has an abundance of trees that have benefited citizens
for many years, providing protection, shade, and food for wildlife.
2. Flemington trees have played an important role in the quality of life
and the economic value of homes and properties in the Borough.
3. Flemington trees have acted as purifying systems for the air, and
helped to control erosion and flooding through their root systems.
§ 2-10.10 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-10.13
1:22
4. Flemington trees have improved the quality of life in the Borough
by providing shade, reducing noise and glare, and providing an
essential natural landscape.
5. Flemington trees have provided valuable energy saving benefits by
moderating the effects of heat in summer and cold in winter.
Therefore, the Borough of Flemington has determined a need to
safeguard the community's interest in large trees that comprise
the community's natural resources, and to protect these resources
from deforestation or indiscriminate or excessive tree removal in
an effort to preserve the general welfare of the community. This
subsection aims to preserve as many large trees throughout the
Borough by requiring property owners to protect and preserve as
many large trees as set forth in this subsection.
b. Definitions.
LARGE TREE — Shall mean a tree with a caliper of at least ten inches,
measured at a point four and one-half feet from the ground.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — Shall mean the commission responsible
for overseeing this subsection on behalf of the Borough and with the
consent of the Borough's Council.
TREE — Shall mean a woody plant having at least one well-defined stem
and a more or less definitely formed crown, usually attaining a height
of at least eight feet.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — Shall mean the permit, which must be
obtained before any large tree may be removed, as specified in this
subsection.
c. Exemptions. The following activities do not require a tree permit:
1. The removal of large trees on any approved construction permit or
permit to improve real property to the extent specifically
authorized in the permit.
2. The removal of large trees in accordance with a plan approved by
the planning board or the board of adjustment, so long as the
approval includes a requirement that the applicant replace two
trees for each large tree removed with two new trees as provided in
this subsection.
3. The pruning, trimming or maintenance of large trees in a manner
which is not harmful to the health of the tree.
4. The removal of large trees which are diseased, dead, partially or
completely fallen by acts of nature, or which endanger public
safety.
d. Tree Removal Permit. A tree removal permit shall be required for all
trees designated as large trees, and all trees planted through the
§ 2-10.13 GENERAL § 2-10.13
1:23
Borough Adopt-A-Tree Program, all of which shall be protected from
cutting or destruction within the Borough, except as allowed in
Subsection c above. It shall be unlawful to cut or otherwise cause the
death of any tree having the large tree designation, except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, without first having obtained a permit.
e. Enforcement Authority. The Borough zoning officer shall issue tree
removal permits and monitor all work performed under any permit
issued pursuant to this subsection. Any person residing, owning
property or owning or operating a business in the Borough may request
that the shade tree commission examine any tree to determine if that
tree should be protected as a large tree.
The shade tree commission shall prepare, maintain and update when
necessary a record of all large trees covered by the provisions of
this subsection. Preparation of this record shall be completed within
one year of the enactment of this subsection or as soon as practical
thereafter. Designation of trees as large trees shall transfer with the
sale of any property in the Borough so that the new owner of the
property shall be bound by said designation.
f. Application for Tree Removal Permits. A tree permit shall be obtained
for the removal of any tree protected by this subsection by submitting a
written application to the Borough zoning official, together with a
$10.00 filing fee. The application shall include the applicant's name and
address, the consent of the owner of the land upon which the tree(s) is
located, and the location on the property of the tree(s) to be removed.
The Borough zoning official shall respond within seven days of receipt
of a tree removal application. Permits shall be valid for a period of three
months, and must be displayed prominently at the address where the
tree is to be removed. Application forms shall be made available at
Borough Hall.
g. Approval of the Tree Removal Permit. Upon receipt of an application for
removal of a large tree the Borough zoning official shall visit and
inspect the site and shall approve the permit for those trees that meet
one or more of the following criteria: (1) tree removal is necessary to
allow reasonable use of the property; (2) tree removal will not adversely
affect community benefits as stated in Subsection a., or the property
owner plans to replace the tree with a tree not less than two and onehalf
inch diameter measured at a height of four and one-half feet above
the ground and type, which shall be the same species or a species that
will provide community benefits as stated in Subsection a.
The planting of a replacement tree shall be within the property that
contained the tree removed or, if this is not possible, elsewhere in
the Borough within public property at a site to be determined by the
Borough zoning official with the advice but not the consent of the shade
tree commission.
§ 2-10.13 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-10.13
1:24
§ 2-11. CONSERVATION COMMISSION.
§ 2-11.1. Establishment.
A conservation commission is hereby created for the protection,
development or use of natural resources, including water resources, located
within the territorial limits of the Borough.
§ 2-11.2. Appointment; Membership; Terms.
The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor,
one of whom shall be a member of the planning board and all of whom
shall be residents of the municipality. The members shall serve without
compensation except as hereinafter provided. The Mayor shall designate
one of the members to serve as chairman and the presiding officer of the
commission. The terms of office of the first commissioners shall be for
one, two or three years, to be designated by the Mayor in making his
appointments, so that the terms of approximately one-third of the members
will expire each year, and their successors shall be appointed for three years
and until the appointment and qualification of their successors. The Mayor
or Council of the Borough may remove any member of the commission for
cause, on written charges served upon the member, and after a hearing
thereon in which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel.
A vacancy on the commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 2-11.3. Powers and Duties.
h. Appeal Procedures. Any person may appeal in writing to the Borough
Council within 14 days of the written decision of the Borough zoning
official approving or denying a tree removal permit, or approving or
denying large tree status. The Council shall decide any such appeal
based upon the criteria set forth in this subsection.
i. Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
subsection shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 for each large tree that
has been harmed or destroyed. All fines and other penalties paid shall
be placed in an account for the shade tree commission to plant, replace
or maintain trees throughout the Borough.
a. The conservation commission shall have power to conduct research into
the use and possible use of Flemington and may coordinate the
activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes, and may
advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purposes.
It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including open marsh lands, swamps or other wet lands, in order to
obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may from time
§ 2-10.13 GENERAL § 2-11.3
1:25
§ 2-12. RENT LEVELING BOARD.
There shall be a rent leveling board established and which shall have such
powers as are set forth in § 14-34 of this revision.
§ 2-13. ELECTION DISTRICTS.
There shall be four election districts as follows:
§ 2-13.1. First District.
Bounded on the west by the center line of Main Street, on the north by
Pennsylvania Avenue, and east by the Borough line, and on the south by the
center line of Maple Avenue.
§ 2-13.2. Second District.
Bounded on the east by the center line of Main Street, on the north and west
by the Borough line, and on the south by the center line of Mine Street.
§ 2-13.3. Third District.
Bounded on the north by the center lines of Mine Street and Maple Avenue,
on the west by the center line of Main Street and the Borough line, on the
east by the Borough line, and on the south by the Borough line.
to time recommend to the planning board plans and programs for
inclusion in a municipal master plan and the development and use of
such areas.
b. The conservation commission may, subject to the approval of the
Council, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the
Borough by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its
purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to
acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement,
including conservation easement, covenant or other contractual right,
including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions,
as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit future
use, or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other
land and water areas in the Borough.
c. The conservation commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Common Council.
d. The Common Council may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred
by the conservation commission. The commission may appoint such
clerks and other employees as it may from time to time require and
shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it.
4. Editor's Note: Former Chapter 14, is reserved.
§ 2-11.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-13.4
1:26
§ 2-13.4. Fourth District.
Bounded on the east by the center line of Main Street, on the north and east
by the Borough line, and on the south by the center line of Pennsylvania
Avenue.
§ 2-14. (RESERVED)
Former Section 2-14, Retirement Age, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 4-1970, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2013-6.
§ 2-15. PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-15.1. Public Works Committee.
There is hereby created a public works committee in and for the Borough
to be composed of the Mayor and the councilmen in charge of the water
department, sewerage treatment and collection, trash and garbage
collection, landfill, streets, and buildings and grounds.
§ 2-15.2. Director of Public Works.
§ 2-15.3. Qualifications of the Public Works Director.
The public works director shall have proven supervisory or operating
capability in at least one of the areas of his responsibility as herein set forth
a. Creation. There is hereby created and established the office of public
works director.
b. Appointment; Term. The Mayor shall nominate and appoint the public
works director, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. The
term of office of the public works director shall begin on January 1, and
expire one year thereafter on December 31.
c. Reporting. The public works director shall report to the public works
committee.
d. Compensation. The compensation of the public works director shall be
as established from time to time by the Mayor and Council, according to
law.
e. Residency Requirement. The public works director shall, at the time of
his appointment or within six months thereafter, establish and maintain
a bona fide residence within 12 miles of the Borough. Failure to comply
with this regulation shall be deemed a sufficient cause for removal or
discharge.
f. Physical Examination. Prior to his employment as such, the public
works director shall submit to a physical examination so as to
determine his physical fitness for the position of public works director.
§ 2-13.4 GENERAL § 2-15.3
1:27
and show evidence of acquiring supervisory or operating capability in the
areas. Proof of such capability may consist of one or more of the following:
§ 2-15.4. Duties and Responsibilities of the Public Works Director.
The director of public works shall be responsible for:
§ 2-16. LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD.
a. Possession of licenses issued by the State of New Jersey as an operator
of a sewer and/or water plant.
b. Proven ability to operate street maintenance and repair equipment
such as jackhammer, roller, snowplow, backhoe, etc.
c. Experience in on-site supervision of employees in related areas.
d. Demonstrated ability to plan work schedules.
e. Experience in personnel matters.
f. Experience in dealing with the public in general.
a. Supervising the overall operation of the street department, water
department, sewer department and department of buildings and
grounds.
b. Directing and supervising all Borough employees employed by the
street department, water department, sewer department, and
department of buildings and grounds, with full authority to direct which
employees are to perform which tasks.
c. Planning, coordinating and supervising the completion of all projects
and jobs undertaken by the street department, water department,
sewer department, and department of buildings and grounds.
d. Planning for and supervising the maintenance and repair of all property
owned or controlled by the Borough whether real or personal.
e. Supervising the collection of garbage and, in connection there-with,
receiving and following up on complaints, and in general, seeing that
the collection of garbage is performed in accordance with garbage
collection contract provisions as may exist from time to time.
f. Supervising the operation of the Flemington-Raritan Joint Land-fill at
such times when it shall be the responsibility of the Borough of
Flemington so to do under its agreement with the Township of Raritan,
and in the event that a Flemington-Raritan Joint Landfill Committee is
formed, the public works director shall be a member of such committee.
§ 2-15.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-16.1
1:28
§ 2-16.1. Creation of Local Assistance Board.
There is hereby created, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 44:8-115, a local assistance
board composed of five persons. At least one member of the local assistance
board shall be a woman. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. All members shall
serve without compensation, but shall be allowed their necessary and actual
expenses.
§ 2-16.2. Terms of Members and Vacancies.
The term of one member of the local assistance board shall be for one year
and such member only may be appointed from among the membership of
the governing body of the Borough of Flemington. The term of office of the
other four members shall be four years each, one term expiring in each
year. The term of each member of the local assistance board shall begin on
the first day of January, and each member shall continue in office until his
successor shall be appointed and shall qualify.
§ 2-16.3. Administration.
The local assistance board shall organize and select a chairman and a
secretary, and shall appoint a director of welfare who shall be the first
executive and administrative officer of the board. He shall hold office for a
term of five years from the date of his appointment, and shall be paid such
salary as may be fixed by such board subject to approval by the Mayor and
Common Council of the Borough. In case of vacancy in the office of director
of welfare, one temporary or acting director may be appointed to serve for
not more than 90 days.
Other employees in such number as may be necessary to properly
administer public assistance, shall be appointed in the same manner as
other employees of the Borough.
No employee of the welfare department of the Borough whose
compensation is paid from funds received or appropriated for public
assistance or the administration thereof in any manner shall hold any office
in any political party.
§ 2-16.4. Director of Welfare.
The director of welfare shall:
a. Supervise by periodic investigation every person receiving public
assistance, such investigation to be made by visitation at least once a
month;
b. Reconsider from month to month, the amount and nature of public
assistance given and alter, amend or suspend the same when the
circumstances so require;
§ 2-16.1 GENERAL § 2-16.4
1:29
§ 2-16.5. Records.
The local assistance board shall keep records of its meetings and activities
and shall make an annual report to the Mayor and Borough Council, not
later than the last Council meeting of each calendar year, and such other
reports as may from time to time be requested by the Mayor and Common
Council.
§ 2-17. PUNCTUAL PAYMENT OF REAL ESTATE TAXES.
§ 2-17.1. Proof of Payment Required for Issuance of Licenses.
Any applicant for a permit, license, approval, or relief used or useable in
connection with a designated parcel of real property located in the Borough
of Flemington shall submit proof with such application that all real property
has been paid through the quarter in which the application is filed.
§ 2-17.2. Refusal If Taxes Not Paid.
No permit, license, approval or relief used or useable in connection with
a designated parcel of real property located in the Borough of Flemington
shall be issued by any board, body, officer, or employee of the Borough
unless all real estate taxes assessed against such real property have been
paid through the then-current quarter.
§ 2-18. WAIVER OF APPEARANCE BEFORE THE JUDGE OF THE
BOROUGH MUNICIPAL COURT UPON PAYMENT OF CERTAIN
FINES FOR CERTAIN OFFENSES.5
c. Devise ways and means for bringing persons unable to maintain
themselves to self-support or to the support of any other person or
agency able and willing so to do;
d. Keep full and complete records of such investigation, super-vision,
assistance and rehabilitation, and of all certifications of persons for
employment or benefits and cancellations thereof, in such manner and
form as required by the commissioner of the department of human
services;
e. Bring about appropriate action for commitment to any State or county
institution where the best interest of the needy persons would be so
served;
f. Perform such other duties and functions as set forth in N.J.S.A. 44:8-120
et seq.
5. EDITOR'S NOTE: PRIOR ORDINANCES CODIFIED HEREIN INCLUDE PORTIONS OF
ORDINANCE NOS. 5-1985, 13-1985, 16-1989.
§ 2-16.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-18.1
1:30
§ 2-18.1. Waiver of Appearance by Payment of Fine.
Any person charged with violating any section or subsection of "The Revised
General Ordinances of the Borough of Flemington 1975" shown on Schedule
A may waive his right to appear before the judge of the municipal court of
the Borough by payment of the fine set opposite such offense.6
§ 2-18.2. Required Appearance - Defense by Affidavit.
For any offense not listed on Schedule A, the Local Supplemental Violations
Bureau Schedule, a court appearance is required, unless the court
authorizes a defense by affidavit in accordance with the provisions of Court
Rule 7:12-3. For offenses involving traffic accidents resulting in personal
injury, a court appearance is also required.
§ 2-19. PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
§ 2-19.1. Creation of Office.
The Office of Flemington Parking Enforcement Officer is hereby established.
Not more than four parking enforcement officers may be appointed in the
manner prescribed by § 2-19.2 hereof.
§ 2-19.2. Appointment to Office.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, appoint parking enforcement officers.
§ 2-19.3. Term of Office.
The term of office of a parking enforcement officer shall run from the date
of appointment to the 31st day of December at 12:00 Midnight immediately
following such appointment.
§ 2-19.4. Power and Authority.
A parking enforcement officer shall possess the power and authority to:
a. Issue a parking ticket for a parking offense, as those terms are defined
in the "Parking Offenses Adjudication Act," P.L. 1985, c. 14 (N.J.S.A.
39:4-139.2 et seq.);
b. Serve and execute all process for any parking offense issuing out of the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Flemington; and,
c. Cause any vehicle parked, stored or abandoned in the Borough of
Flemington in violation of a statute, resolution, ordinance or regulation
to be towed away from the scene of the violation and to collect from the
vehicle owner or owner's agent, on behalf of the Borough of
6. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 2-18.1 GENERAL § 2-19.4
1:31
§ 2-19.5. Restrictions and Limitations on Parking Enforcement
Officers.
A parking enforcement officer is not a special law enforcement officer
within the meaning of the "Special Law Enforcement Officers Act," P.L.
1985, c. 439 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.) and is not a member of the
Police Department of the Borough of Flemington.
No parking enforcement officer may carry or use a firearm while on duty.
A parking enforcement officer is deemed to be on duty while the officer
is performing the public safety functions enumerated in § 2-19.4 and for
which the officer is receiving compensation, if any, from the Borough of
Flemington at the rates as may, from time to time, be established by
ordinance.
§ 2-19.6. Qualifications of Parking Enforcement Officers.
No person may be appointed as a parking enforcement officer unless, at a
minimum, the person:
§ 2-19.7. Conditions of Appointments and Recommendations of
Chief of Police.
An applicant for the position of parking enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to this section shall have fingerprints taken, which fingerprints
shall be filed with the Division of State Police and Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
Before any parking enforcement officer is appointed, the Chief of Police of
the Borough of Flemington shall ascertain the eligibility and qualifications
of the applicant and report these determinations in writing to the Mayor
and Borough Council.
§ 2-19.8. Training.
No person appointed as a parking enforcement officer may commence
duties as such unless that person has successfully completed a training
Flemington, the costs of the towing and subsequent storage of the
vehicle before surrendering the vehicle to the owner or agent.
a. Is a resident of the State of New Jersey during the term of appointment;
b. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently;
c. Is of sound mind and in good health;
d. Is of good moral character; and,
e. Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty which would
make the person unfit to perform the duties of his office.
§ 2-19.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-19.8
1:32
course conducted or approved by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Flemington. The Borough Council may waive this training requirement for
any person otherwise eligible to be appointed as a parking enforcement
officer under this section if the person possesses substantially equivalent
training and background, as determined by the chief of police.
§ 2-19.9. Uniform and Identification.
Prior to the commencement of duties, every parking enforcement officer
shall be furnished with a uniform which shall clearly identify the officer's
function. The uniform shall include, but not be limited to, a hat and
appropriate badges which shall bear an identification number or name tag
and the name "Borough of Flemington." The uniform shall also include
an insignia issued by the Borough of Flemington which clearly indicates
the officer's status as a parking enforcement officer. The uniform shall be
distinct in color from the uniform of a regular police officer or special law
enforcement officer.
§ 2-19.10. Compensation.
The compensation of all parking enforcement officers shall be as, from time
to time, fixed by ordinance of the Borough of Flemington. For 1988 and
until hereafter changed, the rate of compensation of parking enforcement
officers shall be at the rate of $6.00 per hour.
§ 2-19.11. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect immediately after final passage and publication
according to law.
§ 2-20. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
§ 2-20.1. Creation of Position.
The position of chief financial officer is hereby created in and for the
Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-20.2. Appointment to Position.
The chief financial officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council.
§ 2-20.3. Term of Office.
The term of office of the chief financial officer shall be one year and shall
commence January 1 of each year.
§ 2-20.4. Qualifications of Chief Financial Officer.
No person shall be appointed to the position of chief financial officer unless
such person has the qualifications required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1, et. seq.
§ 2-19.8 GENERAL § 2-20.5
1:33
§ 2-20.5. Tenure of Office; Removal.
Every person who is serving as the chief financial officer of the Borough
of Flemington and has served in that position for a period of not less
than five consecutive years and who is a holder of a municipal finance
officer certificate issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1, et seq.,
shall be granted tenure of office upon filing with the Clerk of the Borough
of Flemington and with the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs, a notification evidencing his compliance
with such tenure requirements. Thereafter, the person shall continue to
hold office during good behavior and efficiency, and shall not be removed
therefrom except for just cause and then only after a public hearing upon a
written complaint setting forth the charge or charges against him pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.9 or upon expiration or revocation of certification
by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.5.
§ 2-20.6. Compensation.
The compensation of the chief financial officer shall be as, from time to time,
fixed by ordinance of the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 2-20.7. Duties and Responsibilities of Chief Financial Officer.
The chief financial officer shall:
a. Carry out the responsibilities set forth under N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26, et
seq.,
b. For the Borough of Flemington:
1. Maintain a cash receipts book and cash disbursement book for all
funds of the Borough of Flemington, except for funds received and
disbursed by the Borough Clerk, planning board, board of
adjustment, tax collector, utilities clerk and The Flemington
Building Department, consisting of the construction official,
building subcode official, plumbing subcode official, electrical
subcode official and fire protection subcode official.
2. Reconcile all bank accounts maintained by the Borough of
Flemington, except bank accounts maintained by the officers,
boards and departments specifically set forth in Subsection 1
above.
3. Maintain a general ledger for at least the current fund and prepare
monthly a balanced trial balance.
4. Maintain a general journal to record all journal entries that are
then posted to the general ledger.
5. Prepare and submit to the Borough Clerk monthly a report showing
all receipts and disbursements from January 1 for each account
§ 2-20.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-20.7
1:34
§ 2-21. COOPERATIVE PRICING SYSTEM.
segregated by funds, which report shall show each line item
appropriation, all encumbrances against each line item and each
line item balance all to the date of each report.
6. Record all capital and current fund grants in a journal, together
with the time or times such grants are to be received, the time and
times and amounts when grant funds are received and if not
received at the time or times set forth in the grant award, notify the
councilperson in charge of finance of such non-receipt; the chief
financial officer also shall see that the grant monies are spent
within the time allocated by the grant and oversee that the grant
monies are properly applied.
7. Deposit all Flemington funds received by him to Flemington's
credit in an approved bank within 48 hours of receipt.
8. Foot and cross-foot the receipt book, disbursement book and
general ledger monthly and balance each.
9. Sign checks in payment of vouchers after the governing body
authorizes payment of such vouchers, but only after comparing the
approved bill payment list with the check to determine that the
payee and amount of payment are the same on the bill list and the
check.
c. For the Flemington Free Public Library:
1. Maintain a cash receipts book and cash disbursement book for all
funds of the Flemington Free Public Library.
2. Reconcile all bank accounts maintained by the Flemington Free
Public Library.
3. Prepare monthly a balanced trial balance.
4. Prepare and submit to the Borough Clerk monthly a report showing
all receipts and disbursements from January 1 for each account
segregated by restricted and nonrestricted funds, which report
shall show each line item appropriation, all encumbrances against
each line item and each line item balance all to the date of each
report.
5. Foot and cross-foot the receipt book and disbursement book
monthly and balance each.
6. Sign checks in payment of vouchers after the library board of
trustees authorizes payment of such vouchers, but only after
comparing the approved bill payment list with the check to
determine that the payee and amount of payment are the same on
the bill list and the check.
§ 2-20.7 GENERAL § 2-21.1
1:35
§ 2-21.1. Title.
This section shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-21.2. Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor is hereby
authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with the lead
agency.
§ 2-21.3. Contracting Unit.
The lead agency shall be responsible for complying with the provisions
of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) in regard to
bidding and all other provisions of the revised statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
The Borough of Flemington shall be responsible for entering into contracts
and for complying with its responsibilities as set forth in the cooperative
pricing agreement.
§ 2-22. MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT FOR SUPPLEMENTAL POLICE
PROTECTION.
§ 2-22.1. Preamble.
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 authorizes the governing bodies of two or more
municipalities to enter into an agreement with each other for municipal
police aid in case of an emergency. The Mayor and Common Council of this
Borough believes that it would be in the best interest of the residents of
the Borough for the Borough to enter into such an agreement with other
nearby municipalities. Proposed agreements have been prepared providing
for such mutual aid; and the Mayor and Common Council of this Borough
desires to enter into such agreements.
§ 2-22.2. Agreement Entered.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, this Borough enters into the form of
agreement annexed to and made part of this section,7 known as mutual aid
agreement, with all of the municipalities who adopt an ordinance reciprocal
to this one and are willing to, and do, enter such mutual aid agreement.
§ 2-22.3. Authorization.
The Mayor and Borough Clerk be, and they hereby are authorized and
directed to execute said agreements on behalf of this Borough.
7. Editor's Note: The agreement referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk attached to Ordinance 1995-31.
§ 2-21.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-22.4
1:36
§ 2-22.4. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect immediately after publication following final
passage in accordance with law and shall apply to the municipalities who
adopt an ordinance reciprocal to this section and enter the said Mutual Aid
Agreement with this Borough.
§ 2-23. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT.8
§ 2-23.1. Establishment of Department of Community and Economic
Development.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Flemington, Hunterdon
County, New Jersey, a department the name of which shall be "The Borough
of Flemington Department of Community and Economic Development."
§ 2-23.2. Composition of Department.
The Borough of Flemington Department of Community and Economic
Development shall consist of the following:
§ 2-23.3. Powers and Duties of the Director.
The director of community and economic development shall be the head
of the Borough of Flemington Department of Community and Economic
Development and shall be ultimately responsible to the Mayor and Borough
Council for the day to day operations of the department. Pursuant to policies
established by the director in concert with the Mayor, the commissioner
of the department as established below and the representative from the
Borough Council to the planning board, the director shall:
a. One director of community and economic development;
b. Such administrative and support personnel as shall be designated to
the department by the Mayor and Borough Council;
c. Such volunteers as may be recruited by the director.
a. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
department, to include developing and implementing a comprehensive
plan for community and economic development which may consist in
part of the development and implementation of a version of the
National Trust for Historic Preservation's 4-point model;
b. Be in charge of production of the Borough newsletter and maintenance
of Borough website;
8. Editor's Note: Former § 2-23, Economic Development Commission, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 15-1998 and 2-1999, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-2.
§ 2-22.4 GENERAL § 2-23.3
1:37
§ 2-23.4. Establishment of the Position of Commissioner of the
Department.
There shall hereby be established a Commissioner of Community and
Economic Development of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-23.5. Qualifications of Commissioner.
The commissioner of community and economic development shall at all
times be a member of the governing body of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-23.6. Term of Office of Commissioner.
The term of office of the commissioner, for all years excepting 2004 shall
begin on January 1 and expire one year thereafter on December 31. For the
year 2004, the term of commissioner shall begin on the date of appointment
and expire on December 31, 2004.
§ 2-23.7. Nomination and Appointment of Commissioner.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, appoint the commissioner.
§ 2-23.8. Powers and Duties of the Commissioner.
The commissioner shall be the direct line of communication between the
director of the department and the Mayor and Borough Council. The
commissioner shall meet and communicate with the director as and when
reasonably requested by the director and shall convey all such
communication to the Mayor and Borough Council within a reasonable time
thereafter.
§ 2-23.9. Compensation of Commissioner.
The commissioner shall serve without compensation over and above the
compensation to which such commissioner is entitled as a member of the
governing body of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-24. MUTUAL AID FIREFIGHTING AGREEMENT.9
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all staff and volunteers within
the department;
d. Delegate such of the director's authority as the individual shall deem
necessary for the efficient operation of the department;
e. Report at least quarterly in writing to the Mayor and the Borough
Council, on the operation of the department during the preceding
quarter.
9. Editor's Note: The agreement referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 2004-4.
§ 2-23.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-24.1
1:38
§ 2-24.1. Preamble.
The Flemington Borough Fire Department and the other nearby
municipalities in which they are located are desirous of entering into a
mutual aid firefighting agreement.
The entry of the aforesaid agreement is authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1.
For the aforesaid agreement to be effective, all municipalities executing
the same must adopt reciprocal ordinances authorizing the execution of the
said agreement.
§ 2-24.2. Authorization to Execute Agreement.
The Mayor and Borough Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute the attached mutual aid firefighting agreement on behalf of the
Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-24.3. Effective upon Adoption of Reciprocal Agreements.
The attached mutual aid firefighting agreement will only be effective upon
the adoption of a reciprocal ordinance authorizing its execution by the
various nearby municipalities and its actual execution by the said
municipalities and its fire chief.
§ 2-25. THE BOROUGH OF FLEMINGTON DEPARTMENT OF
COMMUNITY EVENT PLANNING.
§ 2-25.1. Composition of Department.
The Borough of Flemington Department of Community Event Planning shall
consist of the following:
§ 2-25.2. Powers and Duties of the Director.
The director of community event planning shall be the head of the Borough
of Flemington Department of Community Event Planning and shall be
ultimately responsible to the Mayor and Borough Council for the day-today
operations of the department. Pursuant to policies established by the
director in concert with the Mayor and Borough Council, the commissioner
of the department as established below shall:
a. One director of community event planning;
b. Such administrative and support personnel as shall be designated to
the department by the Mayor and Borough Council;
c. Such volunteers as may be recruited by the director.
a. Have, exercise and discharge, the functions, powers and duties of the
department, to include developing and implementing a comprehensive
plan for community events.
§ 2-24.1 GENERAL § 2-25.2
1:39
§ 2-25.3. Establishment of the Position of Commissioner of the
Department.
There shall be established a Commissioner of Community Event Planning of
the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-25.4. Qualifications of Commissioner.
The commissioner of community event planning shall at all times be a
member of the governing body of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-25.5. Term of Office of Commissioner.
For the year 2006, the term of commissioner shall begin on the date of
appointment and expire on December 31, 2006.
§ 2-25.6. Nomination and Appointment of Commissioner.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, appoint the commissioner.
§ 2-25.7. Powers and Duties of the Commissioner.
The commissioner shall be the direct line of communication between the
director and the department and the Mayor and Borough Council. The
commissioner shall meet and communicate with the director as and when
reasonably requested by the director and shall convey all such
communication to the Mayor and Borough Council within a reasonable
time thereafter. The commissioner shall be responsible for the Borough
newsletter and Borough website.
§ 2-25.8. Compensation of Commissioner.
The commissioner shall serve without compensation over and above the
compensation to which such commissioner is entitled as a member of the
governing body of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 2-26. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
b. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all staff and volunteers within
the department;
c. Delegate such of the director's authority as the individual shall deem
necessary for the efficient operation of the department;
d. Report at least quarterly in writing to the Mayor and the Borough
Council, on the operation of the department during the preceding
quarter.
§ 2-25.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-26.1
1:40
§ 2-26.1. Eligible Positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:l5C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 2-26.2. Exempt Positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:l5C-2:
§ 2-26.3. Implementation of Program.
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A.43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Penalties and Benefits.
§ 2-27. IDENTITY THEFT POLICY OF THE BOROUGH OF
FLEMINGTON.
§ 2-27.1. Background.
The risk to the Borough of Flemington, its employees and customers from
data loss and identity theft is of significant concern to the Borough and
a. Business administrator;
b. Municipal attorney;
c. Municipal engineer;
d. Municipal prosecutor;
e. Municipal court judge.
a. Tax collector;
b. Chief financial officer;
c. Construction code official;
d. Qualified purchasing agent;
e. Tax assessor;
f. Municipal planner;
g. Registered municipal clerk;
h. Licensed uniform subcode inspector;
i. Principal public works manager.
§ 2-26.1 GENERAL § 2-27.1
1:41
can be reduced only through the combined efforts of every employee and
contractor.
§ 2-27.2. Purpose.
The Borough of Flemington adopts this sensitive information policy to help
protect employees, customers, contractors and the Borough from damages
related to the loss or misuse of sensitive information.
§ 2-27.3. Scope.
This policy and protection program applies to employees, contractors,
consultants, temporary workers, and other workers at the Borough of
Flemington, including all personnel affiliated with third parties.
§ 2-27.4. Policy.
a. The policy will:
1. Define sensitive information;
2. Describe the physical security of data when it is printed on paper;
3. Describe the electronic security of data when stored and
distributed; and
4. Place the Borough in compliance with State and Federal law
regarding identity theft protection.
b. This policy enables the Borough of Flemington to protect existing
customers, reducing risk from identity fraud, and minimize potential
damage to the Borough from fraudulent new accounts. The program
will help the Borough of Flemington:
1. Identify risks that signify potentially fraudulent activity within new
or existing covered accounts;
2. Detect risks when they occur in covered accounts;
3. Respond to risks to determine if fraudulent activity has occurred
and act if fraud has been attempted or committed; and
4. Update the program periodically, including reviewing the accounts
that are covered and the identified risks that are part of the
program.
a. Sensitive Information Policy.
1. Definition of Sensitive Information. Sensitive information --
includes the following items whether stored in electronic or printed
format:
(a) Credit card information, including any of the following:
§ 2-27.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-27.4
1:42
(1) Credit card number (in part or whole);
(2) Credit card expiration date;
(3) Cardholder name;
(4) Cardholder address.
(b) Tax identification numbers, including:
(1) Social Security number;
(2) Business identification number;
(3) Employer identification numbers.
(c) Payroll information, including, among other information:
(1) Paychecks;
(2) Pay stubs.
(d) Cafeteria plan check requests and associated paperwork.
(e) Medical information for any employee or customer, including
but not limited to:
(1) Doctor names and claims;
(2) Insurance claims;
(3) Prescriptions;
(4) Any related personal medical information.
(f) Other personal information belonging to any customer,
employee or contractor, examples of which include:
(1) Date of birth;
(2) Address;
(3) Phone numbers;
(4) Maiden name;
(5) Names;
(6) Customer number.
(g) Borough of Flemington personnel are encouraged to use
common sense judgment in securing confidential information
to the proper extent. Furthermore, this section should be read
in conjunction with the Open Public Records Act. If an
employee is uncertain of the sensitivity of a particular piece of
information, the employee should contact their supervisor. In
the event that the Borough cannot resolve a conflict between
§ 2-27.4 GENERAL § 2-27.4
1:43
this policy and the Open Public Records Act, the Borough will
contact the Government Records Council.
2. Hard Copy Distribution. Each employee and contractor performing
work for the Borough of Flemington will comply with the following
policies:
(a) File cabinets, desk drawers, overhead cabinets, and any other
storage space containing documents with sensitive information
will be locked when not in use.
(b) Storage rooms containing documents with sensitive
information and record retention areas will be locked at the
end of the workday or when unsupervised.
(c) Desks, workstations, work areas, printers and fax machines,
and common shared work areas will be cleared of all
documents containing sensitive information when not in use.
(d) Whiteboards, dry-erase boards, writing tablets, etc. in common
shared work areas will be erased, removed, or shredded when
not in use.
(e) When documents containing sensitive information are
discarded they will be placed inside a locked shred bin or
immediately shredded using a mechanical cross cut or
Department of Defense (DOD)-approved shredding device.
Locked shred bins are labeled "Confidential paper shredding
and recycling." Borough of Flemington records, however, may
only be destroyed in accordance with the city's records
retention policy.
3. Electronic Distribution. Each employee and contractor performing
work for the Borough of Flemington will comply with the following
policies:
(a) Internally, sensitive information may be transmitted using
approved e-mail. All sensitive information must be encrypted
when stored in an electronic format.
(b) Any sensitive information sent externally must be encrypted
and password protected and only to approved recipients.
Additionally, a statement such as this should be included in the
e-mail:
"This message may contain confidential and/or proprietary
information and is intended for the person/entity to whom
it was originally addressed. Any use by others is strictly
prohibited."
§ 2-27.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-27.5
1:44
§ 2-27.5. Additional Identity Theft Prevention Program.
If the Borough of Flemington maintains certain covered accounts pursuant
to Federal legislation, the Borough may include the additional program
details.
a. Covered Accounts. A covered account includes any account that
involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions.
Every new and existing customer account that meets the following
criteria is covered by this program:
1. Business, personal and household accounts for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk of identity theft; or
2. Business, personal and household accounts for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk to the safety or soundness of the
Borough of Flemington from identity theft, including financial,
operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.
b. Red Flags.
1. The following red flags are potential indicators of fraud. Any time a
red flag, or a situation closely resembling a red flag, is apparent, it
should be investigated for verification.
(a) Alerts, notifications or warnings from a consumer reporting
agency;
(b) A fraud or active duty alert included with a consumer report;
(c) A notice of credit freeze from a consumer reporting agency in
response to a request for a consumer report; or
(d) A notice of address discrepancy from a consumer reporting
agency as defined in § 334.82(b) of the Fairness and Accuracy
in Credit Transactions Act.
2. Red flags also include consumer reports that indicate a pattern of
activity inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of
an applicant or customer, such as:
(a) A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
(b) An unusual number of recently established credit
relationships;
(c) A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect
to recently established credit relationships; or
(d) An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of
account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
c. Suspicious Documents.
§ 2-27.5 GENERAL § 2-27.5
1:45
1. Documents provided for identification that appear to have been
altered or forged.
2. The photograph or physical description on the identification is not
consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer
presenting the identification.
3. Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account
or customer presenting the identification.
4. Other information on the identification is not consistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the municipality,
such as a signature card or a recent check.
5. An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the
appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
d. Suspicious Personal Identifying Information.
1. Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the
municipality. For example:
(a) The address does not match any address in the consumer
report;
(b) The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued or is
listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master
File; or
(c) Personal identifying information provided by the customer is
not consistent with other personal identifying information
provided by the customer. For example, there is a lack of
correlation between the SSN range and date of birth.
2. Personal identifying information provided is associated with known
fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources
used by the Borough of Flemington. For example, the address on an
application is the same as the address provided on a fraudulent
application.
3. Personal identifying information provided is associated with known
fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources
used by the municipality. For example:
(a) The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a
prison; or
(b) The phone number is invalid or is associated with a pager or
answering service.
4. The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons
opening an account or other customers.
§ 2-27.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-27.5
1:46
5. The address or telephone number provided is the same as or
similar to the address or telephone number submitted by an
unusually large number of other customers or other persons
opening accounts.
6. The customer or the person opening the covered account fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an
application or in response to notification that application is
incomplete.
7. Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the Borough of
Flemington.
8. When using security questions (mother's maiden name, pet's name,
etc.), the person opening the covered account or the customer
cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which
generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report.
e. Unusual Use of, or Suspicious Activity Related to, the Covered Account.
1. Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered
account, the Borough of Flemington receives a request for new,
additional, or replacement goods or services, or for the addition of
authorized users on the account.
2. A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly
associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the
customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial
payment but not subsequent payments.
3. A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent with
established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for
example:
(a) Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed
payments;
(b) A material change in purchasing or usage patterns.
4. A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy
period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of
account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors).
5. Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with
the customer's covered account.
6. The Borough of Flemington is notified that the customer is not
receiving paper account statements.
7. The Borough of Flemington is notified of unauthorized charges or
transactions in connection with a customer's covered account.
§ 2-27.5 GENERAL § 2-27.5
1:47
§ 2-27.6. Responding to Red Flags.
§ 2-27.7. Periodic Updates to Plan.
§ 2-27.8. Program Administration.
8. The Borough of Flemington receives notice from customers, victims
of identity theft, law enforcement authorities, or other persons
regarding possible identity theft in connection with covered
accounts held by the Borough.
9. The Borough of Flemington is notified by a customer, a victim of
identity theft, a law enforcement authority, or any other person that
it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity
theft.
a. Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, an employee must act
quickly as a rapid appropriate response can protect customers and the
Borough of Flemington from damages and loss.
1. Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, gather all related
documentation and write a description of the situation. Present this
information to the designated authority for determination.
2. The designated authority will complete additional authentication to
determine whether the attempted transaction was fraudulent or
authentic.
b. If a transaction is determined to be fraudulent, appropriate actions
must be taken immediately. Actions may include:
1. Canceling the transaction;
2. Notifying and cooperating with appropriate law enforcement;
3. Determining the extent of liability of the municipality; and
4. Notifying the actual customer that fraud has been attempted.
a. At periodic intervals established in the program, or as required, the
program will be reevaluated to determine whether all aspects of the
program are up to date and applicable in the current business
environment.
b. Periodic reviews will include an assessment of which accounts are
covered by the program.
c. As part of the review, red flags may be revised, replaced or eliminated.
Defining new red flags may also be appropriate.
d. Actions to take in the event that fraudulent activity is discovered may
also require revision to reduce damage to the Borough of Flemington
and its customers.
§ 2-27.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2-27.8
1:48
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. LITTER.
a. Involvement of Management.
1. The identity theft prevention program shall not be operated as an
extension to existing fraud prevention programs, and its
importance warrants the highest level of attention.
2. The identity theft prevention program is the responsibility of the
governing body. Approval of the initial plan must be appropriately
documented and maintained.
3. Operational responsibility of the program is delegated to Sandra
Borucki and in future to Council liaison to police department.
b. Staff Training.
1. Staff training shall be conducted for all employees, officials and
contractors for whom it is reasonably foreseeable that they may
come into contact with accounts or personally identifiable
information that may constitute a risk to the Borough of Flemington
or its customers.
2. Sandra Borucki is responsible for ensuring identity theft training
for all requisite employees and contractors, and in future to Council
liaison to police department.
3. Employees must receive annual training in all elements of this
policy.
4. To ensure maximum effectiveness, employees may continue to
receive additional training as changes to the program are made.
c. Oversight of Service Provider Arrangements.
1. It is the responsibility of the Borough of Flemington to ensure that
the activities of all service providers are conducted in accordance
with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect,
prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft.
2. A service provider that maintains its own identity theft prevention
program, consistent with the guidance of the red flag rules and
validated by appropriate due diligence, may be considered to be
meeting these requirements.
Any specific requirements should be specifically addressed in the
appropriate contract arrangements.
§ 2-27.8 GENERAL § 3-1.1
1:49
§ 3-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this section
AIRCRAFT — Shall mean any contrivance now known or hereafter invented,
used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a litter storage and
collection receptacle.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean "garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein
and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined
by general law, any newspaper entered with the Post Office Department
of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and
any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product commodity or
thing.
a.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
b.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit: but the terms
of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or
a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event,
when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection
with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good
order; provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to
authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any
ordinance of this Borough.
c.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
d.
§ 3-1.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-1.1
1:50
by general law; and, in addition, shall include any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and
sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean any printed or written
matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid
definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — Shall mean a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or
any other public area in the Borough, owned or used by the Borough and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling house, building, or other
structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether uninhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or
vacant, and shall include, but not be limited to, any yard, grounds, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to
such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds, and buildings.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper wrappings,
cigarettes, yard clippings, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials. For the purposes of § 3-1.4, the word
rubbish shall also include leaves.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 3-1.2. Litter in Public Places.
a. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other place within the Borough except in public receptacles for
collection.
b. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk,
curb or other place within the Borough even though the same may be in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 3-1.1 GENERAL § 3-1.3
1:51
§ 3-1.3. Placement of Litter in Receptacles so as To Prevent
Scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 3-1.4. Sweeping Litter into Gutters Prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Borough the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free
of litter. Notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, it shall
be permissible to rake leaves into the gutter on any street or road in the
Borough for purposes of collection and disposal by the street department
during the fall of each year but not after December 1. Raking or depositing
leaves in any gutter except during the aforesaid period of time shall be a
violation of the provisions of this section.
§ 3-1.5. Merchant's Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Borough the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Borough shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter.
§ 3-1.6. Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Borough, or upon
private property.
§ 3-1.7. Truckloads Causing Litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough
unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the Borough, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit on
any street alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 3-1.8. Litter in Parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Borough
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
§ 3-1.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-1.8
1:52
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
persons responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 3-1.9. Litter in Fountains and Streams.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream or any
other body of water within the Borough.
§ 3-1.10. Throwing or Distributing Commercial Handbills in Public
Places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Borough. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place, provided that it shall not be unlawful for
any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 3-1.11. Placing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on
Vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle, provided that it shall not be unlawful in
any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to
the receiver, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is
willing to accept it.
§ 3-1.12. Depositing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on
Uninhabited or Vacant Premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 3-1.13. Prohibiting Distribution of Handbills where Property
Posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any
such handbills left upon the premises.
§ 3-1.8 GENERAL § 3-1.14
1:53
§ 3-1.14. Distributing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills at
Inhabited Private Premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the owner,
occupant or other person then present in or upon the private premises,
provided that in cases of inhabited private premises which are not posted,
the person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to do so, may
place or deposit any handbill in or upon the inhabited private premises, if
the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the handbill
from being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets, or
other public places, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
§ 3-1.15. Exemption for Mail and Newspapers.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place, or upon private property.
§ 3-1.16. Dropping Litter from Aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the Borough
any litter, handbill or other object.
§ 3-1.17. Posting Notices Prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamp post, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized or required by law.
§ 3-1.18. Litter on Occupied Private Property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Borough, whether owned by that person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 3-1.19. Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter, provided that this subsection shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 3-1.14 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-1.20
1:54
§ 3-1.20. Litter on Vacant Lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Borough whether owned by that person or not.
§ 3-1.21. Clearing of Litter from Lands by Borough.
§ 3-2. GRAFFITI PROHIBITED AND REMOVAL REQUIRED.10
§ 3-2.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to promote the public peace, morals and
welfare of the residents of the Borough by prohibiting and barring any
individual or entity from defacing, destroying or otherwise damaging
private or public property without the owner's consent by application of
graffiti, and requiring the prompt removal of graffiti by the owner of the
property on which an unlawful application of graffiti has occurred.
a. Notice To Remove. The health officer or the police chief is authorized
and empowered to notify the owner or tenant of any lands within the
Borough or the agent of such owner or tenant, to properly dispose of
litter located on the owner or tenant's lands which is dangerous to
public health, safety or welfare. The notice shall be given by personal
service, or by certified mail addressed to the owner, at his last known
address.
b. Action upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or tenant or any agent of the owner or tenant so notified to
properly dispose of litter dangerous to public health, safety or welfare
within ten days after receipt of written notice, or within 15 days after
the date of such notice in the event the notice is returned to the
Flemington Post Office because of its inability to make delivery,
provided it was properly addressed to the last known address of the
owner, tenant, or agent, the litter shall be removed from the lands in
question under the direction of the health officer or police chief.
c. Charges Included in Tax Bill. In all cases where the Borough has
affected the removal of litter or has paid for its removal under the
direction of the health officer or the police chief, the health officer or
police chief, whichever the case may be, shall certify the cost to the
Borough Council. The Council shall examine the certificate, and if found
correct shall charge the cost shown against the lands involved. The
amount charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands and shall
be added to and become part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes,
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the
same manner as taxes.
10.Editor's Note: Former § 3-2, Loitering, previously codified herein and containing portions
of Ordinance 3/27/72 and Ordinance No. 17-1978, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2003-31.
§ 3-1.20 GENERAL § 3-2.2
1:55
§ 3-2.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Shall mean the unlawful application of any drawing,
inscription, figure or make upon any structure, wall, rock, bridge, building,
fence, gate, roadway, tree or other real or personal property, either
privately or publicly owned.
GRAFFITI TOOLS — Shall mean any device including a spray paint
container or indelible marker that can be used to apply any non-water
soluble solution to any surface described in the definition of "graffiti"
hereof.
HOBBY-SIZED PAINT CONTAINER — Shall mean any spray paint container
of six ounces or less.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Shall mean any felt tip marker, china marker or
similar device that is not water-soluble and which as a flat or angled writing
surface of one-half inch or greater.
MINOR — Shall mean any person under the age of 18 years.
SPRAY PAINT CONTAINER — Shall mean any receptacle, whether or not
aerosol, holding paint that can be used to apply paint to any surface
described in the definition of "graffiti" hereof.
§ 3-2.3. Graffiti Prohibited.
§ 3-2.4. Sale of Spray Paint and Other Graffiti Tools.
a. Prohibited Conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface,
destroy or otherwise damage private or public property without the
owner's consent, by or through the application of what is commonly
known as "graffiti."
b. Possession of Graffiti Tools Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to have in his or her possession any spray paint container,
indelible marker or other graffiti tool while on public or private
property, without the consent of the respective owner of such property,
in a manner that warrants a justifiable and reasonable alarm or
immediate concern for the safety of property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered by the enforcement officer in
determining whether such alarm or immediate concern is warranted is
the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of an enforcement
officer, refuses to identify him or herself or manifestly endeavors to
conceal him or herself or the graffiti tool. Prior to any citation being
issued to a person for a violation of this chapter, such person shall be
afforded an opportunity by the enforcement officer to dispel any alarm
or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by
requesting him or her to identify himself or herself and explain his or
her presence and conduct.
§ 3-2.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-2.4
1:56
§ 3-2.5. Deterrence and Intervention.
a. Sale to Minors.
1. No person or entity shall sell or otherwise transfer any indelible
marker or spray paint container other than a hobby-sized paint
container to a minor, unless said minor is accompanied by parent or
legal guardian at time of purchase or transfer.
2. No minor shall, at the time of purchase of items specified in
Subsection a., knowingly furnish fraudulent evidence of his or her
majority, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's
license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective
Service Act, an identification card issued to a member of the Armed
Forces, or any document issued by a Federal, State, County or
municipal government.
b. Display and Sale Requirement.
1. No person or entity shall sell or offer for sale, transfer or offer to
transfer any spray paint container, including hobby-sized paint
containers, unless such spray paint container is held for sale or
transfer in an enclosed device which is constructed to prevent
removal of the merchandise except by authorized attendants or is
stored, out of sight, in such a way as to prevent free access to the
merchandise by the public. The merchant may, at its discretion,
utilize a line-of-sight display. To qualify as a line-of-sight display, the
products must be easily and readily observed by the retail
personnel at all times. To accomplish line-of-sight requirements, a
retailer may utilize placement of personnel workstations, mirrors
or cameras or other such devices or arrangements acceptable to
the Borough enforcement officials to ensure surveillance of the
product.
2. Every person or entity selling spray paint or indelible markers shall
place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such a
product stating:
IT IS A CRIME TO SELL OR OTHERWISE CONVEY AEROSOL
SPRAY PAINT OR WIDE-TIPPED MARKERS TO PERSON UNDER
18 YEARS OF AGE IN THE BOROUGH OF FLEMINGTON AND IS
PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $2,000. OR IMPRISONMENT
NOT TO EXCEED 90 DAYS INCLUDING A SENTENCE OF
COMMUNITY SERVICE.
a. Graffiti Trust Account. A Graffiti Trust Account maintained by the
Borough specifically for the remediation of graffiti on public property
within the Borough is hereby created. The Mayor and chief financial
officer shall control the allocation of the funds in the Graffiti Trust
Account for the remediation of graffiti within the Borough, which shall
include cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the
§ 3-2.4 GENERAL § 3-2.5
1:57
§ 3-2.6. Removal Required.
damaged public and private property to the condition existing prior
to any remediation. Any remediation of public or private property
subjected to graffiti may be funded by the Graffiti Trust Account at
the discretion of the Mayor and/or chief financial officer. Any private
property that has been subjected to graffiti is eligible for remediation
through the Graffiti Trust Account only up to the amount of $500.
b. Reward Program. Any person who shall provide information which
leads to the arrest and conviction of a violator of this section is entitled
to receive from the Borough a reward of $500. The Mayor, or his/her
designee, shall determine whether a particular reward shall be divided
among persons based on the information provided; but in no event shall
the total reward relating to a particular violation exceed $500. No
person employed by the Borough shall be eligible for such reward.
a. Property Owner to Remove Graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, public agency or utility owning, or acting as manager or agent for
the property, whether privately or publicly owned, or permit the
application of or fail to remove any graffiti from the property within 30
days of receipt of notice from the Borough to remove such graffiti. If the
person, firm, public agency or utility owning, or acting as manager or
agent for the owner of such property fails to remove the graffiti timely,
the Borough shall cause the graffiti to be removed and charge the
property owner for the expenses incurred. Failure of the property
owner to pay the Borough shall result in the charges being placed as a
municipal lien upon the property as permitted by statute.
b. The Borough police officers and code enforcement officers are hereby
authorized to enforce the provisions of this section, including the
issuance of summonses and notices required under Subsection c
hereof.
c. Notice to Remove Graffiti. Whenever the Borough becomes aware of
the existence of graffiti on any property, including structures or
improvements within the Borough, a code enforcement officer or a
police officer shall give, or cause to be given, notice to the property
owner and/or owner's agent or manager to remove such graffiti
therefrom. Such notice shall be in writing, delivered by certified and
regular mail, and shall be made in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF ORDER TO REMOVE
GRAFFITI FROM PROPERTY
TO THE OWNER, AGENT OF THE OWNER, OR PERSON MANAGING THE PROPERTY
HEREINAFTER DESCRIBED
(Property Address, Block and Lot)
§ 3-2.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-2.6
1:58
§ 3-2.7. Violations and Penalties.
YOUR ATTENTION IS HEREBY DIRECTED TO THE PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE 2007-15
AND CHAPTER 3.2 OF THE CODE OF THE BOROUGH OF FLEMINGTON, A COPY OF WHICH
ORDINANCE IS ON FILE IN THE OFFICE OF THE BOROUGH CLERK, IN THE MUNICIPAL
BUILDING. PURSUANT THERETO, YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT A CERTAIN
UNSIGHTLY CONDITION EXISTS — NAMELY GRAFFITI — ON YOUR PROPERTY WHICH
INJURES NEIGHBORING PROPERTY AND THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE.
YOU ARE HEREBY FORMALLY NOTIFIED THAT YOU MUST IMMEDIATELY, BUT IN NO
EVENT LATER THAN WITHIN THIRTY DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE, REMOVE
SUCH GRAFFITI FROM THE PROPERTY AND THEREAFTER KEEP THE PROPERTY FREE
THEREFROM.
IN THE EVENT YOU FAIL TO COMPLETE THE REMOVAL WITHIN THE TIME INDICATED
HEREIN, THE UNDERSIGNED SHALL CAUSE THE SAME TO BE REMOVED AND YOU WILL
BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE COST OF THE BOROUGH'S REMOVAL OF THE UNSIGHTLY
CONDITION FROM THE PROPERTY, INCLUDING IMPOSITION OF THE COST AS A
MUNICIPAL LIEN UPON THE PROPERTY.
YOU MAY BE ELIGIBLE FOR REMEDIATION OF COSTS TO COMPLETE REMOVAL FROM THE
FLEMINGTON BOROUGH GRAFFITI TRUST ACCOUNT PROGRAM. YOU MAY CONTACT THE
BOROUGH CLERK FOR MORE INFORMATION OR TO DETERMINE YOUR ELIGIBILITY.
SIGNED: TITLE:
NAMED: DATE:
***
ONCE THE GRAFFITI HAS BEEN REMOVED, YOU MUST SIGN A COPY OF THIS NOTICE
WHERE INDICATED BELOW AND RETURN TO THE MUNICIPAL CLERK OF THE BOROUGH,
NO LATER THAN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE, INDICATING AND
CERTIFYING BY YOUR SIGNATURE THAT THE GRAFFITI HAS BEEN REMOVED, ANY
OBJECTION TO THIS NOTICE MUST BE MADE IN WRITING BY PERSONAL DELIVERY OR
CERTIFIED MAIL WITHIN 30 DAYS OF THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE.
Certification by Property Owner
I hereby certify that the unsightly condition — namely graffiti — at the property indicated
above has been removed. I certify that the foregoing statement made by me is true and
accurate to the best of my knowledge. I am aware that if the foregoing statement made by me
is willfully false, I am subject to punishment. I understand that my signature affixed hereto
shall serve as my certification, which signature shall be the same as making a statement under
oath, and the making of this certification is subject to the same penalties as provided by law
for perjury.
Signed: _________________________________________________
Name: __________________________________________________
Date: ___________________________________________________
a. Parental Responsibility. Any act in violation of the provisions of this
section committed by a minor under the age of 18 years shall be
§ 3-2.6 GENERAL § 3-2.7
1:59
imputed to that minor's parent or legal guardian. A parent or guardian
of a minor who violates any provision shall be liable for payment of any
fines and the expense of restitution.
b. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within 30
days of the date of written notice provided by the Borough to the owner,
or in the case of the Department of Transportation — within 120 days of
the date of written notice, unless an action challenging the notice and
order to remove is still pending before a court of competent
jurisdiction, the Borough shall undertake removal of the graffiti from
the property, and the property owner shall be deemed in violation of
this section and shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $50 to be paid by
the property owner to the Graffiti Trust Account. Thereafter, the
Borough shall present the property owner, by regular and certified mail,
with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the Borough —
which shall include the mandatory fine of $50 — and the Borough shall
direct the property owner to reimburse the costs listed. If the property
owner does not pay the costs within 30 days of the date of notice of
itemized costs, the Borough shall assess the cost of removal as a
municipal lien against the property, after certification thereto to the
taxing authority. Any private property owner subject to this provision
shall be entitled to full restitution for graffiti clean-up costs in the event
the offender who caused the unsightly condition is apprehended and
convicted, in accordance with Subsection c hereof.
c. Any person committing a violation of any provision of § 3-2.3 shall be
punished by:
For a first offense, a mandatory fine of $1,000, plus full monetary
restitution to restore the damaged property to its original, undamaged
condition.
For a second or subsequent offense, a mandatory fine of $2,000, plus
imprisonment for a term of up to 90 days, plus full monetary restitution
to restore the damaged property to its original, undamaged condition.
In all cases, the affected property owner shall establish the cost of
restitution subject to judicial review.
d. Any person committing a violation of any provision of § 3-2.4 shall be
punished by:
A fine of up to $2,000, or imprisonment for a term of up to 90 days,
or both. In lieu of imprisonment, the judge may impose a sentence of
community service of up to 90 days.
Said convicted individual shall also make full monetary restitution to
restore the property to its original undamaged condition. The affected
property owner shall establish the cost of restitution, subject to judicial
review.
§ 3-2.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-2.7
1:60
§ 3-2.8. Reporting.
The chief financial officer shall report annually to the Borough Council
on the status of the Graffiti Trust Account. At the very least, such report
shall include the amount currently in the fund, and the amount allocated to
graffiti remediation of the past year.
§ 3-2.9. Neighboring Municipalities Urged to Adopt Similar
Legislation.
The administrative and legislative branches of this government shall
endeavor to have the municipalities in close territorial proximity with the
Borough of Flemington adopt legislation prohibiting the conduct as set forth
in this chapter.
§ 3-3. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 3-3.1. Definition.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle propelled
otherwise than by muscular power, including vehicles which run upon rails
or tracks, which are found in any public street, highway or lands and either
not bearing current registration plates or, if bearing current registration
plates, remaining stationary and unused on the public street, highway or
lands for more than 14 days consecutively.
§ 3-3.2. Prohibition.
No person shall abandon a motor vehicle upon the public streets, highways
and lands.
§ 3-3.3. Police Department Possession.
All abandoned motor vehicles shall be taken in possession by the police
department and removed to a storage place. The police department shall
then follow the procedures established by R.S. 39:10A to sell the abandoned
motor vehicle at public auction.
§ 3-4. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
§ 3-4.1. Removal of Snow and Ice Required.
Every owner or tenant of any lands adjoining public streets within the
Borough shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of the
street, marked crosswalks and fire hydrants, within 12 hours of daylight
e. Any fines imposed by the municipal court or other agencies authorized
to impose a fine for a violation of this section shall be deposited in the
Graffiti Trust Account to be used for the removal of graffiti from public
structures and for the reward program as provided in § 3-2.5.
§ 3-2.7 GENERAL § 3-4.1
1:61
after the same shall fall, be formed or accumulate on such sidewalks,
marked crosswalks and fire hydrants.
§ 3-4.2. Removal by Borough; Payment for Removal.
When the owner or tenant of any real estate fails to remove snow and
ice from the abutting sidewalks of the street, marked crosswalks and fire
hydrants, it may be removed by the Borough under the direction of the
street department. The official in charge of the street department shall
certify to the Borough Council the cost of the removal. The Borough Council
shall examine such certificate and, if found to be correct, shall charge the
cost against the real estate abutting the sidewalk, marked crosswalks and
fire hydrants, and the amount shall become a lien and tax on the real estate
and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon,
and shall be enforced and collected with interest, in the same manner
as other taxes. The cost of removal shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed for a violation of § 3-4.1.
§ 3-4.3. Placement Upon Street Prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation, shall throw, place or deposit any snow or
ice into or upon any street or marked crosswalk or upon any fire hydrants
wherever located in the Borough of Flemington, it being the intent and
purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting,
shoveling, plowing or depositing snow and ice which has accumulated on
private property within the Borough into or upon streets.
§ 3-4.4. Prohibits Snow Obstruction of Parking Spaces Reserved for
Handicapped Motorists.
§ 3-5. REMOVAL OF GRASS, WEEDS, BRUSH AND OTHER DEBRIS.
a. Any person who owns or controls a parking area which is open to the
public or to which the public is invited and which contains special
parking spaces for the use of persons who have been issued a placard or
wheelchair symbol license plates pursuant to P.L. 1949, C280
(C.39:4-204 et seq.) shall be responsible for assuring that access to
these parking spaces and to curb cuts or other improvements designed
to provide accessibility for handicapped persons is not obstructed.
b. If snow or ice is obstructing the special parking space, curb cut or other
improvement designed to provide accessibility for the handicapped, it
shall be removed within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall, be
formed or accumulate in such spaces, curb cuts or improvements.
c. A person who violates this act shall be liable for a penalty of not less
than $200 or more than $500.
§ 3-4.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-5.1
1:62
§ 3-5.1. Duties of Owners and Tenants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
in the Borough to:
§ 3-6. COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF LEAVES; BURNING
PROHIBITED.
§ 3-6.1. Duties of Owners and Tenants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
in the Borough to collect and remove the leaves in front of their properties.
§ 3-6.2. Notice to Owners or Tenants.
After an investigation of any complaint of a resident, officer or employee of
the Borough relative to a violation of this section, or upon his own motion,
the police chief shall make a written report of the conditions complained
of to the Council at its next regular meeting. If the reported conditions
are found to exist, the Council shall direct the clerk to notify the owner,
tenant or person in possession of the lands complained of, in writing, either
personally or by registered mail, to remove such leaves within ten days after
receipt of the notice. The police chief shall reinspect the lands in question
after the ten day period expires and report, in writing, to the Council at its
next regular meeting whether the condition complained of has been abated
or remedied.
§ 3-6.3. Removal by Borough, Costs Established as a Lien.
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question fails
to abate the condition complained of within ten days after receipt of notice,
the police chief shall cause the condition complained of to be abated and
shall certify the cost to the Council, which shall examine the certificate and,
if it is correct, cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the
lands. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the lands and shall
be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon the lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be
collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation of this
section.
a. Keep all brush, hedges or other plant life, growing within ten feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a
height of not more than three feet where it shall be necessary and
expedient for the preservation of public safety.
b. Keep the lands free of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, where the
same are inimical to the preservation of public health, safety or general
welfare of the Borough, or which may constitute a fire hazard.
§ 3-5.1 GENERAL § 3-6.4
1:63
§ 3-6.4. Burning of Leaves Prohibited.
No person shall burn any leaves within the Borough, on either public or
private property.
§ 3-7. PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
§ 3-7.1. Throwing of Hard or Offensive Objects.
No person shall throw any stone, stick, or other hard or offensive substance,
or shoot any device at, into or upon any street, sidewalk, curb, alley,
highway, park or other public place, quasi-public place or place to which the
public is invited, or into any car, vehicle or private property not his own,
which may cause injury or damage to any person or property using or being
in or upon the same.
§ 3-7.2. Riding Bicycles or Skateboards on Sidewalks.
No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard upon any sidewalk in the
Borough.
§ 3-8. (RESERVED)
§ 3-9. OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
§ 3-9.1. Obstruction Defined.
No person shall obstruct the free and lawful passage of pedestrians and
vehicles on the streets and sidewalks of the city by placing thereon any
goods, wares, merchandise or other articles of trade or sale, or in any other
manner whatsoever.
§ 3-9.2. Exceptions.
This section shall not apply:
§ 3-9.3. Police Powers.
The police department is given full power and authority to prevent
obstructions in violation of this section and to remove any such obstruction
after giving to the owner of the premises abutting the area so obstructed a
reasonable notice to remove the obstruction.
§ 3-10. BICYCLES.
a. Where the obstruction is caused by the loading or unloading of goods,
wares or merchandise to and from vehicles in such a manner as to
cause a minimum of obstruction which is necessary and unavoidable.
b. To receptacles for garbage, ashes or refuse lawfully placed on or in
sidewalk areas for collection.
§ 3-6.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-10.1
1:64
§ 3-10.1. Definitions.
As used in this section the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
§ 3-10.2. Width and Location of Bicycle Routes on Roadways.
When a roadway is designated as a bicycle route, the width and location of
the bicycle route on the roadway shall be four feet in width, measured from
the curb line, or if there be no curb line, four feet from the lateral line of the
roadway, paralleling the right-of-way line.
§ 3-10.3. Bicycle Routes.
The following roadways, sidewalks and paths are hereby designated as
routes for bicycle travel, and as such, they shall be known as bicycle routes:
a. Street or highway the entire width between the boundary lines of a way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
b. Roadway that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
c. Sidewalk that portion of a street or highway intended for the use of
pedestrians, between the curb line or the lateral line of a shoulder, or, if
none, the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent right-of-way line.
d. Bicycle path or paths a way, other than a roadway or sidewalk, that is
designated as a bicycle route in § 3-10.3, or pursuant to § 3-10.4.
e. Vehicle every device in, upon or by which a person or property is, or
may be, transported upon a highway excepting devices moved by
human power.
f. Bicycle a two-wheeled device in, upon or by which a person or property
is or may be transported and that is propelled by human power.
g. Bicycle route a portion of a roadway or a sidewalk or bicycle path that is
designated as a route for bicycle travel, pursuant to sub-section 3-10.3
or 3-10.4.
a. Roadways.
Roadway Side Location
North Main Street South Between Borough line and
Park Avenue.
Park Avenue West Between North Main Street
and Mine Street.
§ 3-10.1 GENERAL § 3-10.3
1:65
§ 3-10.4. Temporary Bicycle Routes.
The common Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate any
other roadway, sidewalk, or path as a temporary bicycle route and may
rescind any such temporary designation.
Roadway Side Location
Capner Street North Between Park Avenue and
Borough line.
Capner Street South Between Borough line and
Park Avenue.
Mine Street South Between Borough line and
Park Avenue.
New Jersey Route 12 North Between South Main Street
and Brown Street.
Central Avenue West Between Mine Street and
Church Street.
Church Street South Between Central Avenue and
the Borough line.
Broad Street East Between Church Street and
Williams Street.
Williams Street South Between Broad Street and
Elwood Avenue.
Elwood Avenue East Between Williams Street and
New Jersey Avenue.
New Jersey Avenue North Between Elwood Avenue and
East Main Street.
Hopewell Avenue North Between East Main Street and
North Main Street.
North Main Street North Between Hopewell Avenue and
the Borough line.
Brown Street Both Between Church Street and
Route 12.
South Main Street Both Between Route 12 and the
Borough line.
b. Sidewalks. None.
c. Paths. None.
§ 3-10.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-10.5
1:66
§ 3-10.5. Signs and Pavement Markings.
Subject to the approval of the State Commissioner of Transportation, where
required, signs shall be installed in connection with bicycle routes as
follows:
§ 3-10.6. Bicycle Operation Regulations.
a. Route Markers. All bicycle routes shall be marked by standard white on
green "Bike Route" marker signs as approved by the National Joint
Committee on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where a private street,
way or path is designated as a bicycle route, the words "Private Street
(or Way), Use At Own Risk" shall be placed below each pertinent route
marker sign. Where a temporary bicycle route is designated pursuant to
§ 3-10.4, the word "Temporary" shall be placed below each pertinent
route marker sign.
b. Cyclist Dismount Signs. A black on white rectangular sign directing
cyclists to dismount shall be installed at such locations along a bicycle
route to temporary bicycle route as the Council may, by resolution from
time to time, direct.
c. Other Cyclist Signs. The common Council may by resolution authorize
the installation along a bicycle route of such other signs addressed to
cyclists as it may deem appropriate.
d. Bicycle Crossing Signs. Standard black on yellow "Bike Xing" warning
signs as approved by the National Joint Committee on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices shall be installed at locations designated by resolution
of the common Council.
e. Pavement Markings. When a portion of a roadway is designated as a
bicycle route, such route shall be marked with a bright paint stripe
approximately six inches in width, which stripe shall be located at its
closest point, four feet from the curb line, or if there be no curb line,
then four feet from the lateral line of the roadway.
a. Keeping to Right, Single File, Passing. Every person operating a bicycle
upon a bicycle route shall ride as near to the right side of the bicycle
route as practicable, exercising due care when passing a stationary
object, or person, or one proceeding in the same direction. Persons
riding bicycles upon a bicycle route shall ride in single file.
b. Signaling when Passing. Every person operating a bicycle upon a
bicycle route shall give reasonable warning by an audible signal before
passing a stationary person or a person proceeding in the same
direction.
c. Dismounting When Required. Every person operating a bicycle upon a
bicycle route shall dismount at such locations posted with "Cyclist
Dismount" signs.
§ 3-10.5 GENERAL § 3-10.7
1:67
§ 3-10.7. Penalty.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of the provisions of § 3-10.6,
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $25.
§ 3-10.8. Effective Date.
The provisions of § 3-10.6 shall become effective as to a particular bicycle
route only when signs and markings shall be installed for such route as
required by the provisions of § 3-10.5.
§ 3-10.9. Interpretation.
Nothing herein shall be construed as dedicating for exclusive use by cyclists
bicycle routes designated over and across roadways.
§ 3-11. PENALTY.
§ 3-11.1. Maximum Penalty.
For violation of any provision of this Code, or any other ordinance of the
Borough of Flemington, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided
in connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both,
or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days at the discretion
of the municipal court judge. (N.J.S.A. 40:49.5)
§ 3-11.2. Separate Violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 3-11.3. Application.
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a
particular case or violation.
§ 3-11.3A. Minimum Penalty.
The Borough Council may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular
Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$100 dollars. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 3-10.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-11.4
1:68
§ 3-11.4. Exceptions.
Any person violating the parking provisions of this revision, or aiding,
abetting or assisting in the violations of these provisions shall upon
conviction before a judge be fined not more than $50 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
The police department may have any vehicle parked in violation of this
chapter towed away at the expense of the owner.
In the event that a vehicle is towed away for illegal parking, it shall be
stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of the
vehicle upon payment of towing costs within 24 hours of the time the vehicle
was removed, plus $5 for each additional 24 hours or fraction thereof that
the vehicle remains in storage. The location of vehicles which have been
towed away may be ascertained by requesting such information from the
Borough police department.
§ 3-12. JUVENILE CURFEW.
§ 3-12.1. Definitions.
§ 3-12.2. Acts Prohibited.
§ 3-12.3. Exceptions.
The prohibitions of § 3-12.2 shall not apply to a juvenile (a) engaged in,
or traveling to or from, a business or occupation which the laws of the
State of New Jersey authorize a juvenile to perform, (b) engaged in errands
involving medical emergencies, or (c) attending extracurricular school
activities, activities sponsored by religious or community based
a. The word juvenile means an individual who is under the age of 18 years.
b. The word guardian means a person, other than a parent, to whom legal
custody of the juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in
the place of the parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the
juvenile.
c. The word public place means any place to which the public has access,
including but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public
transportation facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking
lot or any other public building, structure or area.
a. No juvenile shall be on or in a public place between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless accompanied by the juvenile's parent or
guardian.
b. No parent or guardian of a juvenile shall allow such juvenile to be on or
in a public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless
accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian.
§ 3-11.4 GENERAL § 3-12.3
1:69
organizations or other cultural, educational and social events, or traveling
to or from such activities or events.
§ 3-12.4. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
required to perform community service and may be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000. If both a juvenile and the juvenile's parent or guardian violate this
section, they shall be required to perform community service together.
§ 3-13. WRECKED OR JUNKED VEHICLES.
§ 3-13.1. Definitions.
§ 3-13.2. Acts Prohibited.
No person in charge of or in control of premises within the Borough of
Flemington, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall
allow any vehicle not currently registered by the State of New Jersey, or any
partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating
vehicle to remain on such property; and no person shall leave any such
vehicle on any property within the Borough.
§ 3-13.3. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 3-13.2 shall not apply to:
§ 3-13.4. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500,
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of the provisions of
this ordinance and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken
to be a separate and distinct offense.
a. The word vehicle as used in this section shall mean any device required
to be licensed by the State of New Jersey for operation on the roads and
highways of this State.
b. To garage shall mean the placing of a vehicle in a building, the function
of which is to store vehicles.
a. Persons, corporations or associations who are legally engaged in and/or
licensed to engage in the used car business, the repair of wrecked cars,
or the operation of an automobile junk yard.
b. Vehicles that are properly garaged on the premises.
§ 3-12.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-14
1:70
§ 3-14. GAMES OF CHANCE ON SUNDAY.
Organizations, societies and associations duly licensed to hold and operate
legalized games of chance under the provisions of R.S. 5:8-58 et seq. are
hereby authorized to hold, conduct and operate authorized games of chance
in the Borough of Flemington on Sundays pursuant to R.S. 5:8-58.
§ 3-14.1. Raffle and Bingo Licensing.
The Municipal Clerk of the Borough of Flemington is hereby authorized and
delegated the authority to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses
to be held in the Borough of Flemington.
§ 3-15. OBSCENE MATERIAL.
§ 3-15.1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to regulate the public display by retailers of
obscene materials, where such materials are likely to be viewed by minors,
and thereby control and minimize any adverse effect.
§ 3-15.2. Definitions.
KNOWINGLY — Shall mean:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Shall mean any description, narrative account,
display or depiction of a specified anatomical area, or specified sexual
activity contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other representation, a
publication. A sound, video or other recording, or a film, which by means
of posing, composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality
with the sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or
activity.
RETAILER — Shall mean any person who operates a store, newsstand,
booth, concession or similar business with access for persons under 18
years of age, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or
other publications, films, CDs, DVDs or other recordings at retail containing
pictures, drawings and photographs, whether such sales are either the
primary focus of such business or are an ancillary aspect to such retail
business.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Shall mean:
Having knowledge of the character and content of the material
described herein; or
1.
Having failed to exercise reasonable inspection, which would disclose
its character and content.
2.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
1.
§ 3-14 GENERAL § 3-15.2
1:71
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Shall mean:
§ 3-15.3. Display by Retailers Restricted.
No retailer who operates a store, newsstand, booth, concession or similar
business, with unimpeded access or an unimpeded view of obscene
materials, by persons under 18 years of age, or is in the business of
making sales of periodicals, films, CDs, DVDs or other recordings, or other
publications at retail, shall display or permit to be displayed at its business
premises, any obscene materials at a height of less than five feet and
without a blinder or other covering placed over the material displayed so
as to completely cover any specified anatomical area. The public display of
the obscene material shall constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer
knowingly made or permitted the display.
§ 3-15.4. Violations—Penalty.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be punished either by imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
$500, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each day the violation is
continued shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 3-16. SPECIAL EVENTS.11
§ 3-16.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
Any act of masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviant sexual
intercourse; or
2.
Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
3.
a. "Chief of police" shall mean the chief of police of the Borough of
Flemington.
b. "Special event" shall mean any parade, march, ceremony, show,
demonstration, rally, vigil, exhibition, pageant or procession of any
kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or
other public place in the Borough of Flemington.
c. "Special event permit" shall mean a permit as required by this section.
d. "Person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, group of
two or more people, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
11.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 17-1980,
15-1990 and 2005-31.
§ 3-15.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-16.2
1:72
§ 3-16.2. Permit Required; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No.
2014-20]
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any special
event, unless a special event permit shall have been obtained from the chief
of police.
§ 3-16.3. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No.
2011-15; Ord. No. 2013-19; Ord. No. 2014-20; Ord. No. 2016-8]
A person seeking issuance of a special event permit shall file an application
with the chief of police on forms approved by such officer.
a. This section shall not apply to the following:
1. A governmental agency acting with the scope of its functions; or
2. Any person acting under regulatory or statutory authority.
a. An application for a special event permit shall be filed with the chief of
police not less than 30 days before the event date if the event requires
street closures, otherwise 6 days when no more than 180 days before
the date of the event.
b. The application for a special event permit shall set forth the following
information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the special event;
2. If the special event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or
by an organization of any kind, the name of the organization and of
the authorized and responsible heads of such organization;
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the special event chairman or organizer and, if different, who will
be responsible for the conduct of the special event;
4. The date when the special event is to be conducted;
5. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point or, if the special event is going to be in a fixed location and not
moving, the location where the special event will be held;
6. The approximate number of persons who will constitute or partake
in the special event;
7. If animals will be included in the special event, the specific type of
each animal and whether each is domestic or wild;
8. The number and description of the motor vehicles or any other type
vehicle expected to be used in the special event;
9. The specific times when such special event will start and terminate;
§ 3-16.2 GENERAL § 3-16.3
1:73
§ 3-16.4. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information
as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that it is either (1) for any special
event involving expressive activity protected by the New Jersey Constitution
or United States Constitution and includes less than 25 people, provided
the applicant signs a verified statement that he in good faith believes the
10. A statement as to whether the specific event will occupy all or only
a portion of the width of the sidewalk(s) or street(s) proposed to be
traversed or on which it will be located;
11. The location of the street(s) or any assembly area(s) to be used for
the special event;
12. The time at which units of the special event will begin to assemble
at each such assembly area;
13. The interval of space to be maintained between units of the special
event if the event will be moving;
14. If the special event is designed to be held by, or on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from
the person proposing to hold the special event, authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on its behalf;
15. A statement of the purpose of the special event; and
16. Any additional information which the chief of police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
c. If the special event will use or traverse any State or county road or
highway or be located on any Federal, State or county property within
the Borough of Flemington, the application shall be accompanied by a
written consent or other written authorization to hold such special
event on the date and at the time requested, issued by the public
agency or body having jurisdiction and control over said road, highway
or property. If the event will require the closing of a Borough street, the
application shall be accompanied by a Resolution of Consent adopted by
the Borough Council.
d. When it reasonably appears that the applicant for a special event
permit could not have complied with § 3-16.3 by filing the application
for the special event permit not less than six days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the special event, the chief of police
shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is
filed within such six-day period in the same manner as if it had been
timely filed, provided the applicant sets forth the good faith reasons it
could not timely comply in its written application for the permit.
§ 3-16.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-16.4
1:74
event's purpose involves such expressive activity and will not require the
closure of or substantially block or interfere with the use of a sidewalk,
street, alley or other public right-of-way or other property owned or
controlled by the Borough of Flemington or (2) that:
§ 3-16.5. Denial of Permit. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
If the application is disapproved, the chief of police shall give written notice
thereof to the Borough Clerk and applicant setting forth the reasons for the
denial of the permit.
§ 3-16.6. Notice of Decision. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
The chief of police shall notify the applicant for a special event permit of his
decision on such application within 72 hours of the time that the application
was filed.
a. The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other vehicular or pedestrian traffic
contiguous to its route or location;
b. The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police or fire officers of the Borough of Flemington to
properly police or protect the location or line of movement and the
areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police or fire protection
for the Borough;
c. The conduct of such special event will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service
to portions of the Borough of Flemington, other than that to be
occupied by the location or line of movement and areas contiguous
thereto;
d. The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles at the location or
assembly points of the special event will not unduly interfere with
proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas
contiguous to such location or assembly area(s);
e. The conduct of the special event will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
f. The special event either will not move or is scheduled to move from its
point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays en route; and
g. The special event is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for
private profit.
§ 3-16.4 GENERAL § 3-16.7
1:75
§ 3-16.7. Permit Conditions. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
The chief of police also may condition the issuance of a special event
permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place,
and manner of the event and such requirements as are necessary to protect
the safety of persons and property and the control of traffic, provided such
conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. Such
conditions include the following:
§ 3-16.8. Notice of Permit. [Ord. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, notice thereof
shall be forwarded by the chief of police to the following:
a. Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed in
the event application;
b. Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parade
or other events occurring along a route;
c. Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street;
d. Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;
e. Requirements for provision of first aid or sanitary facilities;
f. Requirements for the use of event monitors and providing notice of
permit conditions to event participants;
g. Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures
at the event and inspection and approval of floats, structures, and
decorated vehicles for fire safety by the Borough of Flemington Fire
Department;
h. Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;
i. Requirements for use of garbage containers and the cleanup and
restoration of Borough of Flemington and/or any other affected
property;
j. Restrictions on use of amplified sound;
k. An application for a special event permit to conduct a block party may
be conditioned on notice and obtaining written approval of 50 percent
of the dwellings along the affected street(s);
l. Compliance with any relevant ordinance or law and obtaining any
legally required permit or license.
a. The Mayor;
b. The clerk of the Borough;
c. The fire chief; and
§ 3-16.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-16.8
1:76
§ 3-16.9. Information Required. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No.
2014-20]
Each permit shall state the following information:
§ 3-16.10. Compliance. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The special event
chairman, organizer or other person heading or leading such activity shall
carry the special event permit upon his person during the conduct of the
special event.
§ 3-16.11. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
§ 3-16.12. Violation; Penalty. [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 3-16.13. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2008-3; Ord. No. 2014-20; repealed
by Ord. No. 2016-8]
d. The director of the department of public works.
a. The starting time and ending time;
b. The minimum speed, if applicable;
c. The maximum speed, if applicable;
d. The maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of
the special event, if applicable;
e. The location of the special event or the portions of the street(s) to be
traversed that may be occupied by the special event;
f. The maximum length of the special event in miles or fractions thereof, if
applicable;
g. Such other information as the chief of police reasonably shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this special events ordinance.
a. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere
with any lawful special event or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a special event.
b. No driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless trolley shall drive between
the vehicles or persons comprising a lawful special event when such
vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a
special event.
§ 3-16.8 GENERAL § 3-17
1:77
§ 3-17. GENERAL CLEAN-UP DAYS.
§ 3-17.1. Definitions.
§ 3-17.2. Establishment of Clean-Up Days.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Flemington may, from
time to time, establish a clean-up day for residents to dispose of clean-up
material at a location to be designated by the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 3-17.3. Disposal of Clean-Up Material.
On clean-up days established pursuant to § 3-17.2 and between the hours
to be established by the Mayor and Borough Council, residents who have
obtained a permit to do so as hereafter provided may dispose of clean-up
material in containers to be provided by the Borough of Flemington.
§ 3-17.4. Permits.
a. The word residents as used herein shall mean and include occupants of
residential dwelling units in the Borough of Flemington.
b. The words clean-up material as used herein shall mean stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, television sets, beds, springs, mattresses,
furniture, lawn mowers, rugs, large toys and items of similar nature and
automobile tires (but not more than two automobile tires per resident
per clean up day). The words "clean-up material" as used herein shall
not mean garbage, ashes, trash, rubbish, grass, yard clippings, shrubs,
branches, newspapers, magazines, aluminum cans, glass, Christmas
trees, leaves, trees, stumps, stones, earth, refuse from building
operations or repairs, construction material, scrap auto parts or
vehicles, garbage in liquid form or toxic or flammable chemicals.
c. The word garbage as used herein shall mean refuse from animal or
vegetable food stuffs, and all petriflable material of any kind incident to
the ordinary conduct of a household.
d. The word ashes as used herein shall mean all residue from stoves,
furnaces and fireplaces used for domestic heating purposes.
e. The words trash and rubbish as used herein shall mean all cans (except
aluminum cans), paper (except newspapers and magazines), plastic,
clothing, small appliances, small toys and other wastes and refuse
usually accumulated in and about a household.
f. The words clean-up day as used herein shall mean a calendar day
designated by the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Flemington during part of which residents may upon procuring a permit
dispose of clean-up material in containers provided by the Borough of
Flemington.
§ 3-17 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-17.4
1:78
§ 3-17.5. Permit Fees.
Fees for each permit shall be as follows:
a. A resident may apply for a clean-up day permit on forms prescribed by
the Mayor and Borough Council.
b. Applications shall be made at Borough Hall, 38 Park Avenue,
Flemington, New Jersey on such days and times, as may from time to
time be established by the Mayor and Borough Council.
c. Each applicant for a permit must present proof of residency in the
Borough of Flemington by way of a drivers license, if such applicant has
a drivers license, a tax bill, residential lease or copies thereof.
d. Each applicant shall set forth on the application a description of the
motor vehicle to be used on clean-up day and the license plate number
thereof.
e. One applicant may obtain more than one permit upon qualification
therefor and upon paying an additional permit fee for each such permit.
One permit entitles the holder thereof to offload a motor vehicle once.
f. All permits shall be in such form prescribed by the Mayor and Borough
Council but in any event, shall bear a permit number, the name and
address of the resident holder thereof, the license plate number and
description of the permitted motor vehicle, permit fee receipt and the
Borough seal.
g. All permits issued shall be surrendered by the holders thereof at the
disposal site.
a. Passenger automobile - $10;
b. Station wagon - $20;
c. Truck - six foot bed - $30;
d. Truck - eight foot bed - $35;
e. Truck with over eight foot but less than twelve foot bed - $75;
f. Truck with over twelve foot bed - $300;
g. Small or midsize van - $30;
h. Full size van - $35.
In addition to the above fees, a separate fee of $3.50 per automobile
tire shall be paid.
Fees once paid are not refundable.
§ 3-17.4 GENERAL § 3-17.6
1:79
§ 3-17.6. Off-Loading at Disposal Site.
Residents shall off-load the clean-up material at the disposal site and
deposit same in such different containers as may be directed.
§ 3-17.7. Prohibitions.
§ 3-17.8. Penalties for Violation.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any
provisions of this section or any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for any term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 3-18. SMOKING REGULATED AT FLEMINGTON BOROUGH
MUNICIPAL, FIRE AND POLICE BUILDING. [Amended 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 3-18.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo,
or pipe.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
§ 3-18.2. Smoking Restrictions.
a. No person shall dispose of clean-up material at the disposal site which
was generated outside the territorial limits of the Borough of
Flemington.
b. No person shall dispose of clean-up material at the disposal site without
first obtaining a permit to do so.
a. The rules and regulations of the New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act,
N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55 et seq., shall be complied with at all times while on
Borough of Flemington property or within Borough of Flemington
buildings, except as otherwise set forth in this section.
b. Smoking is prohibited within all buildings owned, rented or leased by
the Borough of Flemington.
c. Outdoor smoking is prohibited within 25 feet of any entrance to or air
intake duct on any building owned, rented or leased by the Borough of
Flemington, except that this prohibition shall not apply to any private
§ 3-17.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-18.2
1:80
§ 3-18.3. Signs; Posting
The Borough of Flemington Clerk shall place or have placed signs in areas
in which smoking is prohibited, which shall be located so as to be clearly
visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol that contrasts in
color with the sign, indicated that smoking is prohibited in such areas. The
sign also shall indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 3-18.4. Violation; Penalty.
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $250 for the first offense,
$500 for the second offense and $1,000 for each subsequent offense, except
where expressly and exclusively governed by the violations and penalties of
the New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act, N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55 et seq.
§ 3-19. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
§ 3-19.1. Legislative Intent and Purpose.
The purpose of § 3-19 is to require the display of numbers on buildings
to identify them in case of emergency and to assist the general public in
conducting its normal affairs and business.
§ 3-19.2. Establishment of Numbers.
The tax assessor of the Borough of Flemington is hereby authorized to
establish numbers for each lot of land located in the Borough of Flemington
and file maps of all such lots in his office after designating thereon the
number established for each. When establishing lot numbers the assessor
shall give due regard to the need for a logical and uniform sequence of
numbers along the streets and roads in the Borough.
§ 3-19.3. Responsibility of Owner.
The owner of a lot of land located in the Borough of Flemington on which
is located any building or buildings in which people are, or may be present
at any time for any purpose, shall install numbers thereon which shall
correspond to the numbers assigned by the tax assessor pursuant to §
3-19.2.
§ 3-19.4. General Requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to numbers on all buildings:
property within such a twenty-five-foot parameter that is not rented or
leased by the Borough of Flemington.
d. Outdoor smoking is prohibited within any outdoor courtyard or atrium
on any property owned, rented or leased by the Borough of Flemington.
§ 3-18.2 GENERAL § 3-19.4
1:81
§ 3-19.5. Multi-Family Dwellings.
The following additional regulations shall apply to numbers on buildings
containing multiple dwelling units or located in multi-family complexes such
as garden apartment, townhouse and condominium developments:
§ 3-19.6. Compliance Required for Issuance of Certificate of
Occupancy.
No original or continued certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
building to which § 3-19 applies unless same complies with the
requirements of this section.
§ 3-19.7. Enforcement Officer.
Section 3-19 shall be enforced by the fire subcode official, zoning officer and
police department of the Borough of Flemington.
a. The numbers shall be Arabic, no less than three inches in height, and
made of durable, clearly visible material. Roman numerals or script
may be used to supplement the Arabic numbers but not as a substitute
for them.
b. The numbers shall be made of reflective material or of a color which
visibly contrasts with the material to which they are attached so they
are easily discernible during the day or at night with the aid of an
emergency vehicle spotlight.
c. All numbers shall be mounted so they face the street on which the
building fronts.
d. All numbers shall be mounted no less than 30 inches above the level of
the ground.
e. All numbers shall be visible from the street upon which the building
fronts.
f. The numbers shall be maintained by the owner of the lot of land on
which the building is located and shall be and remain unobstructed by
trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
a. Each building shall be identified clearly and the identification shall be
visible from the street upon which the building fronts.
b. If a multi-family complex contains more than one building, each
building shall be clearly titled.
c. Individual dwelling unit numbers shall be posted on the entrance door
to each dwelling unit in a building containing more than one dwelling
unit.
§ 3-19.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-19.8
1:82
§ 3-19.8. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, or sub-paragraph of § 3-19 is declared
to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection, paragraph or
subparagraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs or
subparagraphs of § 3-19.
§ 3-19.9. Penalty.
For violation of any provision of § 3-19, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000, or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both,
or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days at the discretion
of the municipal court judge.
§ 3-19.10. Separate Violations.
Each and every day in which a violation of § 3-19 exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 3-19.11. Repealer.
All sections, subsections, paragraphs or subparagraphs of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Borough of Flemington, 1975 inconsistent or
conflicting with the provisions of § 3-19 hereby adopted are hereby
repealed, but only to the extent of such conflict or inconsistency.
§ 3-19.12. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect immediately after final passage and publication
according to law.
§ 3-20. FIRE LANES.
§ 3-20.1. Legislative Findings and Purpose.
The obstruction of driveways on private property to which the public is
invited or which is devoted to public use prevents proper access for fire and
rescue vehicles, equipment and personnel in the event of an emergency and
is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and welfare. The fire lanes
herein designated are established to insure that fire and rescue vehicles,
equipment and personnel have unobstructed means of ingress, egress and
passage along the fire lanes to and through such properties in case of fire
or other emergency.
§ 3-19.8 GENERAL § 3-20.2
1:83
§ 3-20.2. Fire Lanes Established. [Ord. No. 17-1993 § 1; Ord. No.
19-1998 § 1; Ord. No. 2005-24 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-16]
The portions of property described on Schedule I attached and incorporated
herein by this reference are hereby designated fire lanes.12
§ 3-20.3. Obstruction of Fire Lanes Prohibited.
§ 3-20.4. Jurisdiction.
The police department and the bureau of fire prevention of the Borough of
Flemington shall have concurrent jurisdiction in the enforcement of § 3-20.
§ 3-20.5. Installation of Signs; Painting of Lines.
a. No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle whether
attended or unattended or otherwise obstruct any fire lane.
b. No person who shall own or occupy any property on which is located a
fire lane shall permit or allow any person to park, stop or leave standing
any vehicle whether attended or unattended or otherwise obstruct any
such fire lane.
a. The areas established as fire lanes by this section shall be designated by
signs and pavement markings provided and installed by the owner of
the property upon which each such lane is located.
b. Copies of this section or any amendment thereof requiring the
installation of signs and the painting of fire lanes shall be mailed by
certified mail or personally delivered to the owners of any affected
properties by the police department or bureau of fire prevention of the
Borough of Flemington, and thereafter, said property owners must
install said signs and pavement markings within 45 days of such
service.
c. The owner of property upon which a fire lane is located shall maintain
all signs and pavement markings in good condition and repair at such
owner's sole cost. Such owner shall repair, restore or replace the same
or any of them within 45 days after receipt of written notice to do so
from the police department or bureau of fire prevention of the Borough
of Flemington.
d. In the event of the failure of any property owner to comply with
subsections 3-20.5 a, b or c, the police department or bureau of fire
prevention shall cause the work to be done at the cost of the property
owner. Upon completion of the work, the police department or bureau
of fire prevention of the Borough of Flemington shall certify the cost or
the work to the Borough Council of the Borough of Flemington. Upon
receipt of such certification, the Borough Council shall examine such
12.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found on file in the office of the
Borough clerk attached to Ordinance No. 17-1993, as amended.
§ 3-20.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-20.5
1:84
§ 3-20.6. Standards for Signs Designating Fire Lanes.
Signs designating fire lanes shall be:
§ 3-20.7. Standards for Pavement Markings.
Pavement markings for fire lanes shall be as follows:
certificate, and, if found to be correct, shall charge the cost against the
real estate in question, and the amount shall become a lien and tax on
such real estate and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied
and assessed thereon, and shall be enforced and collected with interest,
in the same manner as other real estate taxes.
e. Nothing contained in Subsection d of § 3-20.5 shall be construed as
preventing the police department or bureau of fire prevention of the
Borough of Flemington from filing complaints in municipal court
against noncomplying property owners.
a. Rectangular with a red message on a white background;
b. Rounded at the corners and have a red border;
c. Not larger than 12 inches by 18 inches with the larger dimension
vertical;
d. Metal;
e. Bear the following message:
NO
PARKING
OR
STANDING
FIRE LANE
f. Reflectorized;
g. Installed to face all directions of traffic flow into and within said lanes,
except when otherwise directed by the police department or bureau of
fire prevention of the Borough of Flemington;
h. Placed along the entire fire lane with a distance between signs of 50
feet;
i. Mounted approximately at right angles to the direction of traffic except
when otherwise directed by the police department or bureau of fire
prevention of the Borough of Flemington; and
j. Installed with the bottom of each sign approximately five feet from the
pavement.
§ 3-20.5 GENERAL § 3-20.7
1:85
§ 3-20.8. Obstruction to Fire Lanes Removed.
Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing in violation of this section shall be
deemed a nuisance and a menace and the police department or bureau of
fire prevention of the Borough of Flemington may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner of such vehicle shall pay the reasonable cost of
removal and storage before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 3-20.9. Maximum Penalty.
For violation of any provision of this section, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000, or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both,
or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days at the discretion
of the municipal court judge.
§ 3-20.10. Separate Violations.
Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this section
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 3-21. NOISE CONTROL.
§ 3-21.1. Prohibited Action.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the following acts:
a. The pavement at the border of such fire lane shall be painted with four
inch yellow lines to delineate the same;
b. The pavement within the fire lane border shall be painted with four inch
diagonal yellow lines with spaces between such lines not greater than
ten feet;
c. The words "No Parking or Standing Fire Lane" shall be painted on the
pavement at major vehicular entrances to said fire lanes and every 100
feet along the entire length of the lanes and at other locations within
the lanes as determined by the police department or the bureau of fire
prevention of the Borough of Flemington;
d. The above words shall be painted in yellow block letters not less than
18 inches high with six inch wide strokes; and
e. Such markings shall be repainted as frequently as needed to maintain
high visibility to vehicular traffic within and near the fire lanes.
a. Sound reproduction systems. Operating, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television, tape player or similar
audio device that reproduces amplified sound in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary
or between individual residential dwelling units as defined by § 16-4
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 3-20.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-21.1
1:86
§ 3-21.2. Noise Disturbance Defined.
Noise disturbance is defined as any sound of any kind described in §
3-21.1 which is clearly audible to a person of average hearing across a
residential real property line or between individual residential dwelling
units as defined by § 16-4 from the source of the noise.
§ 3-21.3. Penalty.
Violation of this section shall be penalized as provided in § 3-11 of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 3-22. SALE AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS.
§ 3-22.1. Prohibition of Tobacco Sales to Minors.
§ 3-22.2. Identification Required.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell or permit to be sold any
tobacco product to any individual without first requesting and examining
identification from the purchaser positively establishing the purchaser's age
as 18 years or greater, unless the seller has some other conclusive basis for
determining the buyer is over the age of 18 years.
b. Loudspeaker/public address system. Using or operating of any
loudspeaker, public address system or similar device between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, such that the sound
therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property
line or between individual residential dwelling units as defined by §
16-4.
a. It shall be unlawful to sell a tobacco product to a minor, that is, a person
under 18 years of age.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase a tobacco product (a)
with funds furnished by a minor or (b) with the intent to sell such a
product to a minor.
c. Sign requirement. The following six inch by eight inch sign shall be
posted in a conspicuous place near each cash register in all retail
establishments which sell tobacco products:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 18
OR SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES BY MINORS IS PROHIBITED BY
LAW. Legal proof of age must be shown. A person who sells or offers
to sell a tobacco product to a person under 18 years of age may be
prosecuted in accordance with State Statutes and Flemington Borough
ordinances.
§ 3-21.1 GENERAL § 3-22.3
1:87
§ 3-22.3. Prohibition of Tobacco Vending Machines and Tobacco
Vending Machine Sales.
In view of the indiscriminate sales of tobacco products to minors through
tobacco vending machines, all tobacco vending machines are hereby
prohibited in the Borough of Flemington. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, corporation or association to possess, own, operate, rent or permit
the use of, or operation of, a tobacco vending machine, in, on, or about the
premises under his or her ownership, control or management, or to sell, or
offer to sell, any tobacco product through a tobacco vending machine in the
Borough of Flemington.
§ 3-22.4. Prohibition of Minors Using Tobacco Products in a Public
Pace.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to smoke a tobacco
product in and/or on any public place, or to possess in open view, an opened
pack, opened carton or other opened container (as evidenced by a broken
seal) holding a tobacco product in any public place unless in the presence
of his/her parent/guardian; with no expiration date.
§ 3-22.5. Definitions.
§ 3-22.6. Enforcement.
a. Board of health shall mean the Flemington Borough Board of Health
and may be referred to in this section as the "board of health",
"department" or "board".
b. Health officer shall mean the health officer of the Borough of
Flemington, and/or his or her authorized representative.
c. Retail establishment shall mean any place or business that sells to the
public at retail.
d. Tobacco vending machine shall mean any mechanical, electrical or
electronic self-service device, which, upon insertion of monies, tokens
or any other form of payment, dispense tobacco or tobacco products,
either exclusively or as one kind of an available item.
e. Tobacco product shall mean any product made from the tobacco plant
or containing tobacco leaf, for the purpose of smoking, chewing,
inhaling or other personal use, including but not limited to, cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff and dipping tobacco.
f. Public place shall mean any building or enclosed structure open to the
general public, and any street, road, sidewalk, walkway, park or open
space located within the Borough and maintained for use by the general
public.
a. Whenever the health officer, or his or her designee, or a police officer of
the Borough of Flemington reasonably believes there exists a violation
§ 3-22.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-22.6
1:88
§ 3-22.7. Validity and Severability.
§ 3-22.8. Penalties.
of this section, such officer may issue a summons and complaint not
later than 90 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The
complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable particularity
the nature of the violation, including reference to the subsection
alleged to have been violated. The complaint shall be delivered
personally or sent via certified mail to the alleged violator.
b. The health officer, his/her designee or a police officer of the Borough of
Flemington, after giving proper identification, and if no search or other
warrant is required by law, may summarily inspect any matter, thing,
premises, place, person, record, incident or event as necessary to
enforce the provisions of this section.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, or
otherwise act to interfere with or obstruct the health officer or his/her
designee or any police officer in the performance of duties under this
section. The health officer or designee may request the assistance of
the Flemington Borough Police Department when necessary to execute
his or her official duty in the manner prescribed by law.
d. Citizens may bring complaints for violation of this section.
a. If the provision of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, application or clause shall be judged invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, this order or judgment shall not effect or
invalidate the remainder of any such article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision, application or clause, and, to this end, the
provisions of the section are hereby declared severable.
b. This section shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety, and welfare of the people of the Borough of Flemington,
Hunterdon County, State of New Jersey.
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof,
pay a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500 for each offense. The
complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Flemington or before such other judicial officer having authority under
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
b. Each day of possession or use of a tobacco vending machine shall
constitute a separate violation of this section.
c. The board of health may suspend the retail food establishment license
of any person convicted of a violation of this section, for a period of not
more than three days, pursuant to the authority of the health
commission to license and regulate establishments as provided by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(c).
§ 3-22.6 GENERAL § 3-22.8
1:89
§ 3-22.9. Expiration of Subsection 3-22.4.
Subsection 3-22.4 shall no longer have any expiration date.
§ 3-23. SOLICITATION BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
A charitable organization, as such term is defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20, may
be permitted to solicit contributions in a public roadway or highway to the
extent permitted by, and subject to the restrictions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as
amended by Chapter 82 of the laws of 1996.
§ 3-23.1. Application.
§ 3-23.2. Approval.
§ 3-24. RESISTING ARREST.
d. Notwithstanding Subsection a above, for violations of § 3-22.4 of this
section, the penalties shall be as determined pursuant to the Code of
Juvenile Justice, particularly N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-43b.
a. A charitable organization shall file a written application with the chief
of police not less than six days nor more than 45 days before the date on
which is proposed to conduct the solicitation.
b. The written application shall set forth the following information:
1. The name of the charitable organization along with proof of the
applicant's status as a charitable organization.
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for the solicitation.
3. The date of the solicitation.
4. The hours of the solicitation.
5. The place of the solicitation.
6. Any additional information which the chief of police shall find
reasonably necessary such as certificate of insurance.
7. If the solicitation will use any State or county road within the
Borough of Flemington, the application shall be accompanied by a
written consent or other written authorization to hold such
solicitation on the date and time requested, issued by the public
agency or body having the jurisdiction and control of said road or
highway.
a. The application shall be approved unless the chief of police finds, and
the Mayor and the Council concur, that the time and/or place of such
solicitation will cause a significant disruption or hindrance of traffic
flow of the vehicles or pedestrians in the Borough.
§ 3-22.8 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-24.1
1:90
§ 3-24.1. Resisting Arrest Unlawful.
No person shall take any action to hinder a member of the Borough of
Flemington Police Department or any other law enforcement officer from
effecting a lawful arrest. It is not a defense to a prosecution under this §
3-24 that the arresting officer was acting unlawfully in making the arrest,
provided that he was acting under color of his official authority.
§ 3-24.2. Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating this § 3-24 shall be subject to a penalty in accordance
with § 3-11 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of
Flemington.
§ 3-25. POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
BY PERSON UNDER LEGAL AGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 3-25.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the enforcement of P.L. 2000,
c.33 by local ordinance.
§ 3-25.2. Definitions.
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underaged person's grandparent, aunt or
uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 3-25.3. Prohibited Activity; Penalties; Exceptions.
a. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses without legal authority or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished
by a fine of $250 for the first offense and $350 for any subsequent
offense. The court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this
offense, suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
defendant.
b. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement
of that person's driving license, the court shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to
this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is
less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including
a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
§ 3-24.1 GENERAL § 3-25.3
1:91
§ 3-26. SMOKING REGULATIONS AT PUBLIC GATHERINGS AND IN
WORKPLACES.
c. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
d. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in R.S. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of R.S. 39:3-40.
e. The court, shall, with respect to any person convicted under this section
who is not a New Jersey resident, suspend or postpone, as appropriate,
the nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall
not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
f. This section does not prohibit an underaged person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
g. This section does not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment
by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school; or post-secondary educational institution; however, no
ordinance enacted pursuant to this section shall be construed to
preclude the imposition of a penalty under this section, R.S. 33:1-81, or
any other section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful
alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-25.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-26.1
1:92
§ 3-26.1. Smoking Prohibition Applicable to Public Gatherings.
It shall be unlawful to fail to extinguish upon request a lighted cigar,
cigarette or pipe or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco, in
or at any of the following:
§ 3-26.2. Smoking Prohibition Applicable to Workplaces.
It shall be unlawful to smoke, which is defined as burning a lighted cigar,
cigarette or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco, in all
workplaces with the following exceptions:
§ 3-26.3. Posting of Signs.
Notice of the prohibitions contained in this section shall be conspicuously
posted in parks owned by the Borough, areas permitted above to be
designated as nonsmoking and all nonexempt workplaces stated "Smoking
Prohibited," or the appropriate "Smoking Prohibited" international symbol,
and shall reference § 3-26. The sign shall be a minimum of six inches by
eight inches and shall indicate that violators are subject to a fine. The letters
or symbols shall contrast in color with the sign.
§ 3-26.4. Violation and Penalties.
Any person or entity who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $25.
§ 3-27. DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR
DRUGS.
a. Any park owned by the Borough of Flemington. This section shall not
apply to any private event or gathering held by any person, organization
or entity that only is for its members and their invited guests; and
b. Any event or gathering requiring a permit under § 3-16 titled "Parades"
is required to designate a nonsmoking area. The chief of police, under
the authority of § 3-16, may waive the provision of this section based on
compelling logistical reasons that a nonsmoking section is not
applicable to the permit.
c. Signs designating the "nonsmoking section" will be placed by the
department of public works under the direction of the chief of police in
coordination with the permit.
a. Restaurants and bars;
b. Any place of business in which all employees are members of the same
family; and
c. Any workplace that provides a separate, ventilated area that will
protect all nonsmokers from exposure to second-hand smoke.
§ 3-26.1 GENERAL § 3-27.1
1:93
§ 3-27.1. Detention of Person Arrested for Driving Under the
Influence.
§ 3-27.2. Impounding Vehicles.
a. A person who is arrested for a violation of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-50 shall be held in protective custody at an appropriate police or
other facility where the arrestee's condition may be monitored until the
arrestee is no longer a danger to himself or others, which is defined as
when the arrestee's blood alcohol is less than 0.05% and the arrestee is
no longer under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or narcotic or
hallucinogenic or habit-forming drug to the extent that the arrestee's
facilities are impaired. The officer or other person holding the arrestee
shall release the arrestee from protective custody when the arrestee no
longer is in a danger to himself or others. In no event shall the arrestee
be held in protective custody for a period of longer than eight hours
without providing the arrestee an appropriate hearing.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 3-27.1a, provided that it is not a
detriment to the public safety, the officer or other person holding the
arrestee may, because of the age, health or safety of the arrestee,
release the arrestee pursuant to the provisions of § 3-27.1d, or provide
an appropriate alternative to protective custody. The Borough of
Flemington shall not be subject to liability if a person is released from
custody pursuant to the provisions of this section.
c. For the purposes of this section, an appropriate facility shall include a
police station, the Hunterdon County Jail or, if the arresting officer
deems appropriate, a school or hospital that has supervisory measures
in place to ensure that the arrestee will not be released until such time
as the arrestee is no longer a danger to himself or others as defined in §
3-27.1a.
d. Whenever a person is summoned by or on behalf of a person who has
been arrested for a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 or N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.4a in
order to transport or accompany the arrestee from the premises of the
officer or other person holding an arrestee, the officer or other person
shall provide that person with a written statement advising him of his
potential criminal and civil liability for permitting or facilitating the
arrestee's operation of a motor vehicle while the arrestee remains
intoxicated. The person to whom the statement is issued shall
acknowledge, in writing, receipt of the statement, or the officer or other
person holding the arrestee shall record the fact that the written
statement was provided, but the person refused to sign an
acknowledgement.
e. Nothing in this section shall impose any obligation on a physician or
other health care provider involved in the treatment or evaluation of the
arrestee.
§ 3-27.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-27.2
1:94
§ 3-28. TOWING.
§ 3-28.1. Title. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No. 2014-10]
This section will be known as the "Towing Ordinance of the Borough Of
Flemington."
a. Whenever a person has been arrested for a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50
or N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.4a, the Flemington Police Department shall impound
the vehicle that the person was operating at the time of arrest.
b. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be impounded for a
period of 12 hours after the time of arrest or until such later time as the
arrestee claiming the vehicle meets the conditions for release in §
3-27.2d.
c. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section may be released to a
person other than the arrestee prior to the end of the impoundment
period only if:
1. The vehicle is not owned or leased by the person under arrest and
the person who owns or leases the vehicle claims the vehicle and
meets the conditions for release in § 3-27.2d of this section, or;
2. The vehicle is owned or leased by the arrestee, the arrestee gives
permission to another person, who has acknowledged in writing
receipt of the statement required in N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22(1) to
operate the vehicle and the conditions for release in § 3-27.2d are
met.
d. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall not be released
unless the person claiming the vehicle:
1. Presents a valid operator's license, proof of ownership or lawful
authority to operate the motor vehicle, and proof of valid motor
vehicle insurance for that vehicle.
2. Is able to operate the vehicle in a safe manner and would not be in
violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes; and
3. Meets any other conditions for release established by the
Flemington Police Department.
e. A towing company authorized by the Flemington Police Department to
impound a vehicle pursuant to this section can charge a fee for the
towing and for the storage of the vehicle as provided in the schedule of
fees maintained by the Flemington Police Department. The towing
company is further authorized to retain custody of the vehicle until
those fees are paid and the Flemington Police Department authorizes
the release of the vehicle.
§ 3-27.2 GENERAL § 3-28.2
1:95
§ 3-28.2. Purpose and Scope. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No. 2014-10]
The purpose of the section is to establish towing and storage fee schedules
for towing motor vehicles that are Police Impounded, damaged in accident
and disabled.
This ordinance shall apply to all companies that will be licensed to provide
towing and storage for motor vehicles.
In order to protect persons who operate motor vehicles inside the Borough,
to ensure the proper licensing, storage, availability and other controls over
person and companies licensed to provide a rotating towing service.
§ 3-28.3. Application for Towing License. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No.
2014-10]
Any company interested in towing for the Borough of Flemington shall pick
up an application from Police Headquarters. All companies shall submit the
application for a towing license and return it to the Chief of Police or his
designee. This application will consist of name of the company or trade
name, business owner information such as name, business address, contact
phone numbers, size of storage lot, security features and location where
customer will come and claim stored vehicles. Also storage lots must be
zoned in accordance to the Borough for storage of vehicle and equipment.
Company will also provide a service on a twenty-four hours a day basis each
day of the year. Photos of all the equipment and storage facilities will be
forwarded with the application. Complete listing of the insurance policies,
carriers and agents the owner would place into effect upon license approval.
A statement that the towing company / owner indemnify and hold harmless
the Borough in the event that any claim or recovery is made against the
Borough arising out of the towing and storage of vehicles. Upon completion
of the application and investigation of the application the Chief of Police
or his designee will forward a copy of the application to the Borough of
Flemington Council along with a letter of recommendation for approval
or disapproval of the license with the reasons if any. Once found to be
approved a payment for the towing license for a fee of one hundred fifty
($150) dollars will be made to the Borough and a license will be issued to
the applicant. Along with that the applicant will placed at the end of the
towing list. All licenses shall expire on December 31 annually. The license is
nontransferable or assignable.
§ 3-28.4. Insurance. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No. 2014-10]
Garage keeper's policy. A garage keeper's liability policy in the minimum
amount of $100,00 for each vehicle damaged on a separate claim.
Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy covering the applicant's
business, equipment and vehicles in the minimum amount of $ 500,000 for
any one person injured or killed, and a minimum of $ 1,000,000 for more
than one person killed or injured in any accident and an additional $ 100,00
for any damage arising from injury or destruction to property, and/or a
§ 3-28.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-28.4
1:96
combined single limit of $ 1,000,000. In addition to each policy containing
an endorsement showing the Borough as additionally insured, such policy
shall also provide an endorsement entitling the Borough to 30 days prior
written notice to the Chief of Police or his designee in the event of any
change to coverage under the policy, or in the event of the cancellation of
the policy.
Workers' compensation policy. A workers' compensation policy covering all
of the applicant's employees and operators, containing statutory coverage
including liability coverage of at least $ 100,000 for each accident per
person, $ 500,000 policy aggregate limit per disease, and $ 100,000 for
each disease per person.
§ 3-28.5. Standards of Operator Performance. [Ord. No. 2013-1;
Ord. No. 2014-10]
All operators of the licensed towing company who have entered into
contracts with the Borough shall be obligated to comply with the following
duties.
Remove and tow to the designated storage facility all vehicles directed by
the Borough of Flemington to be removed and towed because such vehicles
are designated as abandoned, illegally parked, disabled, involved in an
accident, or to be impounded.
Store such vehicles in a fenced in lot with motion lights or a lot with security
cameras and motion lights and move such vehicles as directed by Borough
of Flemington.
Provide twenty-four hour, seven-days a week service to the Borough during
the terms of the contract.
Respond promptly to all requests for towing service. In any event, the
wrecker shall respond and be present at the location for service in 15
minutes of receipt of notice of the towing requirement between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (daytime), and within 25 minutes of receipt of notice
between the hours of 7:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. (nighttime). In the event a
wrecker does not arrive at the call for service within the above time periods,
the police officer on scene shall have the right to have the next company on
the rotation called to the location who will then have the right to perform
the service. The original company contacted shall have no right to payment
from any party.
Clean up all broken glass, debris and fluid spill at the scene of accidents,
which work may be billed to the vehicle owner.
Furnish additional towing equipment and services during storm periods of
snow emergencies, traffic emergencies and natural disasters.
Records of all vehicles towed by the Borough of Flemington along with a
report of personal property found with the vehicle and an accounting of all
§ 3-28.4 GENERAL § 3-28.5
1:97
monies received for fees for towing. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
have access upon request to any and all invoices and records required.
In all of the wrecker's dealings with the public, the wrecker operator/owner
shall act in a professional manor, courteous at all times and respectful to
the public, as well as representative of the Borough.
The wrecker, not driven, must tow all vehicles from their location.
The towing company must have a permanent place of business.
The towing company shall also accept payment in either cash or a valid
major credit card.
§ 3-28.6. Towing and Storage Rate Schedule. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord.
No. 2014-10]
The Chief of Police or his designee shall recommend to the Borough Council
rate schedules for storage of vehicles at the wreckers storage location
approved by the Borough of Flemington. Each year the towing and storage
rates will be provided to the towing company along with the license.
§ 3-28.7. Solicitation. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No. 2014-10]
No towing company, whether licensed or unlicensed by the Borough, shall
respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the purposes of
towing a vehicle unless specifically notified by the Borough of Flemington or
the individual involved in the accident or emergency. As long as the officer
on scene deems it's safe to wait for another company requested by the
owner of the vehicle. The duty wrecker, to allow traffic to continue will only
remove vehicles blocking traffic as a result of accidents or emergencies.
Vendor will also not assign calls to other towing companies to complete a
service call.
§ 3-28.8. Light Duty Requirements. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No.
2014-10]
Vendor must present for service one truck, consisting of one flatbed, which
meet the following minimum requirements:
a. 10,000 pounds GVWR minimum commercially manufactured
b. Dual rear wheels
c. 3,000 pounds minimum wheel lift capacity
d. 8,000 pounds minimum winch capacity
e. Vehicle manufacture serial place must be legible for inspection
f. 3/8" x 100' winch cable
g. (2) Safety chains 3/8" x 10" with a minimum of grade 7
§ 3-28.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-28.8
1:98
§ 3-28.9. Heavy Duty Requirements. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No.
2014-10]
Heavy Duty / Service vendors shall tow any vehicle that is over 10,000
pounds GVWR.
h. Wheel lift safety straps
i. Motorcycle towing equipment
j. Amber Emergency lights (with a valid permit from the State of New
Jersey)
k. Two work lights rear facing
l. Jumper box
m. Flashlight, Fire extinguisher, first aid kit, one box Traffic Triangles
n. 5 gallon US dot approved gas can
o. Lug wrench / jack
p. Broom & shovel speedy dry
q. Traffic Vest min class 2 ANSI 1999 or above
r. 17' or longer hydraulically operated 8,000 lb. bed
s. (2) Tire Skates and (4) point tie down straps
t. Must comply with all laws of the State of New Jersey and all Federal
laws, including but not limited to the inspection requirements set forth
in 49 C.F.R. 396 and other applicable regulations of the United States
Department of Transportation ("US DOT") and the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration ("FMCSA") set forth at 49 C.F.R. 105, et
seq.
a. (2) 33,000 pounds GVWR minimum commercially manufactured
chassis, hydraulic with a boom and under reach
b. Air brakes
c. One truck with a minimum towing capacity of 80,000 pounds
d. 5/8" x 200' cable
e. (2) Safety chains 1/2 x 8' alloy
f. (4) Winching chains 1/2 x 8' alloy
g. (4) Chain Binders
h. (2) Recovery Straps 6" x 20' or longer
i. Axle lift safety straps or equivalent retention device
§ 3-28.8 GENERAL § 3-28.9
1:99
§ 3-28.10. Rotation/Limits. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No. 2014-10]
The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to establish a system
of rotation for the assignment of the licensed and contracted towers. The
rotation shall be established on a nondiscriminatory and nonexclusionary
basis. Only licensed towing companies will be added to the list after the
license and the investigation and inspection of vehicles and storage facility
are complete. The Chief of Police or his designee will authorize additional
towing companies as deemed needed to the rotation.
§ 3-28.11. Suspensions/Terminations/Appeals. [Ord. No. 2013-1;
Ord. No. 2014-10]
The Chief of Police or his designee are empowered to take the following
actions:
j. (2) 12 ton Snatch Blocks
k. Amber lights ([with a valid permit from the State of New Jersey)
l. Two work lights rear facing
m. Assortment of wood blocks and boards
n. Assortment of tools
o. Tow light bar or magnetic tow lights
p. Hydraulic bottle jack
q. Flashlight, Fire extinguisher and first aid kit
r. Broom & Shovel
s. (1) Air cushion recovery system with air pump, lifting capacity of
100,000 pounds
t. Semi-tractor with fifth wheel or wrecker with fifth wheel attachment
u. Must comply with all laws of the State of New Jersey and all Federal
laws, including but not limited to the inspection requirements set forth
in 49 C.F.R. 396 and other applicable regulations of the United States
Department of Transportation ("US DOT") and the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration ("FMCSA") set forth at 49 C.F.R. 105, et
seq.
a. Vendors may be removed or suspended from the towing list for three
failures to respond in a timely basis, failure to demonstrate the skills
necessary to perform towing and recovery in a safe, prompt and
efficient manner, or excessive, unresolved customer complaints.
b. Termination may occur if the application is fraudulent, the owner's
insurance is canceled, or if there is evidence indicating a pattern of
§ 3-28.9 FLEMINGTON CODE § 3-28.11
1:100
§ 3-28.12. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No. 2014-10]
§ 3-28.13. Fees. [Ord. No. 2013-1; Ord. No. 2014-10]
The regulations and fee schedules of individual towers shall be available to
the public during normal business hours of the municipality.
consumers fraud or and serious violation as determined by the Borough
of Flemington or the Chief of Police or his designee.
c. Vendor should be able to appeal any disciplinary actions against them
to the Chief of Police or his designee. If not satisfied with the Chief of
Police or his designee an appeal will be made with the Borough of
Flemington.
d. Any equipment violations by State, US DOT or FMCSA will be
suspended until all violations are corrected.
a. Applicant shall submit to inspection of storage facility and vehicles.
b. Vendors shall submit to at least one annual inspection.
c. Inspections shall include records of tows, employees and proof of
insurance.
d. Random inspections.
a. Light Duty Towing Fees.
1. Light Duty Towing Under 10,000 pounds GVW Monday -Friday 8:00
a.m.- 5:00 p.m.
2. $90 hook up and $4 loaded mile.
3. Light Duty Towing Under 10,000 pounds GVW Nights Weekends
and Holidays.
4. $105 hook up and $4 loaded mile.
5. Light Duty Recovery of a vehicle will be $150 per hr minimum of 2
hrs.
b. Light Duty Storage Fees.
1. Outside Secured storage $30 per 24 hr. period.
2. Inside Secured storage $50 per 24 hr. period.
c. Medium and Heavy Duty Towing Fees.
1. Medium Duty Towing 10,000-25,999 pounds GVW Monday - Friday
8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
$200 hook up and $7 loaded mile.
§ 3-28.11 GENERAL § 3-28.13
1:101
Chapter 4
LICENSING — GENERAL
§ 4-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 4-1.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued by
the Borough, except alcoholic beverage licenses and dog licenses.
§ 4-1.2. Application; Fee.
An application for a license shall be accompanied by the required fee and
shall be made to the Borough Clerk upon forms provided by him. It shall
contain the following information.
2. Medium Duty Towing 10,000-25,999 pounds GVW Nights
Weekends and Holidays
$250 hook up and $7 loaded mile.
3. Heavy Duty Towing 26,000-80,000 pounds GVW Monday - Friday
8am-5pm
$250 hook up and $8 loaded mile.
4. Heavy Duty Towing 26,000-80,000 pounds GVW Nights Weekends
and Holidays
$300 hook up and $8 loaded mile.
5. Hourly rate for medium and heavy duty to be set by each towing
company and be provided to the Chief of Police or his designee
minimum of 2 hrs per recovery.
6. Does not include removing axles, drive shafts, air lines or any other
required equipment to transport the vehicle, addition charges will
apply.
d. Medium and Heavy Duty Storage Fees.
1. Tractor or Straight truck Outside Storage $60 per 24 hr. period.
2. Tractor and trailer Outside Storage $80 per 24 hr. period.
a. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
b. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
§ 3-28.13 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-1.2
1:102
§ 4-1.3. Investigation of Applicant.
Each application shall be referred to the chief of police or a police officer
designated by him, who shall immediately institute whatever investigation
he considers necessary for the protection of the public concerning the
applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to properly
conduct the licensed activity. He shall report his findings in writing to
the clerk within a reasonable time after the application has been filed. If
the investigator decides that the applicant's character, ability or business
responsibility is unsatisfactory, or the products, services or activity are not
free from fraud, he shall disapprove the application, and the clerk shall
refuse to issue the license and so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the clerk
shall issue the license immediately, provided the required license fee has
been paid and except in cases where approval of the Council is required. In
the case of an application for a solicitor's, peddler's or canvasser's license,
the license may be issued immediately subject to investigation. In the event
of the disapproval of a license, the applicant may appeal to the Council
c. If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license number.
d. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
e. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
f. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold or supplied.
g. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.
h. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
The applicant shall be fingerprinted if necessary for proper
identification. Fingerprint records shall be immediately processed for
classification and identification.
Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this subsection supplied in detail as to each
partner. Applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all the information required by this subsection
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
The application shall be accompanied by two photographs, not over one
year old and of a minimum size of 1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2 inches, showing
the applicant's face, front and profile.
§ 4-1.2 GENERAL § 4-1.3
1:103
for hearing. The appeal must be filed in writing with the clerk within 14
days after notification of the disapproval. The Council shall hold its hearing
within ten days thereafter, and its decision shall be final.
§ 4-1.4. Contents of License.
The license shall be in a form which the Council shall prescribe by
resolution, and shall contain the following information.
§ 4-1.5. License Record.
The clerk shall keep a record of each license issued under this chapter, in
such form as the Council shall prescribe by resolution, and which contains
the same information as is contained in the license. It shall also indicate
the amount and date of payment of the license fee, the date of issuance,
whether it is a new license or a renewal, and any other information which
the Council may require by resolution.
§ 4-1.6. Display of License.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In any other case the licensee shall have the license in his possession at all
times and display it upon the request of any police officer or any person with
whom he is doing business.
§ 4-1.7. Transferability.
A license shall apply only to the person to whom it is issued and shall not be
transferable to another person. A license may be transferred from place to
place where the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, but only
with the approval of the Council by resolution. The fee for the transfer of a
license from place to place shall be $5.00.
§ 4-1.8. Expiration Date; Renewal; Proration of Fees.
a. The name and address of the licensee.
b. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
c. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
d. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
e. The expiration date of the license.
f. Any other appropriate information which the Council may require by
resolution.
§ 4-1.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-1.8
1:104
§ 4-1.9. Revocation of License; Causes.
Any license or permit issued by the Borough may be revoked by the Council
after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes.
§ 4-1.10. Notice of Hearing.
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the grounds
upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and place of the
hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at his last known
address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five days prior
to the date set for the hearing.
§ 4-1.11. Hearing; Determination.
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own behalf, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses, and to have a permanent record made
of the proceedings at his own expense. The Council shall revoke or suspend
the license if it is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the
licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
a. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for
renewal shall be made not later than December 1 of the year of issue.
b. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any
period of time greater than one half a month shall be considered a full
month for this purpose.
a. Fraud or misrepresentation in an application for a permit or license.
b. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
c. A violation of any provision of this revision.
d. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
e. Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee himself or his
agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
f. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon application,
pending the results of the required investigation, such license may be
summarily revoked if the result of the investigation is such as would
have resulted in disapproval of the application.
§ 4-1.8 GENERAL § 4-1.12
1:105
§ 4-1.12. Reinstatement of Revoked License.
The Council may issue another license to a person whose license has been
revoked or denied if after hearing it is satisfied by clear and convincing
evidence that the acts which led to the revocation or denial will not occur
again. Otherwise, no person whose license has been revoked or denied, nor
any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be issued another
license to carry on the same activity.
§ 4-1.13. Power To Make Rules and Regulations.
The Council may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of administering
or making more effective the provisions of this chapter. No regulation shall
be inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this chapter, and no
regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater
than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any
provision of this chapter.
§ 4-2. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT VENDORS.13
§ 4-2.1. Policy and Purpose.
The practice of hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants or itinerant vendors
going uninvited upon and into private dwelling units or of solicitors
telephoning people in dwelling units without invitation constitutes an
annoyance and danger to the people and is fraught with the opportunity to
commit fraud or other crime. In addition, it is in the best interest, safety and
welfare of the residents of Flemington to provide for traffic and pedestrian
safety by regulating the use of public streets, sidewalks, right-of-ways and
other public property and property adjacent thereto by hawkers, peddlers,
transient merchants and itinerant vendors.
§ 4-2.2. Definitions.
a. Hawk or hawker shall refer to the sale or offering for sale of goods or
merchandise from a cart, wagon, vehicle or conveyance of any kind
from or on the streets of the Borough of Flemington.
b. Peddler shall mean the offering of goods or merchandise for sale from
door to door in the Borough of Flemington.
c. Solicitor shall mean the offering of goods or merchandise for sale from
door to door by the use of samples with the actual product to be
supplied in the future or the promise to perform any service or supply
any goods or merchandise in the future with or without the use of
samples.
13.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinances Nos. 5/29/32 and
2-1964.
§ 4-1.12 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-2.2
1:106
§ 4-2.3. Exemptions.
This section shall not apply to:
§ 4-2.4. Services in the Future.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, solicitor or transient merchant
or itinerant vendor to sell or dispose of, or offer to sell or dispose of, any
goods, wares, merchandise, or service to be rendered in the future, or to
take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise or services to be rendered
or delivered in the future within the Borough of Flemington without first
obtaining a license therefor.
§ 4-2.5. Hours.
No person shall hawk, peddle or solicit except between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, inclusive and 10:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. on Saturday, and then only after having filed an application and
bond and receiving a license. No person shall solicit by telephone at any
time.
§ 4-2.6. License.
No person, firm, corporation, or organization shall solicit, hawk, or peddle
without first having filed the required bond and having obtained a license.
Written application for such license or permit shall be made to the Borough
Clerk and shall show: (1) The name of the applicant and of all persons
associated with him/her in his/her business; (2) the type of business for
which the license is desired; (3) in case of transient merchants, the place
where the business is to be carried on; (4) the length of time for which said
d. Transient merchants or itinerant vendors shall mean persons,
corporations or partnerships who engage in a merchandising business
in New Jersey with the intent to close out or discontinue such business
in Flemington Borough within one year from date of commencement
including those who, for the purpose of carrying out such business,
hire, lease or occupy any building or structure for the exhibition and
sale of goods.
a. The licensing requirements of this section shall not apply to all veterans
who receive an honorable discharge based upon N.J.S.A. 45:23-9.
b. Any person soliciting a vote or support for any political candidate or
program.
c. Any person soliciting for a bonafide charitable, religious, patriotic
community service or philanthropic purposes or organization.
d. Any person engaged in delivering wares, goods, merchandise or other
articles or things in the regular course of business, so long as the
person has ordered such merchandise or articles or is entitled to
receive the same.
§ 4-2.2 GENERAL § 4-2.6
1:107
license is desired; (5) a general description of the thing or things to be sold;
(6) the present place of business of the applicant; (7) the places of residence
of the applicant for the two years last past; (8) statement as to whether
or not the applicant, or his employer or principal has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance stating
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
The Borough Clerk shall issue the said license or permit within a period
of ten days of the date of receiving the application, provided that there
is nothing in the application to indicate that the applicant's character or
business responsibility is other than satisfactory for carrying on the said
business within the Borough of Flemington. In the event that the application
is rejected the Borough Clerk shall note such rejection on the application
and return it to the applicant, along with his/her application fee.
§ 4-2.7. Bond.
Before the license shall be issued the applicant shall execute and deliver to
the clerk of the Borough of Flemington a good and sufficient bond with a
good and sufficient surety in an amount of $500.00. Said bond shall remain
in force for one year from the date of issuance and shall be conditioned
to indemnify and pay the Borough of Flemington any penalties, or costs,
incurred in the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section, and
to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser of personal property, in a sum
equal to at least the amount of any payment such purchaser may have been
induced to make through the misrepresentation as to the kind, quality, or
value, of the personal value of the personal property, and to indemnify or
reimburse any such purchaser may have made to a licensee for personal
property or products, the delivery of which is not made as represented by
the license.
§ 4-2.8. License Fees.
Fees for licensee on this section shall accompany the application and shall
be as follows:
§ 4-2.9. License and Permit to be Displayed.
All licenses or permits issued under the provisions of this section shall be
carried by the licensee or permittee. All licenses or permits granted shall be
shown by the holder to any officer or resident of the Borough of Flemington
to see same.
§ 4-2.10. Extra Licenses Required.
a. For one month or part thereof $25.00
b. For one year or any part thereof $40.00
a. All licenses or permits issued to persons or businesses as defined in this
section shall apply to principal only, provided that one assistant will be
§ 4-2.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-2.10
1:108
§ 4-2.11. Right of Appeal.
If after investigation the Borough Clerk shall indicate disapproval in writing
upon the application, the applicant may appeal to the Flemington Borough
Common Council and the Flemington Borough Common Council shall set
a time and place for said appeal at which hearing applicant will be given
opportunity to present his reason why the license should be issued. The
decision of the Flemington Borough Common Council shall be final.
§ 4-2.12. Noise.
No hawker, peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall
call attention to their activity by the use of horns, bells or other noises.
§ 4-2.13. Time and Validity of License.
Every license or permit shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
thereon expressed, and shall apply only to the person or persons to whom
granted, and shall run from January first of each year and it shall not be
transferable. All yearly licenses shall run from January first of the year in
which the license is issued. All monthly licenses shall run from the first day
of the month in which license is issued.
§ 4-2.14. Penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or business violating this section shall, upon
conviction, pay a fine not exceeding $1,000.00.
§ 4-2.15. Title Unconstitutional Sections.
In case, for any reason any section or provision of this section shall be held
to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not be held to effect any
other section or provision of this section.
§ 4-2.16. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect immediately after final adoption and
publication according to law.
§ 4-2.17. Prohibition from Using Public Streets. [Ord. No. 2005-5]
It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler, transient merchant or itinerant
vendor to sell, buy, dispose of or offer to sell, buy or dispose of any goods,
allowed under such defined business, except as hereinafter provided in
this section.
b. Where more than one assistant is employed in any one business, an
additional license for each person in excess of two in any business must
be secured. The additional licensee fees in each and every case shall be
one-half of the fee as designated in § 4-2.8.
§ 4-2.10 GENERAL § 4-2.17
1:109
wares, merchandise or services, or to take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be rendered or delivered within the Borough in
or on any portion of a public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public
property or any property adjacent thereto, and no license therefor shall be
issued for any such activity. However, this prohibition shall not apply to
stationary stands or carts to sell food, commemorative items, crafts and the
like that are incident to or a part of a special event, such as a parade, for
which a permit is required, in which case the application for the permit shall
include the location of such stands or carts and be subject to approval by the
party to whom the application must be submitted. In no event shall any such
stand or cart obstruct the streets or sidewalks in violation of the Borough's
ordinances.
§ 4-2.18. Applicability if Temporarily Associated with Local
Merchant. [Ord. No. 2005-5]
Hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants and itinerant vendors shall not
be released from the prohibitions of or complying with the provisions of
this section merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local
dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such business in
connection with, as part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer.
§ 4-3. RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 4-3.1. License Required. [Ord. 8-1969, S 1; Ord. 2013-22; Ord. No.
2015-16]
A license from the local board of health shall be required for any retail food
establishment as defined in and governed by the Retail Food Establishment
Code of New Jersey (1965). The establishment shall comply with all
provisions concerning operation and maintenance contained in the abovementioned
code. All licenses are effective from January 1st to December
31st of the same year.
§ 4-3.2. Fees. [Ord. 8-1969, S 2; Ord. 19-1984, S II; Ord. 16-1988, S
I; Ord. 2002-18, S 1; Ord. 2003-21, S 1; Ord. 2013-22; Ord. No.
2015-16]
The fees for licensure of retail food establishments are hereby fixed as
follows:
a. Category 1. Newsstands, pharmacies, liquor stores, video stores and
other establishments handling commercially prepared, prepackaged,
nonpotentially hazardous foods as an incidental part of their business
will pay $135.00.
b. Category 2. B&B's which serve full breakfasts; agricultural markets,
(where there is no food preparation) where potentially hazardous foods
are offered for sale or where grocery food items account for 50 percent
or more of the sales will pay $135.00. B&B's which serve continental
§ 4-2.17 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-3.2
1:110
§ 4-3.3. Suspension or Revocation of License. [Ord. 8-1969, S 3;
Ord. 2013-22; Ord. No. 2015-16]
Any license issued under the terms of this section may be suspended or
revoked by the board of health because of the violation by the licensee
of any provision of this section or (N.J.A.C. 8:24) Chapter 24, "Sanitation
in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines"
or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or
occupation of the person to whom the license was issued is conducted in
a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any Federal, State, or
breakfasts are exempt from licensing and inspection, as are agricultural
markets offering for sale only raw agricultural products with only an
incidental amount of grocery items.
c. Category 3. All other retail food establishments, including mobile food
units, will pay $235 per year. The license period will be from January 1
through December 31. [Amended 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-7]
d. Temporary retail food establishments operating for three consecutive
days or fewer will pay $100; those operating for four consecutive days
up to 14 consecutive days will pay $135. [Amended 4-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-7]
e. If a mobile food unit is using an open flame to prepare foods the vendor
must obtain a Class I Fire Permit from the Fire Marshal each time the
vehicle parks for an event. [Amended 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-7]
f. Farm markets will pay an annual blanket fee of $240.00 to cover the
following types of vendors: baked goods-prepared in a licensed and
inspected kitchen, whole uncut fruits and vegetables, including
mushrooms, jarred foods for example: jellies, jams, pickles, honey,
maple syrup, cider etc., refrigerated foods for example: eggs, cheese
etc., frozen meats, coffees, teas, plants soaps, olive oils and vinegars.
The license period will be from January 1 through December 31. An
applicant must make application at least 2 weeks prior to the event.
g. Farm markets offering food for immediate consumption will pay an
additional fee of $150.00 annually for foods that are prepared for
immediate consumption that are not packaged. If these vendors are
utilizing an open flame to prepare or to keep food at safe temperature
as specified by the Hunterdon County Health Department the vendor
must obtain a Class I Fire Permit from the fire marshal each time the
vendor sets up their preparation area. The license period will be from
January 1 through December 31. An applicant must make application at
least 2 weeks prior to the event.
h. Annual licenses must be renewed for the upcoming year by January
31st to avoid the imposition on the applicant of a $30.00 late fee in the
case of a category 1 or 2 license, and a $50.00 late fee in the case of a
category 3 license.
§ 4-3.2 GENERAL § 4-3.3
1:111
municipal law, or that the person conducting the retail food establishment
is of an unfit character to conduct the establishment, or that the purpose
for which the license was issued is being abused to the detriment of the
public or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license
was issued.
A license shall not be revoked, cancelled or suspended until a hearing has
been held by the board of health. Written notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for the hearing. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the
grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending the license.
Notice may be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified
or by certified mail addressed to the person to be notified at the business
address appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the board of
health the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard. The board of
health may dismiss the complaint or it may revoke, cancel or suspend the
license.
If any license is revoked, neither the holder thereof nor any person acting
for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another license to carry on
the same business within the Borough unless the applicant for the license is
approved by the board of health.
§ 4-4. FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES.
§ 4-4.1. Permits, Licenses Required. [Ord. 5-1971, S 1]
§ 4-4.2. Permit and License Fees. [Ord. 3-1969, S 2; & New.]
a. Permit Required. A permit from the Borough shall be required of any
person who engages in the operation of one or more machines or
devices offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or
token, or by other means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages,
either in bulk or package, without the necessity of replenishing the
devices between each vending operation.
The provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by the board shall be complied
with.
b. License Required. A license from the Borough shall be required for one
or more machines or devices offered for public use which, upon
insertion of a coin, coins, or tokens, or by other means dispense unit
servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package, without the
necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending operation.
All provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by the board shall be complied
with.
§ 4-3.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-4.2
1:112
§ 4-4.3. Application for and Issuance of Permits and Licenses. [Ord.
3-1969, S 3.]
Application for and issuance of permits and licenses shall be made in
conformity with the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Code of
New Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by the local board of health. Such
permits and licenses are not transferable.
§ 4-4.4. Suspension, Revocation or Reinstatement of Permits and
Licenses. [Ord. 3-1969, S 4.]
Permits and licenses may be suspended, revoked or reinstated by the
Borough pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Vending Code of New
Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by the board of health.
§ 4-5. (RESERVED)
§ 4-6. POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS; BOWLING ALLEYS.
§ 4-6.1. License Required.
A license shall be required to maintain or operate a pool room, billiard
room, or bowling alley.
§ 4-6.2. Application for License.
Applications shall be in writing to the Borough Clerk. The application shall
state the type and location of the business proposed to be licensed; the
name, residence, age and occupation of the applicant; and the number
of pool tables, billiard tables or bowling alleys the applicant desires to
operate. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee, and
shall be submitted to the Borough Council, which shall have discretion
in the granting of the license. If an application is denied, the clerk shall
immediately return the fee to the applicant.
§ 4-6.3. Fees.
The fees shall be as follows:
a. The fees for permits and licenses for the purpose of raising revenue, for
regulation and control to be paid annually to the Borough shall be as
follows.
Permit fee, $5.00 per year.
License for each machine, $10.00 per year.
Permit and license fees shall be paid to the Borough Clerk.
a. For a license to conduct a pool and billiard parlor, $5.00 per year for
each pool or billiard table.
§ 4-4.2 GENERAL § 4-6.3
1:113
§ 4-6.4. Display and Transfer of License.
Each license shall be for a particular person and a specific location. It
shall not be transferable either as to person or place. Each license shall be
displayed in the licensed premises so as to be readily observable.
§ 4-6.5. Suspension or Revocation of License.
Any license may be suspended or revoked by the Borough Council for
violation of any of the terms of this section or for other good cause. Upon
any proceeding for suspension or revocation, written notice of the charges
shall be served upon the licensee within five days of the time set for the
hearing. The notice may be either in person or by registered mail addressed
to the licensed place of business, and the hearing may be adjourned from
time to time. If any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not
be entitled to the return of any part of the license fee.
§ 4-6.6. Exceptions, Church and Other Private Nonprofit
Associations.
This section shall not apply to any church or fraternal order or other private
nonprofit association which operates or maintains any of the specified
places or types of amusement solely for the use of its own members.
§ 4-6.7. Minimum Age.
No person under the age of sixteen years shall be permitted to play pool or
billiards in any licensed premises.
§ 4-7. AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
§ 4-7.1. License Required.
A license shall be required to maintain, use, operate or conduct in any
public or quasi-public place, or to permit such maintenance, use, operation
or conduct of any automatic amusement devices of the type commonly
known as bagetelle, pin ball, baffleboard or other automatic amusement
devices operated either through insertion of a coin or otherwise.
§ 4-7.2. Application.
Each application for a license shall be filed in writing with the Borough
Clerk, and shall state the applicant's name, address, age and occupation,
the number and kind of devices sought to be licensed, the name and address
of the owner if other than the applicant, the place where devices will
be maintained or operated, whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime or of any violation of a Borough ordinance involving
gambling and such other information as the Borough Council may require.
All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate license fee.
b. For bowling alleys, $5.00 per year, per alley.
§ 4-6.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-7.3
1:114
§ 4-7.3. Granting of License.
All such applications shall be considered by the Borough Council which in
its discretion may grant or refuse the license. Upon the granting of any
license it shall be promptly issued by the Borough Clerk If the application is
rejected, the fee accompanying it shall be promptly returned.
§ 4-7.4. Fee; Expiration Date. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-12]
The fee for licenses shall be $100 for the first device through 10 such
devices and $10 per each additional device licensed for one year or any
part. This fee will be waived for the first year of operation.
§ 4-7.5. Transfer of License.
The license shall entitle the licensee to maintain the device only at the place
designated on the license, and may be transferred to another place only
upon written authority to effect the transfer issued by the Borough Council.
Any license issued shall not be transferable to any other party.
§ 4-7.6. Information on License; Display.
Each license shall state the name and address of the licensee, the nature
and character of the device licensed, the name and address of the owner
if not the licensee, and the license fee paid, and shall briefly state that the
device is licensed by the Borough.
Each license shall be prominently displayed near the device itself.
§ 4-7.7. Revocation.
If revocation proceedings are taken against any licensee because of
gambling or violation of any other law, the licensee shall be served with
written notice of the charges against him, at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing. The notice shall indicate that revocation proceedings
will be heard by the Borough Council at the time and place named in the
notice, and that the licensee may be present and may be heard.
§ 4-7.8. Purpose of License.
This licensing section is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue and
regulating the maintenance, use and operation of amusement games or
devices.
§ 4-8. JUKEBOXES.
§ 4-8.1. Definition.
A JUKEBOX OR OTHER AUTOMATIC MACHINE PLAYING MUSIC FROM
RECORDS — Shall mean any machine producing music which is started by
inserting a coin or which is played for hire by any person or device.
§ 4-7.3 GENERAL § 4-8.2
1:115
§ 4-8.2. License Required.
A license shall be required for any person to offer a jukebox or other
automatic machine playing music from records for the use of the general
public.
§ 4-8.3. Issuance; Fee; Terms.
The clerk is authorized to issue any such license after payment by the
applicant of a license fee of $10.00. The license fee shall state the place
at which machine is to be used and that it shall not be used in any other
location. Each license shall be good for the calendar year in which it
is issued, and shall be renewed annually. Any person to whom a license
is granted shall exhibit the license whenever required to do so by any
police officer or other representative of the Borough. No jukebox or other
automatic machine playing music from records shall be played after the
hour of 11 p.m. or before the hour of 8 a.m.
§ 4-9. PLACES OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT.
§ 4-9.1. Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a motion picture show,
theatre, or show house, or any performance indoors without having first
made proper provisions for seating, ventilating, ingress and egress, nor
without having first applied to the clerk in writing, signed by the owner or
proprietor, for a permit.
§ 4-9.2. Permit Issuance and Revocation.
The clerk shall issue the permit when the written application is filed with
him. The permit shall be subject to a summary revocation if the Council
determines that the performance is of such a nature or so conducted as to
be a nuisance or likely to become dangerous to the public health. A failure
to comply with this regulation or to at once close on notice from the clerk
shall forfeit the permit and shall subject the person to any other penalties
provided in this revision.
§ 4-9.3. Exceptions.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a permit for
performances or entertainments given by or under the auspices of any
church, school, society, association or club of the Borough except when
performances are held or given in a public play house, opera house or
theatre.
§ 4-9.4. Fire Prevention.
All buildings where moving picture shows, theatrical performances, public
entertainment of any and every character are held in the Borough shall
be inspected by the Borough fire chief, who shall report to the Mayor any
§ 4-8.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-9.4
1:116
and all conditions discovered by him regarding seating capacity, ventilation,
means of ingress and egress; if he finds that the conditions of any of the
places of amusements are such as would endanger the life or limb of the
public, then the fire chief shall notify the owner or proprietor of the place
and the Borough Council may order the place closed until the building or
room is put in safe condition.
§ 4-10. LANDFILL SITE.
§ 4-10.1. Permit Required; Expiration Date.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or unload garbage or refuse
of any kind upon the Flemington-Raritan Municipal Landfill Project, on
Pennsylvania Avenue Extension, in Raritan Township, unless he first obtains
an annual permit to do so, in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The permit shall expire on December 31 of the year for which issued.
§ 4-10.2. Permits for Noncommercial Use.
Residents of the Borough of Flemington may, on proper application, obtain
permits from the Borough Clerk to enter and use the municipal landfill
project for noncommercial purposes. There permits shall be issued without
cost.
§ 4-10.3. Permits for Commercial Use.
Permits may be obtained from the Raritan township clerk authorizing
persons to engage in the commercial collection of garbage and refuse
within the Borough of Flemington and to use the municipal landfill project
for the deposit of garbage and refuse. A permit must be obtained for each
vehicle used for delivering garbage and refuse to the municipal landfill
project, vehicles being classified as follows:
Class A — Standard covered garbage truck with loader.
Class B — Vans and trucks above one ton.
Class C — Trucks under one ton.
§ 4-10.4. Use of Site.
No garbage or refuse originating outside of the Borough of Flemington or
the Township of Raritan shall be deposited on the municipal landfill project.
§ 4-10.5. Collection Vehicles.
No person shall transport any garbage or refuse through the streets or
roads of the Borough of Flemington or the Township of Raritan except in
closed receptacles, closed truck bodies, or truck bodies covered with a
tarpaulin. No person shall allow any garbage or refuse to blow out of, fall
from or otherwise escape from such vehicles.
§ 4-9.4 GENERAL § 4-10.6
1:117
§ 4-10.6. Cooperation with Raritan Township.
This section is similar to an ordinance enacted by the Township of Raritan.
All of the costs of administering, maintaining and operating the municipal
landfill project shall be borne equally by both municipalities. Permit fees
and fines collected as penalties shall be paid one half to the Borough of
Flemington and one half to the Township of Raritan.
§ 4-10.7. Operation of Site.
The hours of operation of the municipal landfill project and availability
of the use of the landfill project to the public shall be as regulated by
resolution passed by the Borough of Flemington and the Township of
Raritan. Permits for persons to engage in the commercial collection of
garbage and refuse and to use the municipal landfill project shall be
obtained for each vehicle used for delivering garbage and refuse to the
landfill project, the fees for such permit shall be as provided by resolution
passed by the Borough of Flemington and the Township of Raritan. Hours
of operation and the fee structure for permits shall be reviewed each year
by the municipalities concerned. Pending such review the hours and fee
structure of the previous year shall remain in effect.
§ 4-11. GARAGE SALES.14
§ 4-11.1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings and definitions:
GOODS — Shall mean and include any goods or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
OCCUPANT/PERSON — Shall mean owner or lessee of the premises,
including individuals, families, partnerships, voluntary association and
corporations.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, garage,
steps or vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house or other
structure.
YARD SALE — Shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage sale",
"lawn sale", "attic sale", "rummage sale" or "flea market sale" or any similar
casual sale of tangible personal property, which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
14.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 2-1976.
§ 4-10.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-11.2
1:118
§ 4-11.2. Location; Compliance Required.
A yard sale may be conducted from private premises only, and goods may
be displayed and sold out of doors only in compliance with the provisions of
this section.
§ 4-11.3. License Required; Fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any yard sale in the Borough
of Flemington without first filing with the Borough Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining for such officer a license so to do to be
known as a "yard sale license". Such filing shall be made at least one day
prior to the requested sale date. The fee for such license shall be and is
hereby fixed at $5.00.
§ 4-11.4. Licensing Restrictions; Display of License.
§ 4-11.5. Application Information.
The information to be filed with the Borough Clerk pursuant to this section
shall be as follows:
a. Such license shall not be issued to any one person or for any one
location more than twice within a one-year period; provided, however,
that no license shall be issued to any person or any location for a sale to
be conducted within 30 days of the date of any other sale held by that
person or at that location. No license shall be issued for more than two
consecutive calendar days. No yard sales will be allowed on a legal
holiday. Charitable or religious or civic organizations may be allowed
more than two licenses within said one-year period with the approval of
the Common Council, and no license fee shall be required.
b. Each license must be prominently displayed on the premises and visible
from the street upon which the yard sale is conducted throughout the
entire period of the licensed sale.
a. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
b. The name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted and the consent of the owner, if the applicant is other than
the owner.
c. The location at which the sale is to be conducted
d. The number of days of the sale, not to exceed two days.
e. The date and nature of any past sale.
f. The relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any
other person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sale.
§ 4-11.2 GENERAL § 4-11.5
1:119
§ 4-11.6. Hours and Dates.
§ 4-11.7. Signs.
No sign for advertising or directing customers shall be posted on any place
other than the premises of the applicant. One sign shall be permitted. Said
sign shall not exceed three feet by three feet in size and shall not be
placed on the premises earlier than one week prior to the sale and must be
removed immediately upon the termination of the sale.
§ 4-11.8. Maintenance of Order; Inspections; Reduction of Sidewalk
Width.
§ 4-11.9. Restrictions on Sale of Bedding, Sofas and Refrigerators.
g. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's or
mercantile license by any local, state or federal agency.
h. The sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
a. All yard sales shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
b. In the case of any sale held upon or adjoining commercial premises, the
sale may continue during the hours that the commercial premises is
normally open for business.
a. The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and
decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No
such person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said
premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any
roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such persons shall
obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire
department of the Borough of Flemington in order to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare.
b. All licensed premises shall at all times be subject to such reasonable
rules as may be made from time to time by the Common Council of the
Borough of Flemington and shall be subject to inspection at all times by
the chief of police or any of their agents or any other duly authorized
representative of the Borough of Flemington.
c. The display of goods, signs or fixtures in connection with the sale shall
not be permitted to result in a reduction of the width of the usual
pedestrian passageway to less than four feet.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale mattresses, bed
springs, cots, lounges and sofas in any yard sale authorized under this
section without first complying with the appropriate section of N.J.S.A.
§ 4-11.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-11.9
1:120
§ 4-11.10. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 4-11.11. Violations and Penalties.
Any person who violates the terms of this section shall, for a first offense,
pay the license fee plus court cost, and for a second or subsequent offense
pay the license fee plus a fine of $50.00 plus court costs.
§ 4-12. COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES.
§ 4-12.1. Vending Machines Unlawful Except as Provided.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to sell or dispense dry
goods, merchandise and other goods from coin-operated vending machines
in the Borough of Flemington.
§ 4-12.2. Application for License.
Any person desiring to maintain a coin-operated vending machine shall
make application to the Borough Clerk for a license, specifying where said
machine is to be maintained and operated, the name and address of the
owner or lessee of the premises, the nature of the goods to be sold by such
machine, and the number of machines to be in operation.
26:10-1 through 26:10-18 with respect to the labeling, sterilizing and
disinfecting of said mattresses, bed springs, cots, lounges and sofas.
b. No refrigerator or icebox having a capacity of one and one-half cubic
feet or more, with an attached lid or door which may be opened and
fastened shut by means of an attached latch, lock or other similar
device, shall be displayed, offered for sale or sold at a yard sale unless
the attached lid or door shall first be removed and detached therefrom.
a. Persons selling pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
c. Persons selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
d. Persons selling where the sale is covered by a valid auction license
issued by the Borough of Flemington.
§ 4-11.9 GENERAL § 4-12.3
1:121
§ 4-12.3. Location of Machines.
All licensed coin-operated vending machines shall be located inside a
building and none shall be located on the public street; buildings wherein
such machines are located shall be in compliance with municipal building
and other requirements; such machines shall be constructed of metal or
other nonabsorbent material.
§ 4-12.4. License Fee.
If the application shows that the proposed coin-operated vending machine
will be operated in accordance with the requirements of this section, then
the municipal clerk shall forthwith issue a license. The annual license fee
shall be $10.00 per coin-operated vending machine. All licenses shall expire
December 31.
§ 4-12.5. Violation; Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished for a fine not to exceed
$200.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both.
§ 4-13. NEWSRACKS.
§ 4-13.1. Findings and Intent.
a. Legislative findings. Certain newspaper distributors have been placing
vending machines on or along public roadways, streets, sidewalks,
ways or places within the Borough of Flemington ("Borough"). The
Borough has conducted a survey of existing newsracks and has
determined that they have been placed in a haphazard manner, with no
regard for the safety and well being of the Borough and its residents
and the historic character of the Borough. The Mayor and Council have
concluded that the existing placement of these newsracks causes
potentially dangerous conditions and obstructions of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on or along public roadways, streets, sidewalks, ways
or places and that the newsracks interfere with the Borough's policy of
maintaining the aesthetic character of its historic district.
b. Legislative intent. It is the purpose of this section to: (a) provide for
pedestrian and driving safety and convenience; (b) restrict
unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of
business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or
entering parked or standing vehicles; (c) maintain the aesthetic
character of the historic district; (d) provide reasonable access for the
use and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants,
mail boxes and access to locations used for public transportation
purposes; (e) relocate and/or replace newsracks which result in visual
blight and/or excessive space allocation on the public rights of way, or
which unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of store window
§ 4-12.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-13.1
1:122
§ 4-13.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean the person responsible for placing and
maintaining a newsrack on or along a public sidewalk, roadway, way, place
or street.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined
by general law; any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States, in accordance with Federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer
as provided by general law, and any other periodical used for advertising or
news.
NEWSRACK — Shall mean any type of unmanned device for the vending or
free distribution of newspaper or new periodicals of any kind.
PERSON — Shall mean any corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, or individual.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any public street, highway, sidewalk,
parkway or alley.
§ 4-13.3. Newsrack Certificate of Compliance.
No person shall place, affix, erect, construct or maintain a newsrack without
first obtaining a one time only certificate of compliance for each newsrack
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 4-13.4. Requirements and Duties.
displays or adjacent landscaping and other improvements; (f) maintain
and protect the values of surrounding properties; (g) reduce
unnecessary exposure of the public to personal injury or property
damage; (h) treat all newspapers equally regardless of their size,
content, circulation, or frequency of publication; (i) maintain and
preserve freedom of the press; (j) cooperate to the maximum with
newspaper distributors.
a. General placement of newsracks. Subject to the prohibitions set forth in
§ 4-13.9 , the nearest portion of a newsrack shall be no more than 18
inches from a building, or a curb or the edge of the street where there is
no curb. No newsrack shall be placed more than four feet from the hash
mark of a parking space where there are marked parking spaces.
b. Installation and maintenance.
1. A newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise securely placed
so as to prevent its being blown down or around and to reasonably
prevent personal injury or property damage due to tilting, tipping
or overturning. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise
§ 4-13.1 GENERAL § 4-13.4
1:123
attached to any public fixture, including, but not limited to, official
signs, sign supports, guide rails, traffic signal supports, highway
lighting supports, controller boxes, fire hydrants or bus shelters.
A distributor shall be responsible for repair of the area, leaving
no holes or projections in the mounting surface, including, but not
limited to the sidewalk and/or curb, affected by the removal of
any newsrack placed on a public right-of-way. Said repairs shall be
made within 30 days of removal, however, in the case the repairs
are not commenced within this period, the Borough may repair
the affected areas(s) and bill the distributor for all costs connected
thereto or charge such amounts against the bond required by §
4-13.6.
Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no
group of newsracks extends for a distance of more than six feet
along a curb. Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached
to one another; however, no more than two newsracks may be
joined together in this manner. A space of no less than ten feet
shall separate individual newsracks or each group of newsracks so
attached or placed next to each other.
2. Newsracks located in that portion of the Flemington Historic
District on Main Street from Capner to Church Streets and 100 feet
back on all intersecting streets measured from the curb line of
Main Street shall be painted forest green in color. Newsracks
located in the above referenced area shall carry no card holders or
advertising except for that dealing with the display, sale or
purchase of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed with
duplicate lettering on the front and back of the cabinet, such
lettering not to exceed six inches in height and to be white in color.
3. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund
in the event that said person is unable to receive the newspaper or
periodical for which payment was made. The coin-mechanism shall
be maintained in good working order at all times. However,
newsracks for free newspapers may omit a coin box and may have
the pull bar welded to the door.
4. Newsracks shall be maintained in good working order at all times,
with unbroken hoods and structural parts and shall be reasonably
free of paint that is chipped, faded, peeling and cracked, and free of
rust or corrosion.
5. The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person
who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack shall
be displayed prominently on the newsrack in such a manner as to
be readily visible and readable to a prospective customer thereof.
§ 4-13.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-13.4
1:124
§ 4-13.5. Application and Issuance of Certificate of Compliance.
6. The distributor shall remove all snow and ice accumulating on its
newsracks and an area two feet to each side of its newsracks within
12 hours of daylight after same shall fall, be formed or accumulate.
7. No newsracks shall exceed 50 inches in height, 36 inches in width
or 24 inches in depth.
a. Approving authority. The approving authority for newsracks shall be the
Borough Clerk. The Borough police chief shall be responsible (1) for
determining whether applications for a certificate of compliance meet
the specific standards set forth in § 4-13.9a through m, (2) for ensuring
that newsracks are placed only where shown in an application and (3)
for enforcement of violations of this section.
b. Applications. The applicant shall file with the Borough Clerk a written
application for an installation certificate of compliance which shall
contain the following information: (1) the name, address and telephone
number of the applicant, who is the owner and/or principal in
responsible charge of the newsrack(s); (2) the name, address and
telephone number of the responsible person whom the Borough may
notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's newsrack; (3)
the number of newsracks and the proposed location of each shown on a
drawing provided by the Borough Clerk; (4) the names of newspapers
or periodicals to be contained in each rack; (5) type or brand of
newsrack, including an illustration and description of the newsrack and
mount.
c. Issuance of a certificate of compliance. Upon a finding by the Borough
Clerk that the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this
section and having received the required approvals from the police
chief specified in paragraph a, the Borough Clerk shall cause to be
issued a certificate of compliance for installation by the newspaper
publishing company in accordance with the application and the
provisions of this section. Such issuance shall be made within ten
working days of the Borough's receipt of the complete application. The
Borough Clerk shall further issue a numbered decal for each newsrack
to be maintained under a certificate of compliance. Such decals shall be
affixed to each newsrack in a conspicuous manner.
d. Denial of a certificate of compliance. If a certificate of compliance for
some newsrack location(s) applied for shall be denied, the applicant
shall be notified of the denial within ten working days of the Borough's
receipt of a completed application. The applicant shall be advised of the
specific cause for such denial by the Borough Clerk, who will suggest
alternative location(s) therefor. The applicant may reapply for
substitute or alternative location(s) at no additional certificate of
compliance fee.
§ 4-13.4 GENERAL § 4-13.5
1:125
§ 4-13.6. Insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance by the Borough Clerk,
the applicant shall furnish to the Borough Clerk, a certificate of public
liability insurance with a ($50,000.00) combined single limit and, if the
newsrack is to be affixed to Borough property or the sidewalk, a one time
only returnable bond deposit which shall be maintained by the Borough
Clerk so long as the newsracks remain in the Borough, unless a charge
against same is taken pursuant to this section. Returnable bonding amounts
for newsrack installations shall be:
Total Proposed Newsracks Total Returnable Bond
1 to 4 $150.00
5 to 10 $300.00
11 to 20 $500.00
21 and up $700.00
Reasonable evidence of equivalent self-insurance coverage may be
substituted by the applicant for the above certificate of insurance subject
to approval of the Borough attorney. Insurance under this section shall run
continuously with the presence of the applicant's newsrack(s) in Borough
rights-of-way, and any termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a
violation of this section, subject to appropriate remedy provided by § 3-11.
In the event that a distributor's insurance lapses and/or is terminated,
and in addition to any liability imposed under § 3-11, the distributor shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Borough for any liability arising out of and/
or resulting from such insurance lapse and/or termination.
§ 4-13.7. Fees.
There shall be a one time only certificate of compliance fee in the amount
of $50.00 for each distributor publisher, plus $10.00 per newsrack. Failed
inspections are subject to a reinspection fee of $5.00. All of the above fees
e. Newsracks for which a certificate of compliance has been granted may
be moved to a new location provided that the Borough Clerk shall be
notified of the location within five calendar days after the move, and
that a fee of ($5.00) shall be paid within this five days to cover the cost
of inspection of the new location by the police chief.
f. Additional newsrack certificate(s) of compliance. If at any time after the
initial application for an installation certificate of compliance, an
applicant wishes to install additional newsracks, then the above
procedure and application paragraph are to be repeated in accordance
with the provisions of this section. Any amount still on account will be
credited against the cumulative returnable bond deposit required
under § 4-13.6, Insurance. Additional certificate(s) of compliance fee(s)
shall be in accordance with § 4-13.7, except that the ($50.00)
distributor's fee is waived if previously paid.
§ 4-13.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 4-13.7
1:126
will be used to defray administrative expenses related to this section only,
and any revenues after the implementation of this section will be returned
to the distributors in proportion to their respective contributions.
§ 4-13.8. Appeals.
Any applicant who has been denied a certificate of compliance pursuant to
the provisions of this section may file an appeal with the Borough Council by
requesting in writing to the Borough Clerk appearance before the Council
to review said denial. The appeal shall be heard by the Council by 30 days
within the filing of the appeal or at the next scheduled regular meeting,
whichever is sooner. The decision of the Council on appeal is subject to
judicial review as provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-13.9. Prohibitions.
No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
a. Within five feet of any marked or unmarked cross-walks;
b. Within ten feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other
emergency facility;
c. Within five feet of any driveway;
d. Within ten feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop,
measured along the pavement;
e. Within three feet of any bus bench, or plaza bench;
f. At any location where the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians
is reduced to less than six feet except if there is less than six feet in
width of sidewalk, one newsrack or group of up to three newsracks may
be located every 250 feet;
g. Within 12 inches of any area improved with lawn, or hedges, or within
three feet of flowers, trees or other landscaping;
h. Within five feet of a building entrance;
i. Within a curb return (from point of tangency to point of tangency);
j. Directly in front of, or within ten feet to the side of any historic building
or structure listed on the Federal Historic Register and/or the New
Jersey Historic Register, and the following structures in the Flemington
Historic District: Old Lee House, Fleming Castle, Hunterdon County
Court House, Union Hotel, Southard Building and the Doric House. The
ten feet shall be measured from a line extending from the corner of the
building or structure to the curb or street edge;
k. In an area parallel to any no parking zone and within ten feet of the
curb or street edge in such zone, except that otherwise permissible
locations in front of existing multiple dwelling complexes of ten units or
§ 4-13.7 GENERAL § 4-13.9
1:127
§ 4-13.10. Enforcement Procedures - Nonconforming Newsracks.
Chapter 5
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 5-1. PURPOSE.
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Flemington in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising R.S. 33:1-1, et
seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director
of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
more may be utilized for newsracks if the front of the newsrack is facing
away from the street edge or curb;
l. In front of any churches or other houses of religious worship;
m. In such a manner as to cover any portion of a display window of a
business establishment.
a. Penalties. Penalties for violations of this section shall be as provided in §
3-11 of the Revised General Ordinances.
b. Nonconforming newsracks. From 150 days after this section becomes
effective and at any time thereafter, any newsrack placed in a public
right-of-way before the effective date of this section shall be deemed to
be in violation of this section unless a certificate of compliance is
obtained.
c. Abandonment. A newsrack shall be deemed abandoned and may be
designated as same by the police chief when no publication is in the
newsrack for a period of more than seven consecutive days, absent a
strike or other event beyond the control of the distributor. Upon the
designation of abandonment, the Borough Clerk shall notify the
distributor within five working days at which time the distributor shall
have 30 days to remove any such newsrack(s), subject to the provisions
set forth in § 4-13.4b1 .
In the event a newspaper publishing company or its distributor decides
to voluntarily abandon a newsrack location, the said distributor shall
notify the Borough Clerk, completely remove the newsrack and mount
and restore the public right-of-way to safe condition as set forth in
§ 4-13.4b1 hereof. Said restoration shall be made within 30 days of
removal, however, in the event the repairs are not commenced within
this period, the Borough may repair the affected area(s) and bill the
distributor or charge its bond for all costs connected thereto.
§ 4-13.9 FLEMINGTON CODE § 5-2
1:128
§ 5-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in R.S. 33:1-1, et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5-3. LICENSES.
§ 5-3.1. Laws Applicable.
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in § 5-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey
or the United States.
§ 5-3.2. Issuing Authority.
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Borough Council,
which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-3.3. License Required.
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Borough
without having obtained a license in accordance with the act referred to in
§ 5-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-3.4. License Fees; Maximum Number. [Amended 7-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-16]
The annual license fees and maximum number of licenses for the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Borough shall be as follows:
Class of License
Annual License
Fee
No. of
Licenses
Plenary Retail Consumption License $2,500 1
Plenary Retail Consumption with
"Broad Package Privilege" License
$2,500 2
Plenary Retail Distribution License $2,500 1
Club License $180 1
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the issue of a new plenary retail
consumption license to a person who operates a hotel or motel containing
50 or more contiguous sleeping rooms. Any license newly issued shall not
be renewed or transferred except to a hotel or motel containing at least 50
contiguous sleeping rooms.
§ 5-2 GENERAL § 5-4
1:129
§ 5-4. REGULATION OF LICENSES.15
§ 5-4.1. Excluded Hours of Sale.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered or consumed, nor
shall any licensee suffer or permit the sale, service, delivery or consumption
of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, upon the licensed premises
between the following hours, prevailing time:
§ 5-4.2. Closing of Premises.
No licensee shall permit any person, patron or customer to consume any
alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises during the hours when the
sale, delivery, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages is forbidden.
During such hours the licensed premises, excepting restaurants and public
dining rooms in hotels and premises operated by club licenses or other
licensees who could qualify for club licenses, shall and must remain closed
and locked to all persons except for employees who clean or perform other
necessary work in and about the premises during such prohibited hours,
and no person other than such employees shall be permitted to remain on
the premises. During the hours when sale, delivery, service or consumption
of alcoholic beverages is forbidden, the entire interior of the bar or business
room, or any other room where alcoholic beverages are sold, delivered
or consumed, shall and must be kept open to full view from the public
thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the public is freely admitted.
§ 5-4.3. Sales to Certain Persons.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or minor, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
a. Mondays.
1. For plenary retail consumption licensees operating a bona fide
restaurant - 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
2. For all other plenary retail consumption licensees - 12:00 midnight
on the preceding Sunday and 7:00 a.m.
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in § 5-4.1(A)(i)
and (ii) when Monday falls on January 1 - 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
b. Weekdays and Saturdays other than Mondays - 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
c. 1. Sundays - 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
2. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in § 5-4.1c1
when Sunday falls on December 31 - 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
15.Editor's Note: Section 4 of Ordinance No. 18-1989 provides the penalty for violations of
the licensing regulations
§ 5-4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 5-4.3
1:130
licensed premises by any of the above-named classes of persons, or permit
any such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 5-4.4. (Reserved)
§ 5-5. MINORS.
§ 5-5.1. Presence.
No minor shall be allowed in any premises where alcoholic beverages are
sold or served for consumption on the premises. No licensee shall employ
any person under lawful age to serve or sell or otherwise be employed about
the premises wherein such license is applicable.
§ 5-5.2. Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages by a Minor.
No minor shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or have another purchase
for him any alcoholic beverage on any premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 5-5.3. Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages for a Minor.
No person shall purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for a
minor. It shall be unlawful for any person to induce or attempt to induce
any licensee or any employee of a licensee to sell, serve or deliver alcoholic
beverages to a minor.
§ 5-5.4. Misstating Age.
No person shall misrepresent his age or the age of another person for the
purpose of inducing any licensee or his employee to sell, serve or deliver
any alcoholic beverage to a person under lawful age, or to permit a person
under lawful age to remain on any premises in violation of § 5-5.1.
§ 5-5.5. Presumption.
Any parent or guardian of a minor who accompanies such minor into a
premises in which alcoholic beverages are served and who permits the
minor to possess or consume alcoholic beverages shall be presumed to have
misrepresented the age of the minor.
§ 5-5.6. Underage Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages on Private Property.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2, Chapter V of the Revised General Ordinances
of the Borough of Flemington is amended and supplemented by the addition
thereto § 5-5.6 "Underage Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages on Private Property" to read as follows:
a. Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, the following words or
terms shall mean:
§ 5-4.3 GENERAL § 5-5.6
1:131
GUARDIAN — Shall mean person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underaged person's parent, grandparent,
aunt or uncle, sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity.
b. Underaged Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on
Private Property. It is unlawful for any person under the legal age to
purchase alcoholic beverages, without legal authority, knowingly
possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage on private
property.
c. Exceptions.
1. This subsection shall not prohibit an underaged person from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with
a religious observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the
legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
2. This subsection shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages by any underaged person while actually engaged in the
performance of employment by a person who was licensed under
Title 33 of the Revised Statutes or while actively engaged in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a county vocational school or postsecondary
educational institution, however, this subsection shall
not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this
subsection, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a
person that is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on
or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
d. Violations and Penalties.
1. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this subsection
shall be subject to a fine of $250.00 for a first offense and $350.00
for any subsequent offense. Upon a finding of guilt, the court may
also suspend or postpone for six months the person's driving
privileges in addition to the authorized fine. Upon conviction of any
person and suspension or postponement of the person's driver's
license, the court shall forward a report to the New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission ("Commission") stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement imposed by the court pursuant to
this subsection. If a person at the time of the imposition of the
sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the
day this sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six
months after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the person
at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect the
§ 5-5.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 5-5.6
1:132
§ 5-6. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES REGULATED IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 5-6.1. Consumption.
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption, any alcoholic
beverage in or on:
license and forward it to the Commission along with a report. If for
any reason, the license cannot be collected, the court shall include
in the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color
and sex of the person as well as the first and last date of the license
suspension imposed by the court.
2. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The person shall be
required to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing.
Failure to receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in
writing the receipt of the written notice shall not be a defense to a
subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
3. If the person convicted under this subsection is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege for the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Commission the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of the nonresident convicted
under this subsection.
a. Any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park, playground, land or
building owned or occupied by any Federal, State, county or municipal
government;
b. Any place to which the public is invited including, but not limited to,
motor vehicle parking yards servicing stores, offices and other
commercial enterprises, provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages
within the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption liquor
licensee, or the consumption of wine within a bona fide restaurant
which is licensed by the board of health; and
c. Any motor vehicle as defined by New Jersey Statute 39:1-1, while the
same is not in operation but located in or on any public street, road,
alley, park, playground, land or building owned or occupied by the
Federal, State, county or municipal government, or any place to which
the public is invited including, but not limited to, motor vehicle parking
yards servicing stores, offices and other commercial enterprises.
§ 5-5.6 GENERAL § 5-6.2
1:133
§ 5-6.2. Possession.
Unless the same is contained in a closed or sealed container, no person shall
possess any alcoholic beverage in or on:
§ 5-6.3. Permitted Exceptions.
The Borough Council may, by motion and upon application being made
therefor and for good cause, permit the possession and consumption of
alcoholic beverages within premises not covered by a plenary retail
consumption liquor licensee, for special functions or social events. The
permission if granted, shall be consistent with the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law of the State of New Jersey and the regulations enacted
pursuant thereto, and upon such further conditions as may be imposed by
the Borough Council.
§ 5-7. REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of R.S. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
a. Any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park, playground, land or
building owned or occupied by any Federal, State county or municipal
government.
b. Any place to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to,
motor vehicle parking yards servicing stores, offices and other
commercial enterprises, provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages within the
licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption liquor licensee, or the
possession of wine within a bona fide restaurant which is licensed by
the board of health.
c. Any motor vehicle as defined by New Jersey Statute 39:1-1, while the
same is not in operation, but located in or on any public street, road,
alley, park, playground, land or building owned or occupied by the
Federal, State, county or municipal government, or any place to which
the public is invited including, but not limited to, motor vehicle parking
yards servicing stores, offices and other commercial enterprises.
§ 5-6.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 5-8
1:134
§ 5-8. DISPLAY OF FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME (FAS) WARNING
SIGNS.
All licensees under this chapter who sell alcoholic beverages shall
prominently post on their premises a warning of the dangers to the unborn
children of women who consume alcoholic beverages while pregnant. The
nature and type of warning sign shall be determined by the Borough of
Flemington Board of Health, which shall prepare and distribute the warning
signs. Any licensee violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the penalties as provided for in § 3-11.
Chapter 6
ANIMALS
§ 6-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Shall mean any place where dogs, cats or other
domestic animals, belonging to anyone other than the owner tenants, or
occupants of such place are for hire, kept, maintained or harbored for
observation or treatment.
CAT — Shall mean any cat, female or male, or spayed female.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat which has obtained the age
of seven (7) months.
CHICKENS AND OTHER POULTRY — Shall mean chickens, turkeys,
guineafowl, peafoul, quail, grouse, chukars, pheasant, ratities and
waterfowl, regardless of age or gender, with the exception of doves and
pigeons.
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has obtained the
age of seven (7) months.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Common Council of the
Borough of Flemington.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
KENNEL — Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding or selling cats or dogs or breeding cats or dogs for sale is
carried on except in a pet shop.
§ 5-8 GENERAL § 6-1
1:135
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Borough of Flemington.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or
not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein dogs or cats for sale are kept or
displayed.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels of
the pet; excrement.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs or cats
seized under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where animals are received,
housed and distributed.
THE WORDS "AND" AND "OR" — May be used interchangeably, and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive toward the
implementation of this chapter.
§ 6-2. LICENSING PROVISIONS.
§ 6-2.1. Dogs and Cats; License and Metal Registration Tag
Required; Placing Tag on Dog or Cat. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat of licensing age shall
in January annually apply for and procure from the Clerk of the municipality
a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog or cat so
owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each such dog or cat a collar
or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 6-2.2. Fees; Renewals; Expiration Date. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
a. The person applying for the license shall pay a State registration fee of
one dollar and twenty ($1.20) cents for State Pilot Program for a oneyear
registration tag for each dog and cat; and for each renewal, the fee
for the license and for the registration/pilot program tag shall be the
same as for the original license and tag; and said licenses, registration
§ 6-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 6-2.2
1:136
§ 6-2.3. License. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ 6-2.4. Out of State Cats or Dogs. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
tag and renewal(s) thereof shall expire no later than January 31 in the
year stated on the license.
b. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing
eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs" or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs here and above provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
c. License forms and uniform metal registration tags shall be furnished by
the municipality.
d. In addition to the fees charged pursuant to Subsection a of §§ 6-2.2 and
6-5, any person applying for the license and registration tag pursuant to
§ 6-2.1 shall pay a fee of three ($3.00) dollars for any dog or cat of
reproductive age which has not had its reproductive capacity
permanently altered through sterilization.
e. The owner of any dog or cat that is applying for a license after January
31 of the issuing year, will be charged a late fee of ten ($10.00) dollars
per animal.
a. The owner of any newly acquired dog or cat of licensing age or of a dog
or cat which attains licensing age shall make application for a license
and registration tag for such dog or cat within ten (10) days after such
acquisition of age attainment.
b. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog or cat for which license and registration are sought, and
whether it is of long or short haired variety; also the name, street and
post office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or
harbor such dog or cat. The applicant shall provide suitable proof that
the animal to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with
rabies vaccine.
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the municipality
any dog or cat licensed in another State for the current year, and
bearing a registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than ninety (90)
days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each
such dog or cat unless the same be licensed under § 6-3.1 of this
chapter.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the municipality
any unlicensed dog or cat and shall keep the same or permit the same to
be kept within the municipality for a period of more than ten (10) days
§ 6-2.2 GENERAL § 6-2.4
1:137
§ 6-2.5. Unauthorized Attachment or Removal of Registration Tag.
[Ord. No. 2012-02]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove
a registration tag from the collar of any dog or cat without the consent of
the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog or cat for
which it was not issued.
§ 6-3. KENNELS, PET SHOPS, SHELTER, POUND OR ANIMAL
HOSPITAL.
§ 6-3.1. License Required. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter, pound or animal hospital shall apply to the Borough Clerk
for a license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment. The
application shall describe the premises where the establishment is located
or is proposed to be located, the purpose or purposes for which it is to
be maintained, and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the
Borough of Flemington Board of Health, showing compliance with local and
State rules and regulations governing location of and sanitation at such
establishment. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound
or animal hospital shall state the purpose for which the establishment is
maintained and all such licenses shall expire on the last day of June of
each year, and be subject to revocation by the Borough of Flemington on
recommendations from the State Department of Health for failure to comply
with the rules and regulations of the State Department or local board
governing the same after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either
the State Department or local board. Any person holding such license shall
not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs or cats owned by
such licensee and kept at such establishment; such licenses shall not be
transferable to another owner or different premises.
§ 6-3.2. License Fees for Kennels and Pet Shops; Exceptions. [Ord.
No. 2012-02]
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for ten (10)
or less dogs or cats shall be ten ($10.00) dollars and for more than ten (10)
dogs or cats, twenty-five ($25.00) dollars. The annual license fee for a pet
shop shall be ten ($10.00) dollars. No fee shall be charged for a shelter, a
pound or an animal hospital.
§ 6-3.3. Leashing Required. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
No dog or cat kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound, or animal hospital
shall be permitted off such premises, except on a leash or in a crate or other
safe control.
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such
dog or cat to be licensed pursuant to § 6-3.1 of this chapter.
§ 6-2.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 6-4
1:138
§ 6-4. DISTRIBUTION OF MONIES. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
All monies collected by the municipality shall be distributed pursuant to
applicable law.
§ 6-5. DOG AND CAT LICENSE FEES.
§ 6-5.1. Annual Fee. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The fee for an annual dog or cat license and each renewal thereof as
required by § 6-2.2 of this chapter is as follows:
Neutered
dog:
$6.80 Neutered cat: $6.80
Not neutered
dog:
$11.80 Not neutered
cat:
$8.80
§ 6-6. BOROUGH CLERK TO FORWARD LIST TO STATE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The Clerk of the Borough shall forward to the State Department of Health a
list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters, pounds, and animal hospitals licensed
within thirty (30) days after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall
include the name and address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 6-7. KEEPING OF ANIMALS (EXCLUDING CATS AND DOGS).
§ 6-7.1. Slaughter of Animals. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The slaughter of animals for the purpose of selling the meat, hide or
other animal product shall be prohibited, unless otherwise specified. The
slaughter or subsequent processing of the animal, conducted for any
purpose, shall not be visible from any neighboring property, neighboring
unit, or public right-of-way.
§ 6-7.2. Roaming at-Large Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
No animal, whether domesticated or not, shall be permitted to be free
roaming. All animals shall be fenced and provided shelter.
§ 6-7.3. Sanitary Conditions. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The yard in the area where the animal shelter and fencing is located shall
be in a neat and sanitary condition so as to deter vermin and odors.
§ 6-7.4. Ventilation; Predator/Rodent Resistance of Shelters. [Ord.
No. 2012-02]
Any animal shelter shall be ventilated and predator/rodent resistant.
§ 6-4 GENERAL § 6-7.5
1:139
§ 6-7.5. Odors. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
Persistent odors from animals or their housing or solid waste which
interferes with the enjoyment of life or use of property shall not be
discernible at or beyond any property line.
§ 6-7.6. Humane Conditions. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
Animals shall be kept in humane conditions not adverse to their health or
welfare.
§ 6-7.7. Compliance with Chapter 26, Zoning. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The location and setbacks of animal shelters and fencing shall be regulated
by Chapter 26, § 2609. Accessory Buildings, Structure or Use.
§ 6-7.8. Maximum Weight. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The maximum weight of any single animal shall be fifty (50) pounds.
§ 6-7.9. Chickens and Other Poultry. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ 6-8. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
§ 6-8.1. Appointed. [Ord. No. 2012-02; amended 4-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-5]
The Mayor and Common Council of the Borough shall annually appoint an
Animal Control Officer.
a. A maximum of six (6) chickens or poultry may be kept on any one
property.
b. Roosters shall be prohibited.
c. Chickens and other poultry shall be provided an enclosure which is
covered, ventilated, and predator/rodent resistant. Said enclosure shall
provide a minimum of four (4) square feet per bird when outdoor space
of equal or greater space is provided or ten (10) square feet per bird
where outdoor space of equal or greater space is not provided.
d. The fenced run shall be well drained so that there is no accumulation of
moisture. The floors and walls of the chicken shelter or coop shall be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition, with all droppings collected at
least weekly. Animal solid waste shall be kept in a covered and secured
container until composted, applied as fertilizer or transported offpremises.
§ 6-7.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 6-8.2
1:140
§ 6-8.2. Impoundment. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The Animal Control Officer shall take into custody and impound or cause to
be taken into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or offered
for adoption as provided by law:
§ 6-8.3. Notice Service to Owner. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
If any animals so seized wear a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a registration
tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog or cat is
known, the Animal Control Officer, shall forthwith serve on the person
whose name is given on the collar, or on the owner or person keeping or
harboring said animal, if known, a notice in writing stating that the animal
has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not
claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.
A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual,
or last known place of abode, or at the given address on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
§ 6-8.4. Maintenance Fee; Proof of License Required; Destruction of
Animal. [Ord. No. 2012-02; amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-5]
a. Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog or cat, which said official or his agent, or agents
have reason to believe is a stray dog or cat;
b. Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog or cat without a current registration tag on his
collar;
c. Any female dog or cat in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog or cat;
d. Any dog, cat or other animal which is suspected to be rabid;
e. Any dog, cat or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to,
or observed by, the Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured or creating a
threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise interfering with
the enjoyment of property;
f. Any animal running at large, or unleashed, off the premises of the
owner and not on a leash accompanied by the owner or the owner's
representative exercising authority and control over said dog or cat.
a. The owner or person keeping or harboring any dog or cat so seized is
responsible for all expenses incurred by reason of the animal's
detention, including but not limited to maintenance at the rate being
charged by the facility for each day of detention.
§ 6-8.2 GENERAL § 6-8.4
1:141
§ 6-8.5. Seizure. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The Animal Control Officer or his agent is hereby authorized to go upon any
premises to seize for impounding any dog, dogs, cat or cats which he may
lawfully seize or impound when such Officer is in immediate pursuit of such
animals, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog or cat if said
owner is present and forbids the same.
§ 6-8.6. Interference Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 6-8.7. Restriction on Number of Dogs or Cats to Be Kept. [Ord.
No. 2012-02]
No more than four (4) dogs and/or cats of licensing age shall be kept,
maintained or harbored at one time in any residential housing unit or on its
grounds or in any business establishment or on its grounds. This restriction
shall not apply to properly licensed kennels, pet shops, shelters, pounds or
animal hospitals.
§ 6-9. REQUIREMENT FOR DISPOSAL. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
All animal owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their animal's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
b. When any dog or cat so seized has been detained for seven days after
notice, when notice can be given as above set forth; or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when no notice has been given as
above set forth; and if the dog or cat be unlicensed at the time of seizure
and the person or persons keeping or harboring said dog or cat has not
produced a license and registration tag for said dog or cat, the Animal
Control Officer may cause the dog or cat to be destroyed in a manner
causing as little pain as possible and consistent with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 4:22-19. No dog or other animal so caught and detained or
procured, obtained, sent or brought to a pound or shelter shall be sold
or otherwise made available for the purpose of experimentation. Any
person who sells or otherwise makes available any such dog or other
animal for the purpose of experimentation shall be guilty of a disorderly
persons offense.
a. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
b. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Police Department and/or Board of Health or its designee of Borough of
Flemington.
§ 6-8.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 6-9
1:142
§ 6-10. PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
No person who is owner of an animal shall suffer or permit such animal to:
§ 6-11. VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ 6-12. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
In addition to the enforcement powers specifically set forth in this chapter,
any person, including, but not limited to, the Animal Control Officer, shall
have the power and authority to file and prosecute Municipal Court
complaints alleging a violation of § 6-2.1, Subsection a of § 6-2.3,
subsections 6-2.4, 6-2.5, 6-3.1, 6-3.3, 6-8.6, 6-8.7 or sections 6-9 or 6-10.
c. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred
($500.00) dollars for each violation.
a. Soil or defile or do any injury or damage to any lawn, vegetable garden,
shrubbery, trees, flowers, driveway, ground or any property of persons
other than the owner or person having the care, custody or control of
such dog or cat;
b. Cause any injury to any person;
c. Bark, cry, whine, howl or otherwise disturb the peace or quiet of the
neighborhood or sleep of any person for any unreasonable length of
time;
d. Be or become a public nuisance or to create a condition hazardous to
safety and health; the habitual barking, howling, whining, or crying of
an animal in the Borough of Flemington is hereby declared to be a
disturbing noise within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(8) and a
nuisance;
e. Run at large or unleashed, off the premises of the owner and not on a
leash accompanied by the owner or the owner's representative
exercising authority and control over the animal;
f. Any person found guilty for the violation of any provision of § 6-10 may
be fined up to five hundred ($500.00) dollars or imprisoned in the
County jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both.
a. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this chapter
shall be liable to a penalty of not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars nor
more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each offense to be
recovered by and in the name of the municipality.
b. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with § 6-8.7 may
be fined up to five hundred ($500.00) dollars or imprisoned in the
County jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both.
§ 6-9 GENERAL § 6-13
1:143
§ 6-13. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
§ 6-13.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
As used in this section:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Shall mean a certified municipal Animal
Control Officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law
enforcement officer of the municipality or his designees as defined in
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Department of Health.
DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Shall mean any cat, dog or livestock other than
poultry.
N.J.S.A. — Shall mean the cited Annotated New Jersey Statute (N.J.S.A.) as
enacted on the date of adoption of this section (March 12, 2012) and any
subsequent amendments to the New Jersey Statute adopted hereafter.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid
declared potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-23.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by
Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.
§ 6-13.2. Seizure and Impoundment of Dog by Animal Control
Officer; Grounds. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the officer
has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
a. Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
b. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person during
an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to persons or
domestic animals;
c. Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24 and
N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or
d. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether
the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of
the Municipal Health Officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or
other structure agreeable to the owner.
§ 6-13 FLEMINGTON CODE § 6-13.3
1:144
§ 6-13.3. Notice of Seizure and Impoundment; Determination of
Identity of Owners; Notice of Hearing; Return of Statement by
Owner; Destruction of Dog. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ 6-13.4. Agreement Between Municipality and Dog Owner;
Settlement and Disposition; Liability of Municipality; Legal
Expenses. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
Notwithstanding any provision in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. to the contrary, the
municipality and the owner of the dog may settle and dispose of the matter
at any time in such manner and according to such terms and conditions that
may be mutually agreed upon. Notwithstanding any provision of N.J.S.A.
4:19-19 to the contrary, no municipality or any of its employees shall have
any liability by virtue of having entered into any settlement agreement
pursuant to this section, or for any action or inaction related to the entry
into such agreement, for any injuries or damages caused thereafter by
the dog. The municipality may as a condition of the settlement agreement
also require that the owner of the dog hold the municipality harmless for
any legal expenses or fees the municipality may incur in defending against
any cause of action brought against the municipality notwithstanding the
prohibition against such causes of action set forth in this section.
§ 6-13.5. Finding to Declare Dog Vicious; Grounds. [Ord. No.
2012-02]
a. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court and
Municipal Health Office immediately that he has seized and impounded
a dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, or that he has reasonable cause to
believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and that a hearing
is required. The Animal Control Officer shall, through a reasonable
effort, attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any dog seized
and impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19. If its owner cannot be
identified within seven (7) days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
b. The Animal Control Officer shall, within three (3) working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment,
and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This
notice shall also require that the owner return within seven (7) days by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether
he wishes the hearing to be conducted or if not, to relinquish ownership
of the dog in which case the dog may be humanely destroyed. If the
owner cannot be notified by certified mail return receipt requested, or
refuses to sign for the certified letter, or does not reply to the certified
letter with a signed statement within seven (7) days, the dog may be
humanely destroyed.
§ 6-13.3 GENERAL § 6-13.5
1:145
§ 6-13.6. Finding to Declare Dog Potentially Dangerous. [Ord. No.
2012-02]
§ 6-13.7. Order and Schedule for Compliance for Potentially
Dangerous Dogs: Conditions. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and schedule for compliance which, in part:
a. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
2. Has engaged in dog fighting activities described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
b. A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily
injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was
provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
c. If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-26, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog may
be destroyed during the pending of an appeal.
a. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds it to be clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-2(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack; and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person; or
2. Severely injured or killed another domestic animal and
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Poses a threat to another domestic animal; or
3. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
b. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
1. Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person if
the dog was provoked; or
2. Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the aggressor.
For the purposes of Subsection b1 of this subsection, the
municipality shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the
dog was not provoked.
§ 6-13.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 6-13.7
1:146
§ 6-13.8. Procedures for Appeal. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control Officer in the municipality
in which the dog was impounded, may appeal any final decision, order or
judgment, including any conditions attached thereto, of a Municipal Court
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. by filing an appeal with the Superior
Court, Law Division, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts
of the State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of limited
a. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
1. To apply, at his own expense, to the Municipal Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2, for a
special municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-30. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the
registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location.
A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until the owner
obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag;
2. To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from fifty (50) feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to Subsection a3 of the subsection;
3. To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping, or digging and within a fence of at least six (6)
feet in height separated by at least three (3) feet from the confined
area. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock
the enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to
preclude any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure, or if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
Animal Control Officer having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three (3)
feet from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner.
b. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy shall contain a
provision requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to be
named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of
the liability insurance policy.
§ 6-13.7 GENERAL § 6-13.8
1:147
jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting a
hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals from
courts of limited jurisdiction.
§ 6-13.9. Liability of Owner for Costs of Impoundment and
Destruction. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ 6-13.10. Right to Convene Hearing for Subsequent Actions of Dog.
[Ord. No. 2012-02]
If the Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a hearing
to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous for any
subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 6-13.11. Duties of Owners of Potentially Dangerous Dogs. [Ord.
No. 2012-02]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
a. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous and all appeals
pertaining hereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the municipality in which the dog is impounded for the costs
and expenses of impounding and destroying the dog. The owner shall
pay the actual costs incurred by the municipality for such costs and
expenses. The owner shall incur the expense of impounding the dog in a
facility other than the municipal depository, regardless of whether the
dog is ultimately found to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
b. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within ten (10) days previous
to the time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New
Jersey State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
a. Comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. in accordance
with a schedule established by the Municipal Court, but in no case more
than sixty (60) days subsequent to the date of determination.
b. Notify the licensing authority, local Police Department and the Animal
Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large or has attacked
a human being or killed a domestic animal.
c. Notify the licensing authority, local Police Department and the Animal
Control Officer within twenty-four (24) hours of the death, sale or
donation of a potentially dangerous dog.
d. Prior to selling or donating the dog inform the prospective owner that
the dog has been declared potentially dangerous.
e. Upon sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a different
municipality, notify the Department and the licensing authority, Police
Department and Animal Control Officer of that municipality of the
§ 6-13.8 FLEMINGTON CODE § 6-13.11
1:148
§ 6-13.12. Violations by Owner; Penalties; Enforcement; Seizure and
Impoundment of Dog; Destruction by Court Order. [Ord. No.
2012-02]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog, who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this section (§ 6-13, Potentially
Dangerous Dogs and Vicious Dogs) or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, or to have failed to comply with a Court's order shall
be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars
per day of the violation, and each day's continuance of the violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation. The Municipal Court shall have
jurisdiction to enforce this section. The Animal Control Officer authorized
to seize and impound any potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to
comply with provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, or a Court's order. The Municipal Court may
order that the dog so seized and impounded be destroyed in an expeditious
and humane manner.
§ 6-13.13. Potentially Dangerous Dog Registration Number, Red
Identification Tag and License; Issuance; Telephone Number to
Report Violation; Publicity. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
Each municipality shall:
transfer of ownership and the name, address and telephone number of
the new owner.
f. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3,
pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the municipality as
provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-31.
a. Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to the
Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the Court's orders.
The last three (3) digits of each potential dangerous dog registration
number issued by a municipality will be the three-number code
assigned to that municipality in the regulations promulgated pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 4:19-33. The Animal Control Officer shall verify, in writing,
compliance to the Municipal Clerk or other official designated to license
dogs.
b. Publish a telephone number for reporting violations of this section. This
telephone number shall be forwarded to the New Jersey Department of
Health and any changes in this number shall be reported immediately
to the New Jersey Department of Health.
§ 6-13.11 GENERAL § 6-13.14
1:149
§ 6-13.14. Fee for Potential Dangerous Dog License. [Ord. No.
2012-02]
Each person who shall own, possess, keep or harbor any potentially
dangerous dog or dogs shall obtain an annual license for each dog and shall
have the same registered and numbered through the Animal Control Officer
and/or person designated in the Borough Clerk's office, and for such license
shall pay the sum of five hundred ($500.00) dollars, as a license fee for each
and every potentially dangerous dog. Said license fee shall be in lieu of the
license fee required pursuant to § 6-2.2 of the Revised Ordinances of the
Borough of Flemington.
§ 6-13.15. Inspection to Determine Continuing Compliance. [Ord.
No. 2012-02]
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with § 6-13.7
of this section.
§ 6-13.16. Deposit and Use of Fines and Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
All fines and fees collected or received by the Borough pursuant to this
section shall be deposited in a special account and used by the Borough to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 6-13.17. Inapplicability of Section to Dogs Used for Law
Enforcement Activities. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs used for law
enforcement activities.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED.
Whenever any words or phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall apply to such words and phrases.
§ 7-2. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, as may be in
current use in the borough.
§ 7-3. (RESERVED)16
16.Editor's Note: Former section 7-3, Penalty, previously codified herein was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 24-1999. See section 2-18 for a schedule of fines and penalties.
§ 6-13.14 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-4
1:150
§ 7-4. PARKING.17
§ 7-4.1. Regulations Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in R.S. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute, or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-4.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Ord.
19-1977; Ord. 23-1980, S 1–4; Ord. 2002-5, S 1]
a. Streets and highways.
1. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, an emergency shall exist and no
vehicle shall be parked on any street or highway in the Borough of
Flemington. The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect
after the snow has ceased until the streets have been plowed
sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the
normal flow of traffic.
2. Municipal parking lots. Whenever sow has fallen and the
accumulation is such that it covers any municipal parking lot, an
emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall be parked in any
municipal parking lot in the Borough of Flemington.
3. Exceptions: Residential - Snow emergency parking.
(a) Any vehicle that is parked in a designated "Residential - Snow
Emergency Parking" area located within a municipal parking
lot.
(1) Areas #1, #2, #3, #4 and #5;
(2) Parking lot located to the rear of the Flemington Borough
Hall and Fire House, 38 Park Avenue.
b. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "EMERGENCY-NO
PARKING" signs are displayed. The chief of police, or in his absence,
the ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of said "EMERGENCY, NO-PARKING" signs when
weather conditions, accidents, fires, or public celebrations dictate or
require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere
with the free flow of traffic. Notification that the "EMERGENCY, NOPARKING"
signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the sign.
17.Editor's Note: For parking regulations in the Circle Outlet Center, see subsection 7-18.1.
§ 7-4 GENERAL § 7-4.2
1:151
§ 7-4.3. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. Ord.
19-1977; Ord. 16-1984, S 1; Ord. 10-1986, SS I, II; Ord. 2-1987, SS
I, II; Ord. 6-1990, S 1; Ord. 12-1990, S 1; Ord. 7-1991, S 1; Ord.
7-1994, S 1; Ord. 1996-28, SS 1, 2; Ord. 7-1998, S 1; Ord. 2002-4, S
1; Ord. 2005-25, S 1; Ord. 2008-20; Ord. 2010-12, S 1)
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule I of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-4.4. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. Ord. 19-1977; Ord. 22-1981; Ord. 6-1983, S 3; Ord.
10-1986, S III; Ord. 6-1990, S 2.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified, on any day,
except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule II of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-4.5. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. 19-1977;
Ord. 26-1977, SS 2, 3; Ord. 9-1981; Ord. 21-1981; Ord. 10-1986, S
IV; Ord. 7-1994, S 3; Ord. 8-1995, S 3; Ord. 1-2000, S 1; Ord.
2006-9, S 2; Ord. No. 2014-17; Ord. No. 2017-5]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown, at
any time between the hours listed, on any day except Sundays and public
holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
III of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-4.6. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets, Sundays and Holidays Included. [Ord. 6-1983, S 3.]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified, on any day,
Sundays and holidays included, upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule II-A of Chapter 7A.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of
removal and storage which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
d. The provisions of paragraphs a, b and c shall not apply to any firefighting
equipment, ambulance or other emergency equipment actively
engaged in dealing with an emergency in the Borough.
e. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation or provision of this subsection or
supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or both.
§ 7-4.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-4.7
1:152
§ 7-4.7. No Stopping or Standing of a Vehicle on Certain Streets.
[Ord. 14-1982, S 3; Ord. 6-1983, S 3; Ord. 7-1994, S 2; Ord. 8-1997,
S 2; Ord. 2001-12; Ord. 2011-22]
No persons shall stop or cause a vehicle to stand at any time upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule I-A of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-4.8. Regulations in the Hunterdon Shopping Center Parking
Lot. [Ord. 16-1984, S 2; Ord. 8-1997, S 1]
a. Parking.
1. No person shall park a vehicle at any time along the curb line in
front of and approximately ten feet distance from the fronts of the
stores in the Hunterdon Shopping Center parking lot. The parking
prohibition established in this subsection shall commence at the
most westerly edge of said curb line and run in an easterly
direction along said curb line, a distance of 650 feet to the Borough
line on the east.
2. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
3. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule 1-A of the Borough
Ordinance found in Chapter 7A.
4. All handicapped parking stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued handicapped
parking permits by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
5. The most northerly driveway at South Main Street shall be exit
only.
b. Lane Use Reservations. The lane locations described are designated as
Lane Use Reservations and traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Entrance Driveway at Reaville a. Right lane must turn right.
Avenue b. Left lane must turn left.
Entrance Driveway at Main a. Right lane must turn right.
Driveway b. Left lane must turn left.
c. Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot and all roadways shall be 15 m.p.h. Regulatory and warning signs
authorized by the Department of Transportation shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above designated speed limit.
§ 7-4.7 GENERAL § 7-4.8
1:153
§ 7-4.9. Parking Restricted for Use by Handicapped Persons. [Ord.
17-1985, S I; Ord. 18-1993, S 1; Ord. 7-1994, S 6; Ord. 2001-4; Ord.
2001-6; Ord. 16-2001; Ord. 2002-19, S 1; Ord. 2003-5, S 1; Ord.
2008-7; Ord. 2009-5, S 1; Ord. No. 2013-7; Ord. No. 2014-3; Ord.
2015-13; Ord. No. 2015-23; Ord. No. 2016-15; Ord. No. 2017-12]
No persons shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule XII of Chapter 7A except: (a) persons
issued handicapped persons identification cards by the Director of the
Motor Vehicle Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and the vehicle
bears a placard issued by the Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission,
which is properly displayed on such vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206;
and (b) temporarily handicapped persons who shall have been issued a
temporary placard by the chief of police of any municipality in the State
of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, and the vehicle displays such
temporary placard.
§ 7-4.10. Parking Restricted in Certain Parking Lots for Use by
Handicapped Persons. [Ord. 18-1985, S IV; Ord. 15-1989, SS 1–3;
Ord. 7-1992, SS 2, 3; Ord. 6-1999, S 1; Ord. 19-2001; Ord. 2002-16,
S 1; Ord. 2004-24, S 1; Ord. 2007-1, S 1]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time in any of the areas in any
of the parking lots described in Schedule XIII of Chapter 7A except: (a)
persons issued handicapped persons identification cards by the Director of
the Motor Vehicle Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and the vehicle
bears a placard issued by the Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission,
which is properly displayed on such vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206;
and (b) temporarily handicapped persons who have been issued a
temporary placard by the chief of police of any municipality in the State
of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, and the vehicle displays such
temporary placard.
§ 7-4.11. Parking by Permit. [Ord. 9-1986, S 3; Ord. 13-1986, S I;
Ord. 3-1987, SS I, II; Ord. 12-1988, S 1; Ord. 3-1991, S 1; Ord.
1-1993, S 1; Ord. 8-1995, S 1; Ord. 1995-34, S 1; Ord. 5-1997, SS 1,
2; Ord. 23-1997, S 1; Ord. No. 2017-15]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time between the hours listed,
on school days, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XV of Chapter 7A unless:
d. Tow away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block any vehicle parked or standing as
to obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit
ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area or pedestrian walkway, or
presenting in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 7-4.8 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-4.11
1:154
§ 7-4.12. Parking Prohibited on School Days During Certain Hours
on Certain Streets. [Ord. 6-1990, S 3; Ord. 7-1995, S 1; Ord. 8-1995,
S 2]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified, on any school
day, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI of
Chapter 7A.
§ 7-4.13. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets Without Parking
Permit. [Ord. 1-1993, S 2; Ord. 23-1997, S 2; Ord. 22-1998, S 1; Ord.
8-2000, S 1]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown, at
any time between the hours listed, on any day except Sundays and legal
holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
XVII of Chapter 7A unless:
a. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident of the
street on which such vehicle is parked and the vehicle displays on its
driver's side rear window a current residential parking permit in such a
manner as to be clearly visible; or
b. The vehicle is owned or operated by a person visiting a resident of the
street on which the vehicle is parked and the vehicle displays a current
visitor parking permit issued to such resident; or
c. The vehicle is an emergency, public service, telephone or other public
utility vehicle rendering service or repairs within the immediate area
where parked; or
d. The vehicle is owned or operated by a contractor, service or delivery
company bearing the name and address of commercial business and
such vehicle is rendering service or making a delivery to a residence
within the immediate area where parked.
e. The chief of police may, in his discretion, approve permits for
nonresidents upon a showing of special need.
Application for permits under subsection 7-4.11 shall be made, in
writing, to the clerk of the Borough of Flemington on forms to be
provided by such clerk. The clerk shall issue permits if he is reasonably
satisfied that the applicant is entitled thereto.
a. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident of the
street on which such vehicle is parked and the vehicle displays on its
driver's side rear window a current residential parking permit in such a
manner as to be clearly visible; or
b. The vehicle is owned or operated by a person visiting a resident of the
street on which the vehicle is parked and the vehicle displays a current
visitor parking permit issued to such resident; or
§ 7-4.11 GENERAL § 7-4.13
1:155
§ 7-4.14. Regulations in the Reading-Flemington Middle School
Parking Lot. [Ord. 18-1998, S 1]
c. The vehicle is an emergency, public service, telephone or other public
utility vehicle rendering service or repairs within the immediate area
where parked; or
d. The vehicle is owned or operated by a contractor, service or delivery
company bearing the name and address of a commercial business and
such vehicle is rendering service or making a delivery within the
immediate area where parked.
e. The chief of police may, in his discretion, approve permits for
nonresidents upon a showing of special need.
Application for permits under subsection 7-4.13 shall be made, in
writing, to the clerk of the Borough of Flemington on forms to be
provided by such clerk. The clerk shall issue permits if he is reasonably
satisfied that the applicant is entitled thereto.
a. Parking.
1. No person shall park a vehicle at any time, except busses, in areas
delineated at "No Parking Busses Only."
2. "No Parking Busses Only" areas shall be designated and delineated
in accordance with the Manual and Uniform Traffic Control Devices
Standards.
b. Loading Zones.
1. No person shall park a vehicle at any time, unless loading or
unloading in areas delineated as "No Parking Loading Zone."
c. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
d. All handicapped parking stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved
Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued Handicapped Parking Permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
e. Speed Limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the
parking lot and all roadways shall be 15 m.p.h. Regulatory and warning
signs authorized by the Department of Transportation shall be erected
and maintained to effect the above designated speed limit.
f. Tow Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block any vehicle parked or standing as
to obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit
ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy areas or pedestrian walkway, or
§ 7-4.13 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-4.14
1:156
§ 7-4.15. Victorian Square. [Ord. 15-1999]
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Victorian Square located in the Borough of Flemington,
County of Hunterdon and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
presenting in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads East All Entire length
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan18 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
b. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Walter E. Foran Boulevard and George
Wilson Boulevard
George Wilson Boulevard
George Wilson Boulevard and Road "A" Road "A"
c. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 m.p.h.
2. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway M.P.H. Limits
All roads 20 Entire length
18.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
borough clerk.
§ 7-4.14 GENERAL § 7-4.15
1:157
§ 7-5. LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO A CERTAIN CLASS OF
VEHICLES. [Ord. 19-1977; Ord. 25-1981, S 7; Ord. 2010-5, S 1]
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's expense.
e. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
f. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $150.00
dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
g. Effect of Subsection. If any part of this subsection is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the subsection.
a. Trucks Over Four Tons. Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV of
Chapter 7A except for the pickup and delivery of materials.
b. Trucks Over Ten Tons. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets as
described are hereby designated as "Route for Vehicles Over 10 Tons."
All trucks having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle
plus load in excess of ten tons shall use the designated Truck Route:
1. Restricted Streets.
Mine Street for entire length
Stangl Road for entire length
Broad Street for entire length
Church Street from Route 31 west to end
Emery Avenue to entire length
New York Avenue for entire length
Pennsylvania Avenue for entire length
New Jersey Avenue for entire length
§ 7-4.15 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-5
1:158
§ 7-5A. DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTE. [Ord. 2010-5, S 1]
NJ Route 12 from Mine Street to the Flemington Circle
NJ Route 31 from the Flemington Circle to Walter Foran Boulevard
Walter Foran Boulevard eastbound from North Main Street to Route 31
§ 7-6. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. 19-1977; Ord. 25-1981, S 6; Ord.
14-1982, S 3; Ord. 6-1983, S 3; Ord. 18-1985, S II; Ord. 8-1997, S 4;
Ord. 18-1998, S 2; Ord. 2003-35, S 1; Ord. No. 2017-8]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V of Chapter 7A are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 7-7. THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS AND YIELD
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 7-7.1. Through Streets. [Ord. 19-1977; Ord. 16-1984, SS 3–4; Ord.
2-1987, S III; Ord. 2011-9]
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule VI of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as Through
Streets. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the Through Street except where YIELD signs are provided for
in the designation.
§ 7-7.2. Stop Intersections. [Ord. 8A, 1982; Ord. 16-1984, S 5; Ord.
8-1997, S 3; Ord. 2011-9]
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 39:4-140, the intersections described in
Schedule VI-A of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
STOP signs shall be installed as provided herein.
§ 7-7.3. Four-Way Stop Intersections. [Ord. 16-1984, S 6; Ord.
2003-35, S 2; Ord. 2004-18, S 1; Ord. 2004-26, S 1]
The locations described in Schedule VI-B of Chapter 7A are hereby
designated as Four-Way Stop Intersections. STOP signs shall be installed on
or near the right side of each such intersecting street.
§ 7-8. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. 19-1977; Ord. 25-1981, SS 4, 5; Ord.
16-1986, S 1; Ord. 7-1994, S 4.]
The locations described in Schedule VII of Chapter 7A are hereby
designated as loading zones.
East Main Street for entire length
Park Avenue to entire length
§ 7-5 GENERAL § 7-9
1:159
§ 7-9. TROLLEY STOPS. [Ord. 19-1977; Ord. 25-1981, SS 2, 3; Ord.
7-1994, S 5.]
The locations described in Schedule VIII of Chapter 7A are hereby
designated as trolley stops.
§ 7-10. PARKING METERS.
§ 7-10.1. Establishment of Zones.
Parking meter zones are hereby established in the borough. The zones shall
be as described in Schedule IX of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.2. Installation of Parking Meters.
§ 7-10.3. Parking Meter Spaces.
a. The borough police commissioners shall install parking meters in the
parking meter zones as provided in this section upon the curb
immediately adjacent to each designated parking space. The meters
shall be capable of being operated, either automatically or
mechanically. Upon deposit of United States currency, a vehicle may
lawfully park in any such parking meter zone for the following period of
time as specified.
One-half hour meters:
Upon the deposit of one nickel: for the full lawful parking time.
15 minute meters:
Upon the deposit of one penny: for the full lawful parking time.
b. Each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed, installed and set
that upon the expiration of the time period registered, by the deposit of
one or more coins, as provided herein, it will indicate by an appropriate
signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired, and during said
period of time and prior to the expiration thereof, will indicate the
interval of time which remains of such period.
c. No parking meters shall be installed in any of the areas where parking
is prohibited pursuant to R.S. 39:4-138.
d. Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and
hours when the requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply, the
value of the coins to be deposited, and the limited period of time for
which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which
such meter is located.
a. The borough police commissioner shall designate the parking space
adjacent to each parking meter for which the meter is to be used by
appropriate parkings upon the curb or the pavement of the street.
§ 7-9 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-10.3
1:160
§ 7-10.4. Deposit of Coins and Time Limits.
§ 7-10.5. Use of Slugs Prohibited.
No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any
slug, button or any other device or substance as substitutes for coins of the
United States currency.
Parking meter spaces so designated shall be of appropriate length and
width so as to be accessible from the traffic lanes of such street.
b. No person shall park a vehicle in any such designated parking meter
space during the restricted or regulated time applicable to the parking
meter zone in which the meter is located so that any part of the vehicle
occupies more than one space or protrudes beyond the markings
designating the space, except that a truck which is of a size too large to
be parked within a single designated parking meter zone shall be
permitted to occupy two adjoining parking meter spaces when coins
shall have been deposited in the parking meter for each space so
occupied as is required in this section for the parking of other vehicles
in such space.
a. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space upon a street
alongside of and next to which a parking meter has been installed
during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking
meter zone in which the meter is located unless a coin or coins of
United States currency of the appropriate denomination as provided in
this section shall have been previously deposited therein for an
unexpired interval of time, and the meter has been placed in operation.
b. No person shall permit a vehicle within his control to be parked in any
such meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to
the parking meter zone in which the meter is located while the parking
meter for the space indicates by signal that the lawful parking time in
the space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of
parking or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately
thereafter a coin or coins in the meter.
c. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space for a
consecutive period of time longer than that limited period of time for
which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which
the meter is located, irrespective of the number or amounts of the coins
deposited in such meter.
d. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the duty
to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this section and the
State Vehicle Code prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 7-10.3 GENERAL § 7-10.6
1:161
§ 7-10.6. Tampering With Meter.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy
or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
§ 7-11. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. 19-1977; Ord. 1-1981; Ord. 12-1988, S
2; Ord. 1-1999, S 1; Ord. 5-1999, S 1; Ord. 2003-35, S 3; Ord. No.
2014-24]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI of Chapter 7A shall
have the speed limits designated in such schedule.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-12. LANE USE RESERVATION.
No person shall cause a vehicle to use the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule X of Chapter 7A except as provided in said Schedule
X.
§ 7-13. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-13.1. No Left Turns. [Ord. 18-1985, S III; Ord. 2-1998, S 1; Ord.
2011-21; Ord. No. 2014-19]
No person shall make a left turn at any of the following locations described
in Schedule XIV of Chapter 7A. Signs indicating NO LEFT TURN shall be
installed in the appropriate places at the intersections or locations indicated
on Schedule XIV.
§ 7-14. REMOVAL OF CHALK.
No person shall remove from the tire of any parked vehicle, with the intent
to evade borough overtime parking restrictions, a chalk mark placed on the
tire by a police officer or parking enforcement officer for the purpose of
monitoring the time limit in which the vehicle is allowed to park on certain
streets or parking lots for a two hour limit.
§ 7-15. TRAFFIC CONTROL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
FOR CONSTRUCTION AND ROAD REPAIRS.
§ 7-15.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
The purpose of this section is to establish controls and regulations for
the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through the Borough of
Flemington when construction, maintenance or repairs causes traffic to be
diverted within or into or exiting the Borough, require the use of members
of the Flemington Borough Police Department, Public Works Director and
Borough Engineer to establish and maintain traffic control operations and
§ 7-10.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-15.1
1:162
to provide for the safety as well as compensation of the members of the
Flemington Borough Police Department performing such operations.
§ 7-15.2. Adoption of Standards. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
§ 7-15.3. Preconstruction Meetings. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
a. The Borough of Flemington, through the Mayor and Council, hereby
finds and declares that problems of traffic control occur when traffic
must be moved through or around street construction, maintenance
operations and utility work above and below ground which requires
blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic,
causing it to be diverted either within or into the Borough; and that
such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace
and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations
directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through and /
or around construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for
the work force performing these operations.
b. The Borough of Flemington, through the Mayor and Council, hereby
adopt the current Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, hereafter
known as MUTCD, except as hereby supplemented and amended, as it
controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance operations
or utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic on all roadways
within or leading to or exiting from the Borough of Flemington. Any
person, contractor, or utility failing to comply with the provisions of
MUTCD while performing such work is in violation of this section.
a. A Preconstruction Meeting shall be required and be scheduled with the
Administration of the Flemington Borough Police Department, Road
Supervisor and Borough Engineer (as required) for any work period
that will exceed five (5) consecutive days by any person, contractor, or
in the case of a roadway or Borough Utility capital improvement
project, public utility as required under the public utility agreement,
wishing to conduct work on, under or above any roadway within the
Borough, or to conduct work on, under or above any roadway that
would cause traffic to be diverted through the Borough.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of a
public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above any roadway within the Borough, or to
conduct work on, under or above any roadway that would cause traffic
to be diverted through the Borough, to contact the Administration of
the Flemington Borough Police Department, Road Supervisor and
Borough Engineer to arrange a preconstruction meeting to submit
plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction work. Preconstruction meetings must be scheduled far
enough in advance (a minimum of two weeks) of the desired start date
so as to allow for efficient planning.
§ 7-15.1 GENERAL § 7-15.3
1:163
§ 7-15.4. Hazardous Conditions. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the aforementioned
departments with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be
called in case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance
site or arising from the construction or maintenance being performed,
prior to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot
be reached, or if the emergency contract person does not respond in a
timely manner to the call from the aforementioned departments to correct
a hazardous condition, the Borough may respond to correct such hazardous
conditions. The reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Borough
shall be charged to the person, contractor or utility responsible for such
conditions.
§ 7-15.5. Road Closing and Detours. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the officer in charge of the Flemington Borough Police Department. The
Flemington Police Department officer in charge shall consult with the Public
Works Director and/or the Borough Engineer prior to any scheduled road
closing or detour. Advance notice of detours must be given to motorists,
except in emergent circumstances.
§ 7-15.6. Off-Duty Police Officers Required. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
c. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section
prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the
aforementioned departments, is in violation of this section.
a. Any person, contractor, or public utility seeking to conduct work on,
above or below any roadway within the Borough of Flemington,
including but not limited to municipal, county or state road, or any
person, contractor or public utility seeking to conduct work on any
municipal, county, state or private roadway outside of the Borough of
Flemington that will require traffic to be diverted within, into or
through the Borough of Flemington is required to hire off-duty
Flemington Borough officers to ensure compliance with the MUTCD as
well as to control traffic resulting from the work. If under certain
circumstances a total road closure is needed where off-duty police
officers are not required it shall be approved by the Flemington
Borough Police Administration, Public works director and Engineer at a
pre-construction meeting as outlined under Section 3.
b. The Administration of the Flemington Borough Police Department shall
be contacted at least 48 hours unless emergent circumstances exist
before starting work to arrange for the hiring of off-duty officers. The
number of officers required shall be determined by the Administration.
c. The requirement to hire off-duty officers set forth in paragraphs a and b
above shall apply to work within the road right-of-way as part of any
§ 7-15.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-15.6
1:164
§ 7-15.7. Payment and Insurance for Services Rendered by Off-Duty
Police Officers. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
partial closure, or work within a heavily traveled roadway, where traffic
must deviate from its normal course of travel.
d. Any and all work that shall take more than one hour to complete shall
conform to the provisions set forth under this section. Any person,
contractor, or public utility that takes more than one hour to complete
their "temporary" or "emergent" work shall hire off-duty police officers
or shall be in violation. All work on, above or below the roads taking less
than one hour may be controlled with certified flagmen, unless off-duty
officers are deemed necessary by the Flemington Borough Police
Department road supervisor and approved by the Chief of Police.
e. Large scale projects taking more than two (2) consecutive weeks shall
be approved by the Flemington Borough Police Department
Administration, Public Works Director and Borough Engineer during a
pre-construction meeting. All work on, above or below the roads shall
require off-duty police officers unless during the pre-construction
meeting it was deemed unnecessary and can be controlled by certified
flagmen, or proper detour signage.
f. All certified flagmen must have completed a nationally recognized Basic
Flagger Training Course and wear approved traffic vests, and must be
certified as to the proper operation of traffic flag controls. If flagmen
cannot see each other, they must have radio communication between
them.
g. If the work requires any road to be closed to traffic for 24 hours or
greater, the hiring of off-duty officers will only be required when it is
deemed necessary by the aforementioned department heads.
a. Any off-duty police officer hired pursuant to subsection 7-15.6 of this
section shall be compensated at the level set forth in the
"Compensation" provision known as "Outside Detail" of the current PBA
188 collective negotiations agreements and Borough ordinance. The
Borough shall collect an administrative fee for outside employment at
$6.00 per hourly pay rate.
b. Any off-duty police officer hired pursuant to subsection 7-15.6 of this
section and working a detail shall be paid for a minimum hourly rate
regardless of the actual amount of time worked in accordance with the
PBA 188 collective negotiations agreement, and in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article IX Section D(4) of the PBA 188 collective
negotiations agreement with the Borough of Flemington.
c. The Borough of Flemington shall administer any and all wages and fees,
including administrative fees and vehicle fees, for extra-duty police
work.
§ 7-15.6 GENERAL § 7-15.7
1:165
§ 7-15.8. Stop Work. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
The Chief of Police, Director of Public Works, or designee(s) shall have the
authority to stop work being performed within the Borough of Flemington,
including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within
the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other related
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this section.
§ 7-15.9. Site Preparation and Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
d. Any off-duty police officer hired pursuant to subsection 7-15.6 of this
section shall be subject to the Rules and Regulations, SOPs and General
Orders of the Flemington Borough Police Department. Wages earned
for outside extra-duty employment by any police officer shall not be
applied toward the pension benefits of the police officer so employed,
nor shall hours worked for outside employment be considered in any
way compensable as overtime payable by the Borough of Flemington.
e. Officers shall receive "premium pay" for all hours worked for "road
work" assignments on Easter, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year's Day. "Premium pay" shall
be defined as 1.5 times the rate of pay set forth in paragraph a of this
section.
f. The hiring entity shall assume any and all liability arising out of extraduty
police work, whether such liability is direct or vicarious, including
but not limited to liability arising from travel to and from a job location
and services rendered during the extra-duty police work.
g. Prior to the commencement of any extra-duty employment, the hiring
entity shall deliver to the Borough of Flemington a Certificate of
Insurance that it holds at least $3,000,000 of general liability insurance
coverage, which shall be reasonably satisfactory to the Borough of
Flemington as to amounts of coverage, deductibles, and insurers. The
Borough of Flemington shall be named as an additional insured to the
policy.
h. Prior to the commencement of any extra-duty employment, the hiring
entity shall deliver to the Borough of Flemington a Certificate of
Workers' Compensation, which shall be reasonably satisfactory to the
Borough as to amounts of coverage, deductibles, and insurers. The
Borough shall be named as an additional insured to the policy.
i. Payment for all such assignments shall be made to the Borough who
shall issue payment through the Borough payroll system to the officer.
a. It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or
equipment are to be placed in roadway or sidewalk areas until all
construction, signs, lights, devices and pavement markings are
installed. All construction signs that will not apply during the
§ 7-15.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-15.9
1:166
§ 7-15.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-7]
§ 7-15.11. Cancellation Policy. [ Ord. No. 2016-7]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits to hiring a police officer or
officers and cancels or reschedules the work within two weeks from the date
scheduled, the outside contractor shall be responsible to pay the officer(s)
through the Borough of Flemington for four hours at the applicable hourly
rate unless a natural disaster and/or state of emergency is declared. If the
cancelation or rescheduling occurs within 12 hours of the start time of the
detail or road work the officer(s) shall be paid for four hours or 50% of the
hours scheduled whichever is greater. Unless a natural disaster and/or state
of emergency is declared.
§ 7-15.12. Severability. [ Ord. No. 2016-7]
Should any section, clause, sentence, phrase or provision of this section be
declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this section.
§ 7-15.13. Indemnification. [ Ord. No. 2016-7]
The hiring entity shall save and hold harmless the Borough, and its officers,
officials, agents, employees, administrators and elected officials, from and
against any and all liabilities arising out of the performance of off-duty
police work, whether such liability is direct or vicarious. This requirement
shall be construed as broadly in favor of indemnification as permitted by
New Jersey law.
construction must be bagged or removed from view of motorists (i.e.;
"Flagman Ahead" signs after workmen have finished for the day).
b. Any person, contractor or utility performing work shall be responsible
to provide all traffic control equipment that is needed to safely manage
the worksite. If "No Parking" notification is needed prior to the work
being performed the above shall also be responsible to post proper
notice. Failure to provide proper traffic control equipment or needed
notification will result in the work site being shut down until proper
equipment can be obtained or notifications can be made.
a. Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, for a first offense pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days; for a second offense, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine for not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
b. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-15.9 GENERAL § 7-16
1:167
§ 7-16. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS.
The following locations shall be established as mid-block crosswalks as
described in Schedule XVIII of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-17. ACCESS AND EXIT WAYS TO AND FROM PRIVATE PARKING
LOTS AND DRIVEWAYS.
§ 7-17.1. Prohibited Movement. [Ord. 25-2001; Ord. 2011-24; Ord.
No. 2014-18]
No person shall enter or exit onto a municipal road or from a municipal road
onto private property as described in Schedule XIX of Chapter 7A.
Regulatory signs shall be erected and maintained by the borough
designating entries and exits from municipal roads onto private property
and from private property onto municipal roads.
§ 7-18. REGULATION FOR THE MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE PROPERTY OPEN TO THE PUBLIC AND TO
WHICH THE PUBLIC IS INVITED (RETAIL BUSINESS).
§ 7-18.1. Circle Outlet Center.
a. Regulation(s):
1. General parking.
(a) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads and
aisles
Both All Entire length
2. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Road "C" Between Reaville Avenue and
the Flemington Borough-
Raritan Township corporate
line.
§ 7-16 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-18.1
1:168
3. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On:
Reaville Avenue and Road A Road A
Reaville Avenue and Road C Road C
Road A and Road B Road B
Road A and Aisle D Aisle D
4. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
described.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road B East Between the Circle Outlet
Center property line and
Road A
5. Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic on the
following roadways are:
Name of Roadway M.P.H. Limits
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
7. Lane Use Reservations. The lane locations described are
designated as lane use reservations and traffic shall move as
indicated.
Intersection Movement
Reaville Avenue and
Road A
a. Northbound left lane of Road A
reserved for left turn only.
b. Northbound right lane of Road A
reserved for right turn only.
b. Installation of Signs. That all signs, posts, or other necessary materials
be installed and paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to
§ 7-18.1 GENERAL § 7-18.1
1:169
§ 7-18.2. Klickety Klack Depot.
the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
c. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey
Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $150.00
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
a. Regulations.
1. General parking.
(a) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below, except in areas covered by
other parking restrictions.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Aisles "A" Both All As indicated on
site plan19
(c) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 foot wide as shown
on the attached site plan20 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle
Commission.
2. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owners or operators expense.
b. Installation of Signs. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall
be installed and paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to
the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
c. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
19.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
borough clerk.
20.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
borough clerk.
§ 7-18.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7-18.2
1:170
Chapter 7A
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
§ 7A-1. SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.3, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets.
SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING
Name of Street Sides Location
Pennsylvania Avenue North From the easterly curbline of
East Main Street to the westerly
curbline of Broad Street.
Bloomfield Avenue North From the easterly curbline of
Main Street to the westerly
curbline of Broad Street.
Court Street North From the westerly curbline of
Main Street to a point 242 feet
west thereof.
Williams Street North From the easterly curbline of
Main Street to the westerly
curbline of Broad Street.
Mine Street North From the westerly curbline of
Main Street to a point 125 feet
west thereof.
Court Street and Court
Street Extension
South From the westerly curb line of
Main Street to the dead end of
Court Street Extension where it
enters the public school grounds.
Maple Avenue South From the easterly curb line of
Main Street to the westerly curb
line of Broad Street.
Mine Street South From the easterly curb line of
Central Avenue to the westerly
curb line of Main Street.
Capner Street North From the westerly curb line of
Main Street to the easterly curb
line of Park Avenue.
Capner Street South From the westerly curb line of
Park Avenue to the Borough line
on the west.
$283.00 dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or
both.
§ 7-18.2 GENERAL § 7A-1
1:171
SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING
Name of Street Sides Location
Chorister Place Both From the easterly curb line of
Main Street to the westerly curb
line of Spring Street.
Allen Street West From the northerly curb line of
Court Street to the southerly
curb line of Capner Street.
Church Street Both From the easterly curb line of
Broad Street to the westerly curb
line of New Jersey Route 31.
South Main Street Both From the Main Street-Route 12
circle to a point 200 feet south
thereof.
Reaville Avenue Both From the Main Street-Route 12
circle to the Borough line on the
east.
Main Street Both From the Main Street-Route 12
circle to a point 200 feet north
thereof.
Academy Street West From the northerly curb line of
Mine Street to the southerly curb
line of Bonnell Street.
Main Street West From the southerly curb line of
William Street projected to the
northerly curb line of Church
Street.
East Main Street West From the southerly curb line of
Hopewell Avenue to a point 100
feet south thereof.
Park Avenue [Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
Mine Street North From the westerly curb line of
Park Avenue to a point 50 feet
west thereof.
North Main Street East From the northerly curb line of
Pennsylvania Avenue to the
southerly curb line of Hopewell
Avenue.
Grant Avenue North From the westerly curb line of
Main Street to the easterly curb
line of Brown Street.
§ 7A-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-1
1:172
SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING
Name of Street Sides Location
Church Street South From the easterly curb line of
Main Street to the westerly curb
line of Broad Street.
Mine Street South From Central Avenue to the
Borough line.
Main Street West From Church Street to Route 12
circle.
East Main Street East From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Route 31.
Broad Street West From Route 12 to a point 762
feet north thereof.
North Place East From North Main Street to
Corcoran Street.
Main Street West From a point 198 feet north of
the northerly curb line of Capner
Street to a point 60 feet north
thereof.
Main Street West From a point 340 feet north of
the northerly curb line of Capner
Street to a point 78 feet north
thereof.
Rear of Soldiers'
Monument
Both From the westerly curb line of
East Main Street to the easterly
curb line of North Main Street
for a distance of 64 feet.
Main Street West From a point 168 feet south of
the northerly curb line of North
Main Street to a point 60 feet
south thereof.
Main Street East From the southerly curb line of
Williams Street to a point 150
feet south thereof.
Capner Street South From a point 300 feet east of the
easterly curb line of Park Avenue
to a point 84 feet east thereof.
Central Avenue Both From Church Street to Mine
Street.
Fulper Road South From Central Avenue to a point
582 feet east thereof.
§ 7A-1 GENERAL § 7A-1
1:173
SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING
Name of Street Sides Location
Fulper Road North From Central Avenue to a point
500 feet east thereof.
Spring Street West From a point 84 feet south of the
southerly curb line of Bloomfield
Avenue to a point 170 feet south
thereof.
Park Avenue West From a point 162 feet from the
northerly curb line of Mine
Street to a point 90 feet north
thereof.
Pennsylvania Avenue South From the easterly curb line of
Main Street to a point 180 feet
east thereof.
Hopewell Avenue South From the southerly curb line of
North Main Street to a point 94
feet east thereof.
New Jersey Avenue South From the easterly curb line of
East Main Street to a point 66
feet east thereof.
North Main Street West From a point 180 feet north of
the northerly curb line of Main
Street to a point 64 feet north
thereof.
Broad Street East From a point 214 feet south of
the southerly curb line of
Williams Street to a point 148
feet south thereof.
Regional Court West From the cul-de-sac at the
southerly terminus of Regional
Court.
Regional Court East From the cul-de-sac at the
southerly terminus of Regional
Court.
Main Street East Between the southerly curb line
of Pennsylvania Avenue to a point
364 feet south thereof.
Hopewell Avenue South From the westerly curb line of
East Main Street to a point 456
feet west thereof.
§ 7A-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-1
1:174
SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING
Name of Street Sides Location
Shields Avenue Both From the southerly curb line of
Bonnell Street to the northerly
curb line of Mine Street.
Highland Avenue South From the westerly curb line of
Route 31 to a point 325 feet
westerly thereof (effective only
for that portion located in the
Borough of Flemington).
Highland Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
Route 31 to a point 185 feet west
thereof (effective only for that
portion located in the Borough of
Flemington).
Roadways around island
located between Highland
Ave. and New Jersey Ave.
which form a part of the
island.
Left
(Surrounding
the island)
Entire length of all roadways
surrounding the island including
portions of Highland Avenue and
New Jersey Avenue.
North Main Street Both From the easterly curbline of
Park Avenue projected to a point
185 feet south thereof.
Dewey Avenue West From the southerly curbline of
Bonnell Street to a point 66 feet
south thereof.
North Main Street Both From a point 30 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 140 feet south
thereof.
Bonnell Street North From the westerly curbline of
Park Avenue to a point 75 feet
west thereof.
Broad Street East From the southerly curbline of
Church Street to a point 170 feet
south thereof.
Broad Street West From the southerly curbline of
Church Street to a point 102 feet
south thereof.
Shields Avenue West From the southerly curbline of
Bonnell Street to the northerly
curbline of Mine Street.
§ 7A-1 GENERAL § 7A-1
1:175
SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING
Name of Street Sides Location
Park Avenue [Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
Park Avenue [Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
East Main Street West From State Highway 31 to a
point 780 feet south thereof.
Garden Lane Both From the northerly curbline of
North Main Street to a point 500
feet north thereof.
Stangl Road Both From the northerly curbline of
Route 12 to a point 740 feet
north thereof.
Union Hotel/Potting Shed
Driveway (Formerly
known as Blaher Building)
East A driveway running in an eastwest
direction from Main Street
to Spring Street along the
southerly line of Tax Block 22,
Lot 4 and the northerly line of
Tax Block 22, Lot 5.
Allen Street East From the northerly curbline of
Capner Street to a point 139 feet
north thereof.
Allen Street West From the northerly curbline of
Capner Street to a point 182 feet
north thereof.
Broad Street East 30 feet north of northerly
curbline of New York Avenue and
a point of 30 feet south of the
southerly curbline of New York
Avenue.
§ 7A-1A. SCHEDULE I-A: NO STOPPING OR STANDING OF A
VEHICLE ON CERTAIN STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.7, no person shall stop or cause a
vehicle to stand at any time upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets.
§ 7A-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-1A
1:176
SCHEDULE I-A:
NO STOPPING OR STANDING OF A VEHICLE ON CERTAIN
STREETS
Name of Street Sides Location
Church Street Both From the easterly curbline of
Central Avenue to the un-named
roadway.
Church Street Both From Central Avenue to a point
84 feet west of Black River and
Western Railroad Track Crossing.
Central Avenue Both Central Avenue from Church
Street to Mine Street.
East Main Street West From the north curbline of
Monument Street to a point 60
feet northerly thereof.
Hunterdon Shopping
Center streets and
roadways along the
perimeter of the
Hunterdon Shop-ping
Center
Both Entire length.
Mine Street South From the Borough line east to
Main Street.
North Main Street Both From Main Street to a point 50
feet north of Monument Street.
Main Street West From the southerly curbline of
William Street projected to a
point 7 feet north thereof.
Main Street West From the southerly curbline of
Mine Street projected to a point
51 feet south thereof.
Main Street West From a point 18 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Mine Street
projected to a point 24 feet north
thereof.
Main Street West From a point 102 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Mine
Street projected to a point 27
feet north thereof.
Main Street West From a point 156 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Mine
Street projected to a point 13
feet north thereof.
§ 7A-1A GENERAL § 7A-1A
1:177
SCHEDULE I-A:
NO STOPPING OR STANDING OF A VEHICLE ON CERTAIN
STREETS
Name of Street Sides Location
Main Street West From a point 152 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Court
Street projected to a point 10
feet south thereof.
Main Street West From a point 86 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Court
Street projected to a point 6 feet
south thereof.
Main Street West From a point 63 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Court
Street projected to a point 9 feet
south thereof.
Main Street West From a point 10 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Court
Street projected to a point 33
feet south thereof.
Main Street West From a point 217 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Court
Street projected to a point 12
feet north thereof.
Main Street West From a point 268 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Court
Street projected to a point 26
feet north thereof.
Main Street West From a point 160 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Capner
Street projected to a point 8 feet
south thereof.
Main Street West From the southerly curbline of
Capner Street projected to a
point 146 feet south thereof.
Main Street East From the northerly curbline of
William Street projected to a
point 15 feet north thereof.
Main Street East From a point 171 feet north of
the northerly curbline of William
Street projected to a point 47
feet north thereof.
§ 7A-1A FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-1A
1:178
SCHEDULE I-A:
NO STOPPING OR STANDING OF A VEHICLE ON CERTAIN
STREETS
Name of Street Sides Location
Main Street East From a point 234 feet north of
the northerly curbline of William
Street projected to a point 43
feet north thereof.
Main Street East From the southerly curbline of
Maple Avenue projected to a
point 87 feet south thereof.
Main Street East From a point 15 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Maple
Avenue projected to a point 20
feet north thereof.
Main Street East From the southerly curbline of
Chorister Place projected to a
point 19 feet south thereof.
Main Street East From a point 17 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Chorister
Place projected to a point 20 feet
north thereof.
Main Street East From a point 156 feet north from
the northerly curbline of
Chorister Place projected to a
point 13 feet north thereof.
Main Street East From a point 176 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Chorister Place projected to a
point 21 feet north thereof.
Main Street East From a point 213 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Chorister Place projected to a
point 4 feet north thereof.
Main Street East From a point 224 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Chorister Place projected to a
point 13 feet north thereof.
Main Street East From the southerly curb line of
Bloomfield Avenue projected to a
point 34 feet south thereof.
§ 7A-1A GENERAL § 7A-1A
1:179
SCHEDULE I-A:
NO STOPPING OR STANDING OF A VEHICLE ON CERTAIN
STREETS
Name of Street Sides Location
Main Street East From a point 249 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Bloomfield Avenue projected to
point 92 feet north thereof.
North Main Street Both From the southerly intersection
of North Main Street and
Hopewell Avenue to the northern
intersection of North Main Street
and Park Avenue.
Park Avenue West From the southerly intersection
of Park Avenue and Walter Foran
Boulevard Extension to 125 feet
South.
Walter Foran Boulevard
Extension
Both From the southerly curbline of
North Main Street to the
southerly intersection of Park
Avenue and Walter Foran
Boulevard Extension.
§ 7A-2. SCHEDULE II: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.4, no person shall park between
the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets.
SCHEDULE II:
PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN
STREETS
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Main Street Both 1:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Between the Main
Street Route 12 Circle
to the Main Street-
East Main Street-
North Main Street
intersections.
East Main Street West 1:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Between the Main
Street-Pennsylvania
Avenue intersection to
New Jersey Route 31.
§ 7A-1A FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-2
1:180
SCHEDULE II:
PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN
STREETS
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
North Main Street West 1:00 am. to 6:00
a.m.
Between the Main
Street-North Street
intersection to the
Borough line on the
north.
North Main Street East 1:00 am. to 6:00
a.m.
Between Hopewell
Avenue to the Borough
line on the north.
§ 7A-2A. SCHEDULE II-A: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING
CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS, SUNDAYS AND
HOLIDAYS INCLUDED.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.6, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets.
SCHEDULE II-A:
PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN
STREETS, SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS INCLUDED
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Brown Street West 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Between the southerly
curb line of Church St.
to the northerly curb
line of Route 12.
Church Street North 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Between the westerly
curb line of Main St. to
the easterly curb line
of Central Ave.
projected.
§ 7A-3. SCHEDULE III: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [Ord. No .2017-5]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.5, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown on any of the following streets or parts
of streets.
§ 7A-2 GENERAL § 7A-3
1:181
SCHEDULE III:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Maple Avenue North 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
60 feet east of
the easterly
curbline of
Main Street to
a point 35 feet
west of the
westerly
curbline of
Broad Street
North Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
25 feet north
of the
northerly
curbline of
Main Street to
a point 131
feet north
thereof.
Main Street East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
43 feet north
of the
northerly
curbline of
Fulper Road
projected to a
point 150 feet
south of
southerly
curbline of
William
Street.
Court Street North 15 minute
visitor
parking
8:30 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
North side
from a point of
25 feet west of
westerly
curbline of
Park Avenue
to a point of
131 feet west
thereof.
§ 7A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-3
1:182
SCHEDULE III:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Capner Street
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
Capner Street South 15 min. 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
55 feet west of
the westerly
curb line of
Main Street to
a point 69 feet
west thereof.
Bloomfield Avenue South 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
50 feet east of
easterly curb
line of Main
Street to a
point 65 feet
west of the
westerly curb
line of Broad
Street.
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 7
feet north of
the southerly
curb line of
William Street
projected to
point 100 feet
north thereof.
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
51 feet south
of the
southerly curb
line of Mine
Street
projected to a
point 100 feet
south thereof.
§ 7A-3 GENERAL § 7A-3
1:183
SCHEDULE III:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
42 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of Mine
Street
projected to a
point 60 feet
north thereof.
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
169 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of Mine
Street
projected to a
point 111 feet
north thereof.
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
92 feet south
of the
southerly curb
line of Court
Street
projected to a
point 60 feet
south thereof.
Main Street West 15 min 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
43 feet south
of the
southerly curb
line of Court
Street
projected to a
point 20 feet
south thereof.
§ 7A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-3
1:184
SCHEDULE III:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
81 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of Court
Street
projected to a
point 110 feet
north thereof.
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
229 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of Court
Street
projected to a
point 39 feet
north thereof.
Main Street West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
168 feet south
of the
southerly curb
line of Capner
Street
projected to a
point 132 feet
south thereof.
Main Street East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
15 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of William
Street
projected to a
point 25 feet
north thereof.
§ 7A-3 GENERAL § 7A-3
1:185
SCHEDULE III:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Main Street East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m..
From a point
57 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of William
Street
projected to a
point 93 feet
north thereof.
Main Street East 15 min. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
52 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of Maple
Avenue
projected to a
point 99 feet
north thereof.
Main Street East 15 min. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
151 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of Maple
Avenue
projected to a
point 17 feet
north thereof.
Main Street East 15 min. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
37 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of
Chorister
Place
projected to a
point 18 feet
north thereof.
§ 7A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-3
1:186
SCHEDULE III:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Main Street East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
55 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of
Chorister
Place
projected to a
point 76 feet
north thereof.
Main Street East 15 min. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
34 feet south
of the
southerly curb
line of field
Avenue
projected to a
point 63 feet
south thereof.
Main Street East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
118 feet south
of the
southerly curb
line of
Bloomfield
Avenue to a
point 94 feet
south thereof.
Main Street East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
54 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of
Bloomfield
Avenue
projected to a
point 195 feet
north thereof.
§ 7A-3 GENERAL § 7A-3
1:187
SCHEDULE III:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
North Main Street
[Ord. No.
2014-17]
West 30 min. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
192 feet south
of the easterly
curb line of
Hopewell
Avenue
projected to a
point 276 feet
southerly.
Park Avenue West 15 min. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
124 feet north
of the
northerly
curbline of
Capner Street
to a point 22
feet north
hereof.
Park Avenue West 15 min 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
319 feet north
of the
northerly curb
line of Capner
Street to a
point 22 feet
north thereof.
Bloomfield Avenue South 15 min 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
168 feet east
of the easterly
curb line of
Main Street to
a point 25 feet
east thereof.
William Street South 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
25 feet east of
the easterly
curbline of
Main Street to
a point 380
feet easterly.
§ 7A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-4
1:188
§ 7A-4. SCHEDULE IV: LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO A
CERTAIN CLASS OF VEHICLES.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-5, trucks over four tons gross
weight are hereby excluded from the following described streets or parts of
streets, except for the pick up and delivery of materials on such street.
SCHEDULE IV:
LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO A CERTAIN CLASS OF
VEHICLES
Name of Street Location
Highland Avenue Entire length
Elwood Avenue Entire length
Maple Avenue Between Broad Street and Elwood
Avenue
Williams Street Between Broad Street and Elwood
Avenue
§ 7A-5. SCHEDULE V: ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. No. 2017-8]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-6, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated.
SCHEDULE V:
ONE-WAY STREETS
Name of Street Direction Location
Bloomfield
Avenue
Eastbound Entire length.
Chorister Place Eastbound From Main Street to a point 140 feet
east thereof.
Capner Street Westbound From Main Street to Park Avenue.
William Street Eastbound From Main Street to Broad Street.
Court Street Eastbound From Park Avenue to Main Street.
Roadways around
island located
between
Highland Avenue
and New Jersey
Avenue, which
form part of the
island.
Counterclockwise
Entire length of all roadways
surrounding the island including
portions of Highland Avenue and
New Jersey Avenue
§ 7A-4 GENERAL § 7A-5
1:189
SCHEDULE V:
ONE-WAY STREETS
Name of Street Direction Location
Main Street Northerly Between North Main Street and
Monument Street.
Monument Street Westerly Between Main Street and North
Main Street.
Church Street Westbound From the easterly curbline of
Central Avenue to the unnamed
roadway.
Church Street Westbound From the easterly curbline of
Central Avenue to a point 84 feet
west of the Black River and Western
Railroad track crossing.
Jean Smith Lane Southbound Between Liberty Village Parking Lot
and Route 12.
Hunterdon
Shopping Center
Fleet Bank
Driveway
Southbound Entire length.
Summit Bank
Teller Driveway
#1
Eastbound Entire length.
Summit Bank
Teller Driveway
#2
Northbound Entire length.
Reading-Fleming
Middle School
South Parking
Lot
Southeast Exiting from South Parking Lot to
Bonnell Street.
Roadway at the
rear of the
Hunterdon
Shopping Center
Counterclockwise
Entire length.
Academy Street Northerly Mine Street to Bonnell Street.
Maple Avenue Westerly Spring Street to Main Street.
Park Avenue Northbound From the Northern curbline of
Corcoran Street to North Main
Street
§ 7A-5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-6
1:190
§ 7A-6. SCHEDULE VI: THROUGH STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-7.1, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. STOP signs
shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street, except where YIELD signs are provided for the designations.
Broad Street:
a. Between William Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.
b. Between Pennsylvania Avenue and New Jersey Avenue.
Broad Street:
a. Between New Jersey Route 12 and Church Street.
b. Between Church Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.
Main Street — North Main Street:
Between New Jersey Route 12 and the Flemington Borough-Raritan
Township corporate line. A YIELD sign shall be installed on East Main
Street facing southbound traffic.
East Main Street:
Between Main Street and New Jersey Route 31.
Church Street:
a. Between Central Avenue and Main Street.
b. Between Main Street and New Jersey Route 31.
Pennsylvania Avenue:
Between Broad Street and the Flemington Borough-Raritan Township
corporate line.
New Jersey Avenue:
Between East Main Street and Highland Avenue.
Mine Street:
Entire length.
Bonnell Street:
Entire length.
Capner Street:
Between Park Avenue and the Flemington Borough-Raritan Township
corporate line.
Walter Foran Boulevard Extension:
Between Walter Foran Boulevard and Park Avenue.
Park Avenue:
a. Between Mine Street and Walter Foran Boulevard Extension.
b. Between Walter Foran Boulevard Extension and North Main Street.
§ 7A-6 GENERAL § 7A-6A
1:191
§ 7A-6A. SCHEDULE VI-A: STOP INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-7.2, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as Stop Intersections:
SCHEDULE VI-A: STOP INTERSECTIONS
Brown Street and Grant Avenue A STOP sign shall be installed on
Grant Avenue.
William Street and Spring Street A STOP sign shall be installed on
Spring Street.
Bloomfield Avenue and Spring
Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on
Spring Street.
Court Street and Allen Street A STOP sign shall be installed on
Allen Street.
Allen Street and Corcoran Street STOP signs shall be installed on
Corcoran Street.
Maple Avenue and Spring Street STOP signs shall be installed on
Spring Street
Spring Street and Chorister Place A STOP sign shall be installed on
Chorister Place.
Central Avenue and Fulper Road A STOP sign shall be installed on
Fulper Road.
Shields Avenue and Bonnell Street A STOP sign shall be installed on
Shields Avenue.
Hunterdon Shopping Center:
Entrance Driveway and Main
Driveway.
A STOP sign shall be placed at the
Entrance Driveway.
Walter Foran Boulevard, Walter
Foran Boulevard Extension and
North Main Street:
STOP signs shall be installed on
Walter Foran Boulevard and Walter
Foran Boulevard Extension in the
event the traffic signal is
inoperative.
Walter Foran Boulevard and North
Main Street (East Side Right Turn)
A STOP sign shall be installed on
Walter Foran Boulevard Extension.
Walter Foran Boulevard Extension
and Park Avenue
A STOP sign shall be installed on
Park Avenue.
§ 7A-6B. SCHEDULE VI-B: FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-7.3, all intersections listed below
are hereby designated as Four-Way Stop Intersections.
§ 7A-6A FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-6B
1:192
SCHEDULE VI-B: FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS
Broad Street and Maple Avenue A STOP sign shall be installed on
Broad Street, the southbound lane.
Broad Street and Maple Avenue A STOP sign shall be installed on
Broad Street, the northbound lane.
Broad Street and Pennsylvania
Avenue
STOP signs shall be installed on or
near the right side of each such
intersecting street.
Elwood Avenue and Maple Avenue STOP signs shall be installed on or
near the right side of each such
intersection street.
Park Avenue and Court Street
Intersection:
Park Avenue and Court Street A STOP sign shall be installed on
Park Avenue, the southbound lane.
Park Avenue and Court Street A STOP sign shall be installed on
Park Avenue, the northbound lane.
Park Avenue and Capner Street A STOP sign shall be installed on
Park Avenue, the southbound lane.
Park Avenue and Capner Street A STOP sign shall be installed on
Park Avenue, on the northbound
lane.
§ 7A-7. SCHEDULE VII: LOADING ZONES IN STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-8, the following described locations
are hereby designated as loading zones.
SCHEDULE VII: LOADING ZONES IN STREETS
Name of Street Sides Location
Spring Street East From a point 66 feet from the
southerly curbline of Bloomfield
Avenue to a point 200 feet north
thereof.
Main Street East From a point 8 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Bloomfield
Avenue projected to a point 46
feet north thereof.
Court Street North From the westerly curbline of
Main Street starting at a point 72
feet west continuing 53 feet
thereof.
§ 7A-6B GENERAL § 7A-8
1:193
§ 7A-8. SCHEDULE VIII: TROLLEY STOPS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-9, the following described locations
are hereby designated as trolley stops.
SCHEDULE VIII: TROLLEY STOPS
Name of Street Sides Location
Main Street West From a point 24 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Court Street
projected to a point 57 feet north
thereof.
§ 7A-9. SCHEDULE IX: PARKING METERS.
In accordance with § 7-10, parking meter zones are hereby established
within the district or upon those streets or parts of streets described herein
in which the parking of vehicles upon streets shall be regulated by parking
meters between the hours specified of any day except Sundays and public
holidays as follows:
§ 7A-10. SCHEDULE X: LANE USE RESERVATIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-12, no person shall use any lane on
any of the following streets or parts of streets except as follows:
SCHEDULE X: LANE USE RESERVATIONS
Name of Street Location
Main Street and Capner Street The left lane of the southerly
approach of Main Street shall be for
left turns only.
Main Street from Capner Street to
Monument Street
The left lane of the southerly
approach on Main Street to
Monument Street from Capner
Street shall be for North Main
Street traffic only.
Main Street and Pennsylvania
Avenue, and Monument Street
No left hand turn from Main Street
onto Monument Street from a
southerly approach.
a. Between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays.
SCHEDULE IX: PARKING METERS
Name of Street Time Limit Side Location
§ 7A-8 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-10
1:194
SCHEDULE X: LANE USE RESERVATIONS
Name of Street Location
Main Street and North Main Street There shall be no left turn at the
intersection of Main Street and
North Main Street for vehicles
approaching from a northerly
direction.
North Main Street and Walter Foran
Boulevard, Walter Foran Boulevard
Extension
The left lane of the easterly
approach on North Main Street for
left hand turns only.
Walter Foran Boulevard Extension
and North Main Street
The left lane of the northerly
approach to North Main Street for
left hand turns only.
Walter Foran Boulevard and North
Main Street
The left lane of the southerly
approach to North Main Street for
left hand turns only.
North Main Street and Walter Foran
Boulevard, Walter Foran Boulevard
Extension
The right lane of the westerly
approach on North Main Street for
right hand turns only.
Walter Foran Boulevard Extension
and Park Avenue
The left lane of the northerly
approach on Walter Foran
Boulevard Extension for left hand
turns only.
Walter Foran Boulevard and George
Wilson Boulevard
The left lane of the northerly
approach on Walter Foran
Boulevard for left hand turns only.
Walter Foran Boulevard and Global
Ag Driveway
The left lane of the southerly
approach on Walter Foran
Boulevard for left hand turns only.
§ 7A-11. SCHEDULE XI: SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. No. 2014-24]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-11, the following speed limits shall
be revised on the following streets or parts of the streets and all other
streets at 25 m.p.h. shall remain.
§ 7A-10 GENERAL § 7A-11
1:195
SCHEDULE XI: SPEED LIMITS
Name of Street Direction Speed Location
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Both 25 m.p.h. Pennsylvania Avenue
Both 25, m.p.h. a. Between the East
Main Street inter-section
and the North Main
Street-Park Avenue
intersection.
North Main Street
b. Between the North
Main Street-Park Avenue
intersection and the
northerly Flemington
Borough line on North
Main Street.
Both 25 m.p.h. a. Between the intersection
of Main Street
and New Jersey Route 12
and the intersection of
Main Street and William
Street.
Main Street
b. Between the intersection
of Main Street
and William Street and
the inter-section of Main
Street and East Main-
North Main Street.
East Main Street Both 25 m.p.h. Between the intersection
of East Main and
Main Street-North Main
Street and the Borough
of Flemington line.
Both 25 m.p.h. a. Between the intersection
of Broad Street
and Route 12 and the
intersection of Broad
Street and Church
Street.
Broad Street
b. Between the intersection
of Broad Street
and Church Street and
the inter-section of
Broad Street and New
Jersey Avenue.
§ 7A-11 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-11
1:196
SCHEDULE XI: SPEED LIMITS
Name of Street Direction Speed Location
Both 25 m.p.h. a. Between the intersection
of Church Street
and Central Avenue and
the intersection of
Church Street and Main
Street.
Church Street
Both 25 m.p.h. b. Between the intersection
of Church Street
and Main Street and the
easterly border of the
Borough of Flemington.
Both 25 m.p.h. a. Between the intersection
of Mine Street
and Main Street and the
intersection of Mine
Street and the
Flemington branch of the
Pennsylvania Railroad.
Mine Street
Both 25 m.p.h. b. Between the intersection
of Mine Street
and the Flemington
branch of the
Pennsylvania Railroad
and the westerly
Flemington Borough
Line.
Capner Street Both 25 m.p.h. From the Borough line to
Park Avenue.
Both 25 m.p.h. a. Between the Reaville
Avenue—NJ Route 12
intersection and the
Reaville Avenue—NJ
Route 31—US Route 202
intersection.
Reaville Avenue
b. Between the Reaville
Avenue—NJ Route
31—US Route 202
intersection and the
Borough line lying to the
east thereof.
§ 7A-11 GENERAL § 7A-11
1:197
SCHEDULE XI: SPEED LIMITS
Name of Street Direction Speed Location
Stangl Road Both 15 m.p.h. Between the Mine Street
intersection and the
intersection of State
Highway Route 12.
Walter E. Foran Both 25 m.p.h. Between North Street
and the Flemington/
Raritan Township
corporate line.
§ 7A-12. SCHEDULE XII: PARKING RESTRICTED FOR USE BY
HANDICAPPED PERSONS. [Ord. No. 2015-13]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.9, no person shall park a vehicle
on any of the following streets or parts of streets except for those persons
issued handicapped persons identification cards by the Motor Vehicle
Commission and the vehicle displays the handicapped symbol.
Schedule XII, Parking Restricted for Use by Handicapped Persons
Name of Street Sides Location
Bloomfield Avenue South From a point 25 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Main
Street to a point 47 feet east
thereof.
89 Broad Street [Ord. No.
2015-13]
South From a point 133 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Maple Avenue to a point 22
feet thereof.
Capner Street [Ord. No.
2015-13]
South From a point 124 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 23 feet west
thereof.
Church Street [Ord. No.
2015-13]
East From a point 100 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Main
Street to a point 20 feet
easterly thereof.
24 Court Street [Ord. No.
2013-7; deleted by Ord.
No. 2015-13]
East Main Street [Ord. No.
2015-13]
West From a point 213 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Monument Street to a point
20 feet northerly thereof.
§ 7A-11 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-12
1:198
Schedule XII, Parking Restricted for Use by Handicapped Persons
Name of Street Sides Location
Main Street [Ord. No.
2015-13]
East From a point 35 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Maple Avenue projected to a
point 17 feet north thereof.
Mine Street [Ord. No.
2015-13]
Semi-public roadways,
driveways, parking areas, and
other areas used for vehicular
traffic on the property known
as Block 36, Lot 23, United
Telephone Co. of N.J. Inc. at
14 Mine Street.
Mine Street [Ord. No.
2015-23]
North From a point 25 feet east of
the easterly curbline of
Academy Street to a point 49
feet east thereof.
6 North Main Street [Ord.
No. 2015-13]
From a point 121 feet north of
the westerly curbline of Main
Street and Veterans Way to a
point 22 feet thereof.
Park Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-12; amended
7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]]
West From a point 49 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Park
Avenue and Bonnell Street
25 Spring Street [Ord. No.
2014-3; deleted by Ord.
No. 2015-13]
Spring Street [Ord. No.
2016-15]
East 215 feet north of William
Street.
§ 7A-13. SCHEDULE XIII: PARKING RESTRICTED IN CERTAIN
PARKING LOTS FOR USE BY HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
No person shall park a vehicle in any of the following areas in any of the
following parking lots except in accordance with § 7-4.10.
§ 7A-12 GENERAL § 7A-13
1:199
SCHEDULE XIII:
PARKING RESTRICTED IN CERTAIN PARKING LOTS FOR USE BY
HANDICAPPED PERSONS
Location of Parking Lot Parking Spaces Restricted
Liberty Village Parking Lot located
northerly of Highway 12 and
westerly of the Black River and
Western Railroad Corporation
railroad tracks.
Four parking spaces appropriately
marked lying approximately 60 feet
west of the information building of
Liberty Village.
Liberty Village Parking Lot located
northerly of Highway 12 and
easterly of the Black River and
Western Railroad Corporation
railroad tracks.
Four parking spaces appropriately
marked being located approximately
30 feet south of the mall entrance at
Liberty Village Complex.
Parking lot servicing property
known as 6 Park Avenue, said
parking lot being located on the
west side of Park Avenue 75 feet
north of Mine Street.
Two parking spaces appropriately
marked lying approximately 20 feet
south of the brick office building
located at 6 Park Avenue.
Borough of Flemington Municipal
Parking Lot servicing the Borough
Hall and the Flemington Fire
Department and located west of the
Flemington Borough Municipal
Building.
Two parking spaces appropriately
marked being located in the
northeast corner of the parking lot
approximately ten feet west of the
easterly entrance to said lot.
New Market Parking Lot located
westerly of Main Street and
southerly of Capner Street.
Two parking spaces appropriately
marked being located in the
northeast corner of the parking lot
approximately 122 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Main Street.
Feed Mill Plaza Parking Lot located
north of Highway 12 and east of the
Black River Western Railroad
Corporation railroad tracks.
Two parking spaces appropriately
marked lying in the southwest
corner of said parking lot
approximately 65 feet south of the
main building.
Feed Mill Plaza Parking Lot located
north of Highway 12 and east of the
Black River and Western Railroad
Corporation railroad tracks.
Three parking spaces appropriately
marked lying in the northwest
corner of the parking lot
approximately 50 feet east of the
silos.
§ 7A-13 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-13
1:200
SCHEDULE XIII:
PARKING RESTRICTED IN CERTAIN PARKING LOTS FOR USE BY
HANDICAPPED PERSONS
Location of Parking Lot Parking Spaces Restricted
Parking lot servicing property
known as 8 Reaville Avenue, said
parking lot located on the west of
Reaville Avenue, 500 feet south of
Route 202.
Two parking spaces located near the
front southerly side of the building
and two parking spaces located to
the rear of the building on the
westerly side.
R. P. Flemington Donuts, Inc. Dunkin Donuts parking lot two
spaces appropriately marked being
located on the north side of the
parking lot approximately 50 feet
from the northerly exit onto Route
202.
Pickwick Village Pickwick Village parking lot one
parking space appropriately
marked, located on the southeast
side approximately 20 feet parallel
to Spring Street.
Klickety Klack Depot Klickety Klack Depot parking lot one
parking space appropriately marked
being located on the first parking
space on the south side of the
parking lot approximately 25 feet
from Central Avenue.
St. Magdalen DePazzi Roman
Catholic Church, known as 105
Mine Street, parking lot located
north of Mine Street and east of
Shields Avenue
Two parking spaces appropriately
marked and located to the right of
Mine Street drive-way, located at
the southeast corner of the property.
Route 31 and Church Street Wawa, Inc. — Three (3) handicap
stalls to the west side of the store
on the west side of the lot fronting
Route 31.
Flemington Municipal Parking Lot
servicing the businesses between
Bloomfield Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue [Added 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-1]
One parking space appropriately
marked, located on the west side
and approximately 100 feet parallel
to Bloomfield Avenue
§ 7A-14. SCHEDULE XIV: NO LEFT TURNS. [Ord. No. 2014-19]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-13.1, no person shall make a left
turn from the following locations:
§ 7A-13 GENERAL § 7A-14
1:201
a. Entrance and exit Route 12
Liberty Village Colonial
Shopping Plaza
No left turn from Liberty Village
Colonial Shopping Plaza driveway
onto eastbound Route 12.
b. Entrance and exit Route 12
Liberty Village Colonial
Shopping Plaza:
No left turn from Liberty Village
Colonial Shopping Plaza driveway
west of and parallel to the Black
River and Western Railroad tracks
crossing Route 12 onto eastbound
Route 12.
c. Exit Route 12 Liberty Village
Colonial Shopping Plaza
driveway
No left turn from Liberty Village
Colonial Shopping Plaza one-way
driveway south onto eastbound
Route 12.
d. Entrance and exit Route 12 the
Flemington Feed Mill
No left turn from the Flemington
Feed Mill driveway onto
eastbound Route 12.
e. Exit Route 12 the Flemington
Feed Mill
No left turn from the Flemington
Feed Mill one-way driveway south
onto eastbound Route 12.
f. WAWA Exit onto Route 31 No left turn southbound Route 31.
g. Entrance North Main Street
onto Steve's Convenience Store
No left turn from North Main
Street onto Steve's Convenience
Store driveway 60 feet west of
Walter Foran Boulevard and
Walter Foran Boulevard Extension
intersection.
h. Exit Steve's Convenience Store
driveway
No left turn from Steve's
Convenience Store driveway 150
feet south of Walter Foran
Boulevard and Walter Foran
Boulevard Extension intersection
onto Walter Foran Boulevard
Extension.
i. Entrance and exit North Main
Street and Park Avenue
No left turn from North Main
Street and Park Avenue
intersection onto North Main
Street and North Main Street
onto Park Avenue.
j. Entrance North Main Street
onto Block 14 Lot 1
No left turn from North Main
Street onto Block 14 Lot 1
driveway 100 feet west of Walter
Foran Boulevard and Walter
Foran Boulevard Extension
intersection.
§ 7A-14 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-14
1:202
k. Exit Block 14 Lot 1 driveway No left turn from Block 14 Lot 1
driveway 230 feet south of Walter
Foran Boulevard and Walter
Foran Boulevard Extension
intersection onto Walter Foran
Boulevard Extension. [Ord. No.
2014-19]
l. Exit North Main Street and Park
Avenue
No left turn from North Main
Street and Park Avenue
intersection onto North Main
Street. [Ord. No. 2014-19]
m. Exit from Block 14, Lot 1 onto
Park Avenue
No left turn from Block 14, Lot 1
driveway 85 feet south of
intersection of North Main Street
and Park Avenue. [Ord. No.
2014-19]
n. Exit Reading Fleming
Intermediate School
No left turn northbound on Allen
Street between the hours of 7:30
a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
4:30 p.m. [Added 2-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-3]
§ 7A-15. SCHEDULE XV: PERMIT PARKING. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.11, the following described
locations are hereby designated as parking by permit areas.
SCHEDULE XV: PERMIT PARKING
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
New Jersey Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From East Main
Street east to the
Borough line.
Highland Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Elwood
Avenue east to the
Borough line.
Pennsylvania Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Broad
Street east to the
Borough line.
New York Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Broad
Street east to the
Borough line.
Emery Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Broad
Street east to the
Borough line.
§ 7A-14 GENERAL § 7A-15
1:203
SCHEDULE XV: PERMIT PARKING
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Maple Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Broad
Street east to the
Borough line.
Williams Street Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Broad
Street east to
Elwood Avenue.
Elwood Avenue Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From New Jersey
Avenue south to
Maple Avenue.
Lincoln Circle Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From East Main
Street 285 feet
south to the
terminus of
Lincoln Circle.
Regional Court Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From East Main
Street 331 feet
south to the
terminus of
Regional Court.
Broad Street Both 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From New Jersey
Avenue south to
William Street.
Pennsylvania Avenue South 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From East Main
Street east to
Broad Street.
Hopewell Avenue North 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From East Main
Street west to
North Main
Street.
East Main Street West 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From Hopewell
Avenue south to
Monument Street.
Court Street North 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 242
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of Main Street to
a point 50 feet
east of the
easterly curbline
of Park Avenue.
§ 7A-15 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-15
1:204
SCHEDULE XV: PERMIT PARKING
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Park Avenue West 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From Court Street
north to North
Main Street.
Capner Street
[Added 7-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-15]
South 7:30 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From the easterly
curbline of Park
Avenue to a point
247 feet east
Capner Street
[Added 7-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-15]
North 7:30 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From the westlery
curbline of Park
Avenue to a point
149 feet west
Park Avenue [Added
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
West 7:30 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From the
northlerly
curbline of
Capner Street to a
point 104 feet
north
§ 7A-16. SCHEDULE XVI: PARKING PROHIBITED ON SCHOOL
DAYS DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.12, no person shall park between
the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets on school days.
SCHEDULE XVI:
PARKING PROHIBITED ON SCHOOL DAYS DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Academy Street East 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Between the
northerly curbline
of Mine Street and
the southerly
curbline of Bonnell
Street.
Court Street
Extension
North 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Between the
westerly curbline of
Park Avenue to the
projected easterly
curbline of Allen
Street.
§ 7A-15 GENERAL § 7A-16
1:205
SCHEDULE XVI:
PARKING PROHIBITED ON SCHOOL DAYS DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Bonnell Street North 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From a point 476
feet west of
westerly curbline of
Park Avenue to a
point 452 feet west
thereof.
Bonnell street North 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From a point 25
feet projected from
Dewey Avenue to a
point 46 feet east
thereof.
Allen Street West 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Between the
northerly curbline
of Capner Street
and the southerly
curbline of North
Main Street.
East Main Street West 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
From the northerly
curbline of
Hopewell Avenue to
a point 620 feet
north thereof.
§ 7A-17. SCHEDULE XVII: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS WITHOUT PARKING PERMIT.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-4.13, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown except on Sundays and legal holidays
on any of the following streets or parts of streets without a parking permit.
§ 7A-16 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-17
1:206
SCHEDULE XVII:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS WITHOUT
PARKING PERMIT
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Capner Street
[Amended
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
North 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
149 feet west
of the
westerly
curbline of
Park Avenue
to a point 25
feet east of
the easterly
curbline of
Allen Street.
Maple Avenue North 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
25 feet east
of the
easterly
curbline of
Spring Street
to a point 25
feet from the
westerly
curbline of
Broad Street.
Mine Street North 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
125 feet of
the westerly
curbline of
Main Street
to a point 25
feet east of
the easterly
curbline of
Park Avenue.
Park Avenue
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
Park Avenue
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
§ 7A-17 GENERAL § 7A-17
1:207
SCHEDULE XVII:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS WITHOUT
PARKING PERMIT
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Park Avenue
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
Park Avenue
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
.
Park Avenue
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
Park Avenue
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
Spring Street East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
25 feet north
of the
northerly
curbline of
William
Street to a
point 50 feet
south of the
southerly
curbline of
Maple
Avenue.
§ 7A-17 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-17
1:208
SCHEDULE XVII:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS WITHOUT
PARKING PERMIT
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Spring Street East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
50 feet north
of the
northerly
curbline of
William
Street to a
point 25 feet
south of the
southerly
curbline of
Maple
Avenue.
Spring Street East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
25 feet north
of the
northerly
curbline of
Maple
Avenue to a
point 268 feet
south of the
southerly
curbline of
Bloomfield
Avenue.
Spring Street West 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
50 feet north
of the
northerly
curbline of
Maple
Avenue to the
southerly
curbline of
Chorister
Place.
§ 7A-17 GENERAL § 7A-17
1:209
SCHEDULE XVII:
PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS WITHOUT
PARKING PERMIT
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Spring Street West 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the
northerly
curbline of
Chorister
Place to a
point 54 feet
north thereof.
Spring Street West 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
25 feet south
of the
southerly
curbline of
Bloomfield
Avenue to a
point 50 feet
south thereof.
§ 7A-18. SCHEDULE XVIII: MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-16, the following locations shall be
established as mid-block crosswalks.
SCHEDULE XVIII: MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS
Name of Street Location
Main Street Beginning at a point 50 feet south of
southerly curbline of Capner Street to
a point 6 feet south therefrom.
§ 7A-19. SCHEDULE XIX: ACCESS AND EXIT WAYS TO AND FROM
PRIVATE PARKING LOTS AND DRIVEWAYS. [Ord. No. 2001-5; Ord.
No. 2011-24]
a. Agway Farm and Home Store.
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-17.1, the following locations
shall be established as a one-way entrance and a one-way exit from the
Agway Farm & Home Store from a municipal road entering or exiting a
private parking lot.
1. Prohibited exit onto North Main Street from the Agway Farm &
Home Store parking lot.
§ 7A-17 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7A-19
1:210
Chapter 7B
PARKING AREAS
§ 7B-1. Definitions.
When any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7B-2. Description of Parking Areas and Access and Exit Ways.
2. Prohibited entry into the Agway Farm & Home Store parking lot
from Hopewell Avenue.
3. Prohibited exit onto North Main Street from Steve's Convenience
Store parking lot 60 feet west of Walter Foran Boulevard and
Walter Foran Boulevard Extension intersection.
b. Block 5, Lot 1 and Block 14, Lot 1.
In accordance with the provisions of § 17-17.1, the following locations
shall be established as a one-way entrance and a one-way exit from
Block 5 Lot 1 and Block 14 Lot 1 from a municipal road entering or
exiting a private parking lot from the additional following locations:
[Ord. No. 2014-18]
1. Right turn only entrance and exit onto North Main Street from
Block 14 Lot 1 parking lot 100 feet west of Walter Foran Boulevard
and Walter Foran Boulevard Extension intersection.
2. Entrance and exit onto Walter Foran Boulevard from Block 5 Lot 1
parking lot 340 feet north of Walter Foran Boulevard and Walter
Foran Boulevard Extension intersection.
a. Parking Area #1 shall be as described in Exhibit 1 annexed.
b. Access and exit ways to and from Parking Area #1 shall be as described
in Exhibit 1A annexed.
c. Parking Area #2 shall be as described in Exhibit 2 annexed.
d. Access and exit ways to and from Parking Area #2 shall be as described
in Exhibit 2A annexed.
e. Parking Area #3 shall be as described in Exhibit 3 annexed.
f. Access and exit ways to and from Parking Area #3 shall be as described
in Exhibit 3A annexed.
g. Parking Area #4 shall be as described in Exhibit 4 annexed.
§ 7A-19 GENERAL § 7B-2
1:211
§ 7B-3. Parking Area Regulations - Parking Area #1.
h. Access and exit ways to and from Parking Area #4 shall be as described
in Exhibit 4A annexed.
i. Parking Area #5 shall be as described in Exhibit 5 annexed.
j. Access and exit ways to and from Parking Area #5 shall be as described
in Exhibit 5A annexed.
k. Parking Area #6 shall be as described in Exhibit 6 annexed.
l. Parking Area #7 shall be as described in Exhibit 7 annexed.
a. No vehicles shall be parked in excess of four hours in Parking Area #1
between 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, legal
holidays excepted.
b. Permitted parking.
1. Additionally, a vehicle displaying a valid permit issued by the
Borough Clerk pursuant to subsection 7B-3e may lawfully park
subject to parking space availability in any such parking space in
Parking Area #1 for an unrestricted period of time.
2. There shall be free public parking in Parking Area #1 on Sundays
and on legal holidays, and no parking from 12:00 midnight to 7:30
a.m., Monday through Friday.
c. Unless the vehicle displays a valid permit issued by the Borough Clerk
pursuant to subsection 7B-3e, no person shall park a vehicle in any
parking space in Parking Area #1 for a consecutive period of time
longer than the limited period of time for which parking is lawfully
permitted in Parking Area #1.
d. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the duty
to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this chapter and the
State Vehicle Code prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
e. Parking permits.
1. The Borough Clerk shall issue parking permits, the form of which
shall be prescribed by the borough council that will entitle the
permittee the right to lawfully park a motor vehicle subject to
parking space availability in any parking space in Parking Area #1
described in subsection 7B-2a, for an unrestricted period of time.
2. The Borough Clerk shall charge for and collect a fee of $125.00 for
each parking permit.
a. The Borough Clerk shall not sell more than 73 parking permits
during the licensed period of one year from October 1st
through September 30th of the issuing year
§ 7B-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7B-3
1:212
§ 7B-4. Parking Area Regulations - Parking Area #2.
§ 7B-5. Parking Area Regulations - Parking Area #4.
§ 7B-6. Parking Area Regulations - Parking Areas #1, #2, #4 and
#5.
§ 7B-7. Entrance and Exit Regulations.
3. Parking permits shall be for a term of one year commencing 12:01
a.m. on October 1st and ending the following September 30th at
12:00 midnight.
4. When an application for a parking permit is made during the course
of any permit year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month.
Any period of time greater than one-half a month shall be
considered a full month for this purpose.
5. The permit issued by the Borough Clerk must be conspicuously
displayed in the lower right hand corner of the driver's side rear
window of the vehicle parked in Parking Area #1 to entitle such
vehicle to be parked as permitted in this section, the exception to
the three hour restriction.
a. No vehicles shall be parked in excess of four hours in Parking Area #2
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, legal
holidays excepted.
a. No vehicles shall be parked in excess of two hours in Parking Area #4
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, legal
holidays excepted.
a. No person shall park a vehicle in such designated parking space during
the restricted or regulated time applicable so that any part of any
vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating the space.
b. Vehicular traffic in violation of these traffic flow patterns is punishable
in the same manner as any other violation of this chapter.
a. Route I described in Exhibit 1A shall be used only as a one-way
entrance from west to east into Parking Area #1.
b. Route II described in Exhibit 1A is to be both an entrance and an exit for
Parking Area #1.
c. Route I described in Exhibit 2A shall be used only as a one-way
entrance from west to east into Parking Area #2.
d. Route II described in Exhibit 2A is to be both an entrance and exit for
Parking Area #2.
§ 7B-3 GENERAL § 7B-7
1:213
§ 7B-8. Penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or aiding, abetting or
assisting in the violation thereof shall, upon conviction before a judge, be
fined not more than $100.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or both. Any person charged for the first time with violating any
provision of this chapter may waive his or her right to appear before the
judge of the municipal court of the Borough of Flemington by payment of a
$20.00 fine at the violation clerk's office. The police department may have
any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter towed away at the expense
of the owner. In the event that a vehicle is towed away for illegal parking,
it shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or
operator of the vehicle upon payment of towing costs within 24 hours of
the time the vehicle was removed, plus $20.00 for each additional 24 hours
or fraction thereof that the vehicle remains in storage. The location of the
vehicles which have been towed away may be ascertained by requesting
such information from the borough police department.
Chapter 8
FIRE PREVENTION CODE INDEX
e. The route described in Exhibit 3A is to be both an entrance and an exit
for Parking Area #3.
f. The route described in Exhibit 4A is to be both an entrance and an exit
for Parking Area #4.
g. The route described in Exhibit 5A is to be both an entrance and an exit
for Parking Area #5.
h. Vehicular traffic in violation of these traffic flow patterns is punishable
in the same manner as any other violation of this chapter.
§ 7B-7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 7B-8
1:214
ARTICLE I
Enforcement of Fire Prevention Code of the Code of the Borough of
Flemington
§ 8-1. LOCAL ENFORCEMENT.
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq., shall be locally
enforced in the Borough of Flemington.
§ 8-2. AGENCY DESIGNATION.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Safety in the Office
of Code Enforcement.
§ 8-3. NEW JERSEY UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
The Bureau of Fire Safety shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Borough other than:
owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings; premises owned by or
leased to and maintained by the federal government or any agency or
instrumentality thereof; and interstate agencies, the State of New Jersey,
or any agency or instrumentality thereof. In undertaking such enforcement,
the Bureau of Fire Safety shall faithfully comply with the requirements of
the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 8-4. LIFE HAZARD USES.
The local enforcing agency established by § 8-2 of this article shall carry out
the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 8-5. ORGANIZATION.
The Bureau of Fire Safety, designated in § 8-2 as the local enforcing agency,
shall be part of the Office of Code Enforcement. The Fire Marshal shall be
the chief administrator of the Bureau of Fire Safety and shall report to the
Code Enforcement Liaison for Council.
§ 8-6. APPOINTMENTS; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL.
§ 8-6.1. Appointment of the Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire
Marshal(s).
Appointment of Fire Marshal. The Bureau of Fire Safety shall be under the
supervision of the Fire Marshal, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 8-1 GENERAL § 8-6.2
1:215
§ 8-6.2. Term of office.
The Fire Marshal shall serve for a term of three years. Upon a vacancy in
the office prior to the end of the three-year term, the new Fire Marshal's
three-year term shall commence upon appointment by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council pursuant to resolution.
§ 8-6.3. Deputy Fire Marshal(s) and employees.
Such Deputy Fire Marshal(s) and other employees of the Bureau of Fire
Safety as may be necessary shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council pursuant to resolution and shall be under the
supervision and control of the Fire Marshal.
§ 8-6.4. Removal from office.
All employees of the Bureau of Fire Safety shall be subject to disciplinary
action, including but not limited to removal, pursuant to Borough personnel
policies. An employee so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be
heard by a hearing officer designated by the Mayor and Council. The
determination of the hearing officer shall be final.
§ 8-6.5. Appointment of Legal Counsel.
The Governing Body shall specifically appoint legal counsel to assist the
agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 8-7. BOARD OF APPEALS.
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person aggrieved by any
order of the Bureau of Fire Safety shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Hunterdon.
§ 8-8. REGISTRATIONS REQUIRED FOR NON-LIFE HAZARD USES.
All owners of buildings, premises, structures, or uses except those which
are required to be registered as a life hazard use or requires registration as
a non-life hazard use by the Flemington Bureau of Fire Safety and except
single-family and two-family dwellings occupied by the holder of title to the
property shall annually obtain a certificate from the Fire Marshal.
§ 8-9. LIFE AND NON-LIFE HAZARD ANNUAL INSPECTION
REQUIRED.
Before a certificate of inspection is issued, the Fire Marshal or the Fire
Marshal's designated representative shall make or cause to be made an
inspection to assure that the buildings, premises, structures, or uses comply
with the provisions of the Fire Code.
§ 8-6.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 8-10
1:216
§ 8-10. FEE REQUIRED.
A certificate or permit shall not be issued until the designated fees have
been paid. The owners and/or occupiers of all properties and businesses
subject to this article shall be responsible for the payment of the certificate/
permit fees.
§ 8-11. AMOUNT OF FEE FOR NON-LIFE HAZARD USE
REGISTRATIONS.
The fee for certificates, permits and inspections for non-life hazard use
registrations shall be:
a. Mercantile businesses shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
1. A-1: $52 for the first 1,000 square feet.
2. A-2: $10 for each additional 1,000 square feet.
b. Factories and warehouses shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule
of:
1. B-1: $52 for the first 1,000 square feet.
2. B-2: $65 for 1,001 to 3,500 square feet.
3. B-3: $78 for 3,501 to 6,000 square feet.
4. B-4: $90 for 6,001 to 11,999 square feet.
5. B-5: $200 for 12,000 square feet to unlimited.
c. Repair shops (excluding automotive repair) and service businesses shall
be inspected yearly with same fee as mercantile.
1. A-1: $52 for the first 1,000 square feet.
2. A-2: $10 for each additional 1,000 square feet.
d. Business offices (lawyers, doctors and other professional offices,
insurance offices, etc.) and each commercial structure (structures with
common connected attics or basements shall be registered as a single
building), shall be inspected yearly with fee schedule of:
1. D-1: $52 for each individual business or structure.
e. Residential apartment complexes shall be inspected yearly and pay an
annual fee of:
1. E-1: $52 per building in the complex.
f. All residential rental properties, except apartment complexes, not
occupied by the structure owner shall pay an annual fee of:
1. F-1: $52 per structure.
§ 8-10 GENERAL § 8-11
1:217
§ 8-12. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
The violation of any provision of §§ 8-10 and 8-11 shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day any violation of this chapter shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense and be punishable as such.
§ 8-13. FIRE WATCH AND FIRE DEPARTMENT FIRE SAFETY
STAND-BY.
g. All other structures and facilities not described shall be inspected
yearly with the same fee as that pertaining to a mercantile business.
a. Whenever the Fire Marshal determines that on-site firefighting
personnel shall be required for fire watch as a result of fire protection
system failure or deficiencies, or fire safety at any occupancy or event
to insure the safety of the public or emergency responders, or other
time deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal, the owner or occupant
responsible shall obtain a permit for the use or event. A permit shall not
be required when a fire watch is ordered as a result of a fire within the
Borough.
1. The Fire Marshal shall determine the number of firefighting
personnel required.
2. The Fire Marshal shall determine the hours that the firefighting
personnel will be on duty.
3. The permit fee, if required, shall cover the expenses incurred by
the local enforcing agency.
4. The fee for the permit shall include:
(a) Compensation for firefighter(s) at $25 per hour Monday
through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.; $50 per hour for
holidays, Saturdays, Sundays, and from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
weekdays.
(b) The rate for use of vehicles per day shall be:
(1) $150 for support/command vehicle.
(2) $500 per pumper.
(3) $1,000 per ladder apparatus.
(c) In the event of a fire watch ordered by the Fire Marshal, the
Fire Chief or his/her designee at the conclusion shall submit to
the Fire Marshal a ledger of apparatus used, personnel in
attendance by shift and hours of each for accurate
compensation.
§ 8-11 FLEMINGTON CODE § 8-13
1:218
(d) Reimbursement rates for other related services, equipment, or
expenses shall be provided to the owner by the Fire Marshal
prior to the scheduled use or event.
5. The Fire Marshal or designee(s) shall have right of access to the
premises and area surrounding it without interference from the
property owner.
6. Failure to secure a permit shall be punishable by a penalty equal to
amount of the permit plus $100 for the first offense, amount of the
permit plus $250 for the second offense, and amount of the permit
plus $500 for the third and each subsequent offense.
7. A permit shall be required for each separate event or date of the
activity requiring such a permit.
§ 8-13 GENERAL § 8-13
1:219

ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors
§ 8-14. EXISTING STRUCTURES.
Before any residential property is sold, leased, or otherwise made subject
to a change of occupancy for residential purposes, the owner shall obtain
a certificate of smoke alarm, carbon monoxide alarm, portable fire
extinguisher compliance (CSACMAPFEC). The application fees for
CSACMAPFEC, as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, shall be based upon the
amount of time remaining before the change of occupancy is expected as
follows:
§ 8-15. CSACMAPFEC FEES.
§ 8-15.1. Failure to Show for Inspection.
§ 8-16. FALSE ALARMS.
a. Requests for CSACMAPFEC received more than 10 business days prior
to change of occupancy or closing shall be $55.
b. Requests for CSACMAPFEC received four to nine business days prior to
the change of occupancy or closing shall be $90.
c. Requests for CSACMAPFEC received fewer than four business days
prior to the change of occupancy or closing shall be $161.
a. A no-show for a scheduled inspection shall be subject to a $50 reinspection
fee. A no-show inspection means:
1. The owner/agent fails to meet inspector within 10 minutes of the
appointed time for inspection or reinspection;
2. The owner/agent does not have a key or is unable to give the Fire
Marshal or designee access to the premises for the scheduled
inspection or reinspection; or
3. Electrical power to a premises is disconnected and smoke alarm(s)
to be tested are powered by electrical current from the building
wiring system.
b. An owner who sells, leases, rents or otherwise permits to be occupied
for residential purposes any premises subject to the provisions of this
section when the premises do not comply with the requirements hereof,
or without complying with the inspection and certification requirements
hereof, shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $500. This penalty
shall be separate and distinct from penalties assessed under the
Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.3.
a. Investigations. In the case of false alarms which summon the Fire
Department to investigate, the Fire Marshal shall cause an
§ 8-14 GENERAL § 8-16
1:221
investigation to be made and shall keep a record of such false alarms
on file.
b. Penalties for false alarms. Penalties for false alarms will be issued
through the Uniform Fire Code.
c. All fines and fees collected for the above are to be set in a separate
dedicated penalty account to serve for training and education for the
Flemington Borough Bureau of Fire Safety and the Borough of
Flemington Fire Department.
§ 8-16 FLEMINGTON CODE § 8-16
1:222
ARTICLE III
Rapid Entry Systems
§ 8-17. INSTALLATION.
All buildings within the Borough having an automatic fire detection or
suppression system shall be equipped with a rapid entry key lock box.
However, this requirement shall not apply to owner-occupied one- and twofamily
dwellings identified by the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23
et seq.) as R-3 and R-4.
a. All commercial and industrial properties within the Borough protected
by fences, gates and related barriers presently secured by using a
padlock, or electronically operated or automatic gates or other control
circuits, shall be equipped with a high-security padlock or high-security
key switch as approved by the Fire Marshal. The high-security padlock
and key switches shall be located in a manner as directed by the Fire
Marshal.
b. Rapid entry key lock box, high-security padlock and key switch types.
The rapid entry key lock box and high-security padlock and key
switches shall be U.L. - Underwriter Laboratories certified and
approved by the Fire Marshal.
c. Location. The rapid entry key lock box shall be located at or near the
main entrance to the building or property. The key lock box shall be
mounted at a minimum height of five feet and a maximum of six feet
above final grade. Placement of the key lock box may be altered at the
discretion of the Fire Marshal or his/her designee with approval prior to
installation.
d. Key lock box contents. The key lock box shall contain labeled keys,
easily identified in the field to provide access into the property and/or
building and to any locked areas within the building, and as may be
further directed by the Fire Marshal. The term "keys" will also include
any electronic keys utilized for access to electronic access control
systems.
e. Compliance. All existing buildings shall comply with the provisions of
this section within 12 months of its effective date. All newly constructed
buildings, not yet occupied, or buildings currently under construction
shall comply with the terms hereof prior to the fire detection or
suppression system being accepted and approved for service.
f. Exemptions. The Fire Marshal may provide for a written exemption of
the requirements of this section based upon their review and
determination that the subject property or building is maintained
continuously with doors that are not locked or lockable, or which have
personnel physically present 24 hours per day, every day of the year,
and such personnel have knowledge and can permit access to all areas
of the building or property.
§ 8-17 GENERAL § 8-17
1:223
g. Penalties. Any property or building owner failing to comply with, or in
violation of the terms of, this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or by imprisonment for
up to 90 days, and/or by a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such a
violation continues shall be considered a separate and specific violation
of this section.
§ 8-17 FLEMINGTON CODE § 8-17
1:224
ARTICLE IV
Fire Lanes and Fire Zones
§ 8-18. FIRE LANES AND FIRE ZONES.
§ 8-19. DELINEATION AND MARKING.
Any two of the three shall be acceptable with this article, unless otherwise
set forth by the Fire Marshal, and shall be maintained on an annual basis.
a. Authorization. The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized under § 8-3 of
Chapter 8, Fire Prevention Code Index, to establish fire lanes and fire
zones on properties within the established boundaries of the Borough of
Flemington devoted for public uses.
b. Designation. In and on all premises, public or private, within the
established boundaries of the Borough whereon there is located
including but not limited to retail stores, shopping centers, office
buildings, industrial plants, schools, churches or other public or quasipublic
structure wherein the public is invited, the Fire Marshal may
require and designate fire lanes to provide clear and unobstructed
access to buildings for Fire Department apparatus, equipment or any
other emergency vehicle in the event of an emergency. Fire zones
located on local, county, state and private roads shall include, but not be
limited to, fire hydrants, water storage tanks, all fire department
connections and fire stations. Fire lanes and fire zones may be
designated on public or private property. Fire lanes and fire zones may
be posted with signs, pavement markings and or a combination thereof.
c. Parking, stopping or standing of vehicle prohibited. No person shall
park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, at any time, in any designated fire lane or fire zone or
obstruct any designated fire lane or fire zone. No person shall park,
stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, water draft site or water storage
tanks within the established boundaries of the Borough.
a. A fire lane or fire zone shall be striped along the perimeter with a yellow
stripe not less than four inches wide.
b. A fire lane or fire zone shall be clearly marked on the surface of the
pavement "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" or "FIRE ZONE NO PARKING" in
yellow letters no less than 24 inches high. This wording shall be located
horizontally and between the perimeter lines and shall be repeated
throughout the fire lane or fire zone.
c. A fire lane of fire zone shall be clearly marked with a metal sign every
50 feet with a minimum of two signs. The metal signs shall be no less
than 18 inches by 24 inches with three-inch red letters, shall contain a
white reflective background and shall read as follows: "FIRE LANE NO
PARKING" or "FIRE ZONE NO PARKING."
§ 8-18 GENERAL § 8-20
1:225
§ 8-20. MAINTENANCE OF FIRE LANE OR FIRE ZONE.
The owner of the property where the fire lane or fire zone is located shall
properly maintain any such markings, striping, curbing, and signage in the
designated areas at all times. Defacing, tampering with, or damaging any
such markings, striping, curbing, or signage or allowing them to deteriorate
so as to reduce their effectiveness shall constitute violation of the chapter.
§ 8-21. ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
The Bureau of Fire Safety and the Flemington Borough Police Department
shall have concurrent jurisdiction in policing and issuing parking
summonses.
§ 8-22. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Violators who park illegally, stop or stand in a fire lane or fire zone shall
be subject to a fine of $50. Said fine shall be imposed on complaint and
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Flemington. All fines
and penalties shall be paid to the Borough of Flemington. All fines and fees
collected for the above are to be set in a separate dedicated penalty account
to serve for training and education for the Flemington Borough Bureau of
Fire Safety and the Borough of Flemington Fire Department.
§ 8-20 FLEMINGTON CODE § 8-22
1:226
Chapter 9
BUILDINGS AND HOUSING
§ 9-1. BUILDING CODE.
§ 9-1.1. Code Established.
A code is hereby adopted by the Borough of Flemington for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, addition,
repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of
all buildings and structures and their service equipment, and providing for
certain permits and licenses and penalties for its violation. A copy of this
code is attached to and made a part of this chapter without the inclusion of
the text herein.
§ 9-1.2. Title of Code.
The code adopted and established by this section is commonly known
as the Standard Building Code of New Jersey, in particular parts A and
B embracing administration, definitions, and structural, fire and general
safety requirements, adopted by the New Jersey State Department of
Conservation and Economic Development on December 23, 1953; part C
dealing with elevators, motor stairways and conveyor equipment; part D
dealing with air conditioning, mechanical ventilation and refrigeration; and
part F dealing with electrical equipment and wiring, adopted by the State
Department of Conservation and Economic Development on November 16,
1956; together with the Rules for the Construction of One and Two-Family
Dwellings, being particularly Sections MB 802-0 through U of the Manual
of Parts A and B, as adopted by the State Department of Conservation and
Economic Development on June 18, 1958, together with Revision No. 1 of
the Standard Building Code of New Jersey (1966) and the Rules for the
Construction of One and Two-Family Dwellings (revised 1966), as adopted
by the State Department of Conservation and Economic Development on
September 9, 1966, together with their component manuals and including
Supplements 1, 2 and 3.
§ 9-1.3. Deletions and Amendments.
The following sections are deleted from the Standard Building Code of New
Jersey and are not adopted: Sections A 107.3, A 107.4, B 104.0, B 105.0, B
105.1, and B 105.2.
§ 9-1.4. Where Code May Be Examined.
Three copies of each of the documents referred to in § 9-1.2 have been
placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk, except for modified
portions.
§ 8-22 GENERAL § 9-1.5
1:227
§ 9-1.5. Liability of Building Inspector.
The building inspector or any employee charged with the enforcement of
this code, acting for the Borough in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally,
and he is hereby relieved of all personal liability for any damage that may
occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of
any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against
the building inspector or any employee because of such act or omission
performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be
defended by the legal department of the Borough until final termination of
the proceedings.
§ 9-1.6. Definitions.
§ 9-1.7. Fire Limits Established.
The fire limits of the Borough are hereby established as the entire Borough.
§ 9-1.8. Fees.
No permit required by the building code shall be issued until the fees
prescribed in this subsection are paid; nor shall an amendment to a permit
be approved until any additional fee due to an increase in the estimated cost
of the building or structure is paid.
Fees for construction, alteration or demolition of a building or structure
shall be as provided in § 9A-3 of the Uniform Construction Code chapter of
this revision.
§ 9-1.9. Posting of Indemnity Bonds.
The following bonds shall be posted in respect to each specific section
hereinafter cited.
Section B-119.5a — Signs: $50,000.00 per $100,000.00 (applicable to signs
for commercial advertising only).
Section B-119.5b — Wrecking: $50,000.00 per $100,000.00.
Section B-119.5c — Moving: $50,000.00 per $100,000.00.
§ 9-2. HOUSING CODE.
a. Whenever the word municipality is used in the building code, it shall
mean the Borough of Flemington.
b. Whenever the term corporation counsel is used in the building code, it
shall mean the Borough Attorney.
§ 9-1.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9-2.1
1:228
§ 9-2.1. Enforcing Authority. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-2]
The Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or the Sanitary
Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee of the
Borough of Flemington be and they are hereby designated as the officers to
exercise the powers prescribed by the within section, and they shall serve
in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 9-2.2. Adoption by Reference.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1)
the "New Jersey State Housing Code" as approved by the Departments
of Health and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the
Secretary of State's office is hereby accepted, adopted and established as
a standard to be used as a guide in determining whether dwellings in this
municipality are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A
copy of the "New Jersey State Housing Code" is annexed to this section by
reference, and three copies of the same have been placed on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Flemington and are available to all
persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 9-2.3. Inspections. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-2]
The Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or the Sanitary
Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee of the
Borough of Flemington are hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units, and premises located within the Borough of Flemington in order that
they may perform their duties of safeguarding the health and safety of the
occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making
such inspections the Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or
the Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee
of the Borough are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all
reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises.
The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit,
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Building Inspector and/or
the Health Officer and/or the Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/
Fire Official or his designee of the Borough free access to such dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for
the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent
or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
section or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 9-2.1 GENERAL § 9-2.4
1:229
§ 9-2.4. Notice of Violation. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-2]
Whenever the Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or the
Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee
of the Borough determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of any provision of this section, or of
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, they shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
§ 9-2.5. Hearing Provisions. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-2]
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this section, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Building Inspector and/or the Health
Officer and/or the sanitary inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official
or his designee of the Borough provided such person shall file in the
office of the Borough Clerk a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days
after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition the
borough clerk shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give
the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall
be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should
be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
10 days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that upon
application of the petitioner the Borough Clerk may postpone the date of
the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period, if in his
judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement. After such hearing the Building Inspector and/or the Health
Officer and/or the Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official
a. Be put in writing;
b. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
c. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; and
d. Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by
registered mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice;
or if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this State. Such notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this section and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
§ 9-2.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9-2.5
1:230
or his designee shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending
upon their findings as to whether the provisions of this section and of the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If
the Building Inspector and/or Health Officer and/or the Sanitary Inspector
and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee sustains or modifies
such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant
to this section shall automatically become an order if a written petition for
a hearing is not filed in the office of the Borough Clerk within 10 days
after such notice is served. The proceedings at such hearing, including the
findings and decision of the Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer
and/or the Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his
designee shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter
of public record in the office of the Borough Clerk. Such record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector and/or
Health Officer and/or the Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire
Official or his designee may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the state. Whenever the building
inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or the Sanitary Inspector and/or the
Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, or safety, they
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of
this section, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom
such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition
to the Borough Clerk shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After
such hearing, depending upon their findings as to whether the provisions of
this section and all the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with, the Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or
the Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee
shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 9-2.6. Power and Authority of Building Inspector, Health Officer
and/or Sanitary Inspector and/or the Fire Marshall/Fire Official or
his designee. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-2]
The Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or the Sanitary
Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee are hereby
authorized and empowered to make and adopt such written rules and
regulations as he may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this section, nor
in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The
Building Inspector and/or the Health Officer and/or the Sanitary Inspector
and/or the Fire Marshal/Fire Official or his designee shall file a certified
copy of all rules and regulations which they may adopt in their office and in
the office of the Clerk of the Borough.
§ 9-2.5 GENERAL § 9-2.7
1:231
§ 9-2.7. Conformance to State Housing Code.
No person shall occupy as owner occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the "New Jersey State Housing Code"
established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 9-2.8. Violations; Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed
90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any
of the provisions of this section and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 9-3. SMOKE DETECTORS.
§ 9-3.1. Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in this section, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
a. Dwelling unit shall mean a building or a portion of a building arranged
for the use of one or more individuals living alone or together as a
single housekeeping unit with living, sanitary and sleeping facilities but
not including trailers, tents and house trailers.
b. "Fire official" shall mean a person certified by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs and appointed or designated to direct
the enforcement of the code by the appointing authority of a local
enforcing agency. This term shall also include "Fire Marshal" where the
Fire Official has been appointed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:71-3.2.
[Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-2]
c. Construction official shall mean the chief administrator of the
Flemington Building Department created pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, namely, R.S. 52:271D-119 et seq., its
amendments and supplements and Ordinance 19-1976 of the Borough
of Flemington, entitled "An Ordinance of the Borough of Flemington,
Hunterdon County, Establishing a State Uniform Construction Code
Enforcing Agency, and a Construction Fee Schedule and Fire Limits
Pursuant to Chapter 271, Laws of New Jersey 1975, and Title 5,
Chapter 23 of the New Jersey Administrative Code."
d. Approved rating organization shall mean any of the following:
Underwriters Testing Laboratories, Factory Mutual Research Corp.,
National Bureau of Standards, or NFPA current standard. [Amended
2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-2]
§ 9-2.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9-3.1
1:232
§ 9-3.2. Approved Detectors Required.
Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one electric or battery operated
smoke detector device for each sleeping area. Any such detector shall
bear a seal, tested and listed by an approved rating organization and shall
comply in design to all applicable State, Federal or industrial requirements.
§ 9-3.3. Compliance With Section.
The owner of each dwelling unit shall cause the same to be brought into
compliance with terms and provisions of this section by January 1, 1980,
provided, however, after the effective date of this section:
§ 9-3.4. Installation and Maintenance.
Smoke detectors shall be capable of being installed and maintained by the
person or persons entitled to occupy the dwelling unit. Smoke detectors
shall consist of an assembly incorporating the detector, control equipment
and the alarm sounding device in one unit. They shall have a power supply
consisting of a monitored battery or a cord connection to an electrical
receptacle which is fitted with a plug restrainer device. The plug in
receptacle shall not be controlled by any switch other than that of the main
power supply. Two or more single station smoke detectors assemblies may
be interconnected so that actuation of one causes all integral or separate
audible alarms to operate.
§ 9-3.5. Activation of Smoke Detectors.
Upon activation, the smoke detector shall provide an audible alarm which
is to be so distributed and have such character so that it can be heard in all
rooms of the dwelling unit with its doors closed. The audible signals shall
be distinctive from other audible signaling devices which may be used for
other purposes in the dwelling unit. The smoke detector shall be designed
for and capable of either self-restoration or manual restoration to normal
e. Smoke detector shall mean an instrument approved by an approved
rating organization for the detection of ionized gases or products of
combustion produced by burning or smoldering materials.
a. No dwelling unit shall be sold or the occupancy thereof changed unless
and until the dwelling unit has been brought into compliance with the
terms and provisions of this section;
b. No structural change or repair of a value in excess of $500.00 shall be
made to a dwelling unit unless and until the dwelling unit is brought
into compliance with the terms and provisions of this section; and
c. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the construction official
for a dwelling unit unless and until the applicant therefore shall have
first complied with all the terms and conditions of this section.
§ 9-3.1 GENERAL § 9-3.5
1:233
conditions for operation. No provisions shall be made for deactivation of the
audible alarm other than by reactivation of the system.
§ 9-3.6. Modification of Provisions.
The fire official, with the advice of the construction official, shall have
power to modify in writing any of the provisions of this section upon written
application therefor by the owner or lessee of a dwelling unit when there
are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of this section
with respect to such dwelling unit provided, however, that the spirit of
this section shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done.
§ 9-3.7. Certification by Owner Prior to Sale.
Prior to the sale of any dwelling unit located in the Borough the owner and
seller thereof shall certify in writing to the fire official full and complete
compliance of said property with the terms and provisions of this section.
The making and submission of a willfully false certification by the owner
and seller of a dwelling unit shall be a violation of the terms and provisions
of this section.
§ 9-3.8. Tax Collector to Issue Statement to Persons Requesting Tax
Search.
The tax collector of the Borough shall provide to each person requesting
a tax search from his office a statement calling attention to the provisions
of this section and shall inform the person requesting a tax search of the
obligation of the owner and seller of real property as mentioned in § 9-3.7
hereof to make the certification described therein.
§ 9-3.9. Certificate of Continued Use.
The issuance of a certificate of continued use shall constitute evidence of
compliance of the terms of this section.
§ 9-3.10. Inspections.
During the month of March, 1980, the fire official or agents designated
by him shall inspect each dwelling unit to determine compliance with
this section. Thereafter, the fire official or agents designated by him shall
inspect dwelling units on a schedule to be determined by the fire official
provided, however, that an inspection shall be made by the fire official at
least once every three years.
§ 9-4. RENTAL OF HOUSING UNITS.
§ 9-4.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
§ 9-3.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9-4.1
1:234
ADULT TENANT — Shall mean a person over the age of 18 years not
previously occupying a dwelling unit.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof, used for
human habitation, use, or occupancy and includes any accessory building
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building or structure or part thereof containing
one or more dwelling units which are to be leased or rented to a person
other than the owner or provided to any occupant as compensation for
services rendered to the Landlord or any third party. A dwelling shall not
include a State licensed group home operated by a nonprofit corporation or
public entity.
DWELLING, STANDARDS TO BE APPLIED — For all dwellings in the
Borough of Flemington the following standards are adopted by reference:
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 and N.J.A.C.
5:28-1.11, is hereby adopted as the standard governing supplied utilities,
facilities and other physical things and conditions to make buildings and
dwellings, both residential and nonresidential, safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation, occupancy or use.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms or any part
thereof located within a building containing habitable space and forming
a single housekeeping unit with facilities which are used or designed to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating for a single family or the
functional equivalent thereof.
HABITABLE SPACE — Shall mean the space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility space in similar areas are not considered habitable space.
HOUSING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the person authorized
by this section to issue notice of violations or summons to enforce
compliance with this chapter and to investigate and/or inspect complaints
and possible unsafe conditions and includes the rental housing officer,
zoning official, fire official, construction code official, and any police officer
of the Borough of Flemington.
LANDLORD — Shall mean the owner or owners of the freehold of the
premises or lessor estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession,
assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, or
their duly authorized agents, firm or corporation in control of a building,
dwelling, apartment house or habitable space of premises.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person, including minors, who reside or
intends to reside in a dwelling unit.
RENTAL HOUSING OFFICER — Shall mean the person authorized by the
section to issue permits and conduct inspections.
TENANT — Shall mean any person, including minors, who reside in a
dwelling unit on a continuous basis for more than 30 days.
§ 9-4.1 GENERAL § 9-4.1
1:235
VACANT DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit where the
previous tenants have vacated, or where more adult tenants than permitted
by the landlord registration statement seek to occupy the dwelling unit.
§ 9-4.2. Landlord's Registration Statement Required.
Within 90 days of the effective date of this section every landlord in the
Borough of Flemington shall make application for, and file with the rental
housing officer, a landlord registration statement for every building
containing one or more dwelling units occupied by one or more tenants.
Thereafter the landlord registration statement shall be renewed annually
each March 1.
§ 9-4.3. Application for Landlord's Registration Statement.
An application form for a landlord's registration statement shall be available
from the Borough Clerk and shall not be deemed complete unless the
applicant provides the following for each dwelling units rented to one or
more tenants owned by the landlord in the Borough.
a. Name, address and phone number of landlord.
b. Address of building(s) ("building") and dwelling unit(s) number or other
identifying information for the dwelling unit.
c. For the dwelling unit(s):
1. Identify the unit number or other identifying information.
2. Set forth the gross floor area in square feet of each room occupied
for sleeping purposes.
3. Set forth the total gross floor area in square feet of habitable
rooms.
4. Total number of tenants permitted in the dwelling unit.
5. Total number of occupants who are to reside in the dwelling unit.
6. The date tenancy commenced or will commence.
d. Proof of current payment of property taxes, assessments against
property, sewer charges, or other municipal charges, or assessments
pursuant to U.S.A. 40:52-1.2.
e. Payment of registration fees.
f. A certification from the landlord that the dwelling unit to be rented
complies with this section.
g. A certification from the landlord that he/she will not authorize more
than the maximum permitted tenants to occupy the dwelling unit.
§ 9-4.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9-4.3
1:236
§ 9-4.4. Landlord Registration Statement Required.
No landlord shall permit a tenant to occupy, let or sublet to a tenant,
nor shall any person or persons lease or occupy any vacant dwelling unit,
without obtaining a landlord registration certifying that the dwelling unit
complies with the provisions of the most current, this section and any other
applicable laws and regulations.
§ 9-4.5. Procedure Upon Increase of Occupants.
§ 9-4.6. Limitations of Occupancy.
The maximum number of persons which may inhabit a dwelling unit shall be
computed as follows and certified in the landlord registration statement:
§ 9-4.7. Minimum Standards for Room Occupancy: Light,
Ventilation, Bath and Kitchen Requirement, and Decks.
h. In the event of a change in landlord of the dwelling unit, a new landlord
registration statement shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
a. Every landlord shall have the obligation to monitor any increase in the
number of adult tenants in each dwelling unit and prevent any increase
in tenants that exceeds the number of tenants permitted in the landlord
registration certificate. In addition, the landlord shall have the
obligation to alert the rental housing officer within ten days of increase
in the number of tenants in a dwelling unit above that permitted in the
approved landlord registration statement.
b. Every tenant shall have the obligation to notify the landlord of any
increase in the number of occupants or tenants within ten (10) days of
the arrival of a new tenant.
c. Neither the tenant nor the landlord shall permit more "persons" to
occupy the dwelling unit than the maximum number of tenants set forth
in the approved landlord registration statement.
a. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
b. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted
by the minimum occupancy area requirements.
c. Maximum Occupancy. The maximum number of occupants inhabiting a
building rented for residential purposes shall be stated in the approved
landlord registration statement.
a. Light and Ventilation. Every room containing habitable space must have
at least one window capable of being opened or other opening directly
upon a street, yard, court or other open space. The total area of such
§ 9-4.3 GENERAL § 9-4.7
1:237
§ 9-4.8. Violation of Occupancy Requirements, Inspections,
Enforcement.
opening shall be not less than 12 percent of the floor area of such room
and in no case less than 12 square feet.
b. Bathroom and Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall contain a full bathroom
(including a water closet, lavatory and either a bathtub or shower) and
a kitchen meaning an area for the preparation of food (including a stove
and sink).
c. Maximum Deck, Balcony or Porch Space. The maximum allowable
number of people on any deck, balcony or porch shall be one person per
nine square feet in accordance with the maximum standing room space
allowed as per the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23-1.1 et seq.
d. Structures that preexisted the adoption date of this section21 may
continue to be used as a dwelling unit notwithstanding they do not meet
the requirements of this section, providing their continued use is
permitted by and the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq., and New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.
(jointly referred to as "Uniform Fire Safety Code"). The landlord shall
submit a written request with the application for the rental certificate
of occupancy for such continued use along with a written explanation as
to how compliance with the Uniform Fire Safety Code creates practical
difficulties.
a. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section for a landlord, owner
or a tenant of a dwelling unit to allow a greater number of people than
the permitted maximum number of tenants listed in the landlord
registration statement to rent or occupy any dwelling unit.
b. It shall also be unlawful and in violation of this section for a tenant,
landlord or an owner to allow a number of people greater than the
maximum number of people permitted to occupy the deck, balcony or
porch of said dwelling unit to occupy the deck, balcony or porch of said
dwelling unit.
c. The housing enforcement officer is authorized to issue summons for
violations of this section to any owner, landlord or tenant found to be in
violation of this section.
d. Inspections. For the purpose of making inspections, on information and
belief relating to a violation as specified herein, the Rental Housing
Officer or his agent or duly designated designee is authorized to enter
and examine any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at
such reasonable hours as the circumstances of the case dictate with the
permission of an occupant, tenant, owner or landlord. In the event entry
21.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2007-16, codified herein as § 9-4, was adopted November 7,
2007.
§ 9-4.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9-4.8
1:238
§ 9-4.9. Unlawful Activities.
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section for a landlord or owner of
a dwelling unit or tenant of a dwelling unit or apartment:
§ 9-4.10. Reporting of Violations.
It shall be the legal duty of each holder of a landlord registration statement
to immediately report any breaches of the peace or violations of this chapter
which he or she may know or believes to have occurred on the leasehold
premises, which report shall be made to the rental housing officer or the
police department of the Borough of Flemington by the most expedient
means.
§ 9-4.11. Violations for False Information. [Ord. No. 2007-16]
Any person who is found to have submitted false information,
documentation or identification in connection with an application for a
landlord's registration statement shall pay a minimum fine of $250.00 plus
court costs for the first offense, second offense a minimum of $1,250.00
and third offense or more $2,500.00 for each document containing false
information, documentation or identification. Any person who submits a
false certification or documentation shall be subject to criminal prosecution,
in addition to the penalties contained herein. In addition to the foregoing,
a certificate of occupancy that is issued on the basis of information or
is denied, then, upon advice of the municipal attorney, recourse to a
court of competent jurisdiction may be pursued.
a. To permit or allow people to reside in a dwelling unit in a number in
excess of the number of people for which sleeping accommodations are
provided in accordance with this section.
b. To lease or rent a dwelling unit where the number of tenants exceeds
the total number of sleeping accommodations as set forth in § 9-4.6 of
this section.
c. To knowingly permit a number of people, greater than the maximum
number of occupants or tenants permitted, to occupy a dwelling unit.
d. For the landlord to fail to file with the rental housing officer a landlord
registration statement as required by § 10-7.2 of this section for each
building owned by him/her in the Borough of Flemington containing a
dwelling unit.
e. To violate any other provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq. and/or the Uniform Safety Code.
f. To enter into a lease agreement without at least one tenant being an
adult.
g. To violate any subsection of this section.
§ 9-4.8 GENERAL § 9-4.11
1:239
documentation that is knowingly false or fraudulent when made, shall be
subject to revocation pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions
herein.
§ 9-4.12. Fees. [Ord. No. 2007-16; Ord. No. 2016-17]
§ 9-4.13. Tenant Subject to Removal. [Ord. No. 2007-16]
Any tenant renting a premises in the Borough of Flemington who occupies
the premises prior to obtaining an approved landlord registration statement
shall be subject to immediate removal from the premises by the rental
housing officer, his agents or duly designated designee. Any costs
associated with the removal and subsequent relocation of tenants that are
incurred by the Borough of Flemington will be reimbursed to the Borough
and shall be the responsibility of the landlord and/or tenant.
§ 9-4.14. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2007-16]
In addition to the penalties set forth in § 9-4.11 any owner or agent,
landlord, tenant, and any person or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof shall be liable to a fine of not more than $2,500.00,
community service or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine,
community service, and imprisonment. Each and every day such violation
continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Each violation
of this section shall be a separate and distinct violation.
§ 9-4.15. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2007-16]
This section shall take effect immediately after final passage and publication
accordance to law.
Chapter 9A
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 9A-1. THE FLEMINGTON BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
§ 9A-1.1. Established; Composition; Administrator. [Ord. 19-1976, S
1; Ord. No. 2015-14]
There is hereby established, in the Borough of Flemington, a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as The Flemington
a. There shall be an annual fee of $25.00 to file a landlord registration
statement for each dwelling unit rented to one or more tenants owned
by the landlord within the Borough of Flemington.
b. A late fee of an additional $25.00 per unit shall be assessed if the
payment is more than 30 days past the due date.
§ 9-4.11 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9A-1.1
1:240
Building Department, consisting of a Construction Official, Building
subcode official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official,
Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State
Uniform Construction Code. The construction official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
§ 9A-1.2. Official Positions; Qualifications. [Ord. 19-1976, S 1; Ord.
No. 2015-14]
Each official position created in subsection 9A-1.1 hereof shall be filled by
a person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., as amended by N.J.A.C. 5:23, providing that, in lieu of
any particular subcode official, an onsite inspection agency may be retained
by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person: provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:23
to hold each such position.
R.S. 52:27D-119 et seq. provide for the enforcement of New Jersey's
uniform construction codes by the municipalities.
§ 9A-1.3. Public Business at One Office. [Ord. 19-1976, S 1; Ord. No.
2015-14]
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office, namely 38 Park Avenue, Flemington, New Jersey, except for
emergencies, and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
§ 9A-2. APPEALS. [Ord. 19-1976, S 2; Ord. No. 2015-14]
Persons aggrieved by decisions of the enforcing agency may appeal such
decision to the Construction Board of Appeals established by the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of Hunterdon County.
§ 9A-3. CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES. [Ord. 19-1976, S 3; Ord.
8-1977; Ord. 7-1978, S 1; Ord. 13-1979, S 2; Ord. 14-1979, SS 2, 3;
Ord. 5-1990, SS 1, 2; Ord. 19-1993, S 1; Ord. 6-1996, S 1; Ord.
17-1998, S I; Ord. 22-2001; Ord. No. 2015-14]
a. General.
1. The fee for plan review, computed as a percentage of the fee for a
construction permit, may be paid at the time of application for a
permit. The amount of this fee, if prepaid, shall then be deducted
from the amount of the fee due for a construction permit, when the
permit is issued. Plan review fees are not refundable.
2. The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum of
the basic construction fee plus all applicable special fees, such as
§ 9A-1.1 GENERAL § 9A-3
1:241
elevator or sign fees. This fee shall be paid before a permit is
issued.
3. The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid
before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition to the
construction permit fee.
b. Flemington Building Department fees shall be as follows:
1. Plan review fee: The fee for plan review shall be 20 percent of the
amount to be charged for a new construction permit, except that
elevator device plan review shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c) 6 and 7.
2. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed
on the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of
electrical fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers,
standpipes and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates
provided herein plus any special fees.
(a) Building volume or cost: The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
(1) For new construction in Residential Use Groups U, R-3,
R-4, and R-5, $0.038 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume, provided that the minimum fee shall be $200.00.
For new construction in Commercial Use Groups A, B, E,
F, H, I, M, S and U, $0.040 per cubic foot of building or
structure volume up to 100,000 cubic feet and $0.020 per
cubic foot over 100,000 cubic feet provided the minimum
fee shall be $200.00.
(2) For renovations, alterations and repairs in Residential Use
Groups U, R-3, R-4 and R-5, $15.00 per each $1,000.00 of
actual construction cost provided the minimum fee shall
be $60.00.
For renovations, alterations and repairs in Commercial
Use Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, S and U, $20.00 per
each $1,000.00 of actual construction cost provided the
minimum fee shall be $100.00.
(3) For additions in Residential Use Groups U, R-3, R-4 and
R-5, $0.038 per cubic foot of building or structure volume
provided that the minimum fee for Residential Use Groups
R-3 and R-4 shall be $50.00 and the minimum fee for
Residential Use Groups U involving less than 1,000 cubic
feet of building or structure volume, $60.00.
For additions in Commercial Use Groups A, B, E, F, H, I,
M, S and U, $0.040 per cubic foot of building or structure
§ 9A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9A-3
1:242
volume up to 100,000 cubic feet and $0.015 per cubic foot
over 100,000 cubic feet provided the minimum fee shall be
$200.00.
(4) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed at the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with (2) and (3) above.
(5) Fees for the construction of in ground swimming pools
shall be $100.00 and $50.00 for above ground pools; these
fees are in addition to any required electrical and
plumbing subcode fees.
(6) Fees for the construction of decks in Residential Use
Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be $10.00 per each
$1,000.00 of actual construction cost provided the
minimum fee shall be $75.00; the fees for decks shall
include the three required inspections.
(7) Re-roofing, re-siding, and siding for use groups R-3, R-4,
and R-5 is a flat fee of $75.00. All other use groups the fee
is $20.00 per thousand of estimated cost.
(b) Plumbing Fee Schedule:
Plumbing Fee Schedule
Fixtures
Residential - R3,
R4, R5
Commercial -
A,B,E,F,H,I,M,S,U
Water closets $15.00 $20.00
Urinal - Bidets $15.00 $20.00
Bathtubs $15.00 $20.00
Lavatory $15.00 $20.00
Shower $15.00 $20.00
Floor drains $15.00 $20.00
Sinks $15.00 $20.00
Dishwasher $15.00 $20.00
Drinking fountains $15.00 $20.00
Washing machine
or standpipe
$15.00 $20.00
Hose bibbs or
outside faucets
$15.00 $20.00
Vents - Minimum
permit fees
$15.00 $100.00
Radon permits Minimum permit fee $50.00
Gas piping $65.00 $100.00
§ 9A-3 GENERAL § 9A-3
1:243
Plumbing Fee Schedule
Fixtures
Residential - R3,
R4, R5
Commercial -
A,B,E,F,H,I,M,S,U
Fuel oil piping $65.00 $45.00
Water heaters:
(new dwellings) $50.00 $50.00
(Existing
dwellings)
Replacement -
Minimum fee
$50.00 $100.00
Steam boilers:
Steam boilers -
Complete system
$100.00
Steam boilers -
Replacement
$65.00 $100.00
Hotwater boilers:
Hotwater boilers-
Complete system
$100.00
Hotwater boilers -
Replacement
$65.00 $100.00
Pool heaters $60.00 $100.00
A. C. &
refrigeration
condensers
$55.00 $100.00
Sewer connection $55.00 $100.00
Water service
connection
$55.00 $100.00
Gas service
connection
$55.00 $100.00
Special Devices:
Sewer pumps $60.00 $100.00
Interception/
separator
$60.00 $100.00
Back flow
preventers
$15.00 $100.00
Grease traps $60.00 $100.00
Whirlpool or
Jacuzzi
$15.00 $100.00
§ 9A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9A-3
1:244
Plumbing Fee Schedule
Fixtures
Residential - R3,
R4, R5
Commercial -
A,B,E,F,H,I,M,S,U
Minimum permit
fee
$60.00 $100.00
(c) Electrical Fees:
(1) 1 — 50 units — including all lighting fixtures, receptacles,
switches, detectors, light standard to 8 feet high, fraction
hp motor, emergency lights, communication outlets, alarm
devices rated 20 amp or less:
Each: $75.00
Each additional 20 units: $25.00
Each portable or stationary generator up to 10 hp or 10
kW: $50.00
(2) Motors 1 hp to 5 hp or electrical devices 1 kW to 5 kW:
$50.00
Replacement of wiring for each branch circuit, each hydro
massage tub, each underwater lighting fixture, each
residential stove or oven up to 16 kW, each fire or burglar
alarm control unit, each receptacle rated 21 to 50 amps,
each light standard over 8 feet in height — each
communication closet.
(3) Each motor or electrical device rated greater than 5 hp or
5 kW to 35 hp or 35 kW, equipment, panel board, switch
gear, motor control center or disconnecting means rated
225 amps or less, each transformer or generator rated
greater than 10 kW or 10 kVA to 45 kW or 45 kVA, each
electric sign rated greater than 20 amps to 225 amps
including associated disconnects for each receptacle rated
greater than 50 amps:
Each: $100.00
(4) Each utility loan management device: $46.00
(5) Each motor or electrical device rated greater than 35 hp or
35 kW to 100 hp or 100 kW for each service equipment,
panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor control
center or disconnecting means rated from 225 amps to
600 amps and each transformer or generator rated from
45 kW or 45 kVA to 112.5 kW or 112.5 kVA:
Each: $200.00
§ 9A-3 GENERAL § 9A-3
1:245
(6) Each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100 hp
or 100 kVA, each service equipment, panel board, switch
board, switch gear, motor control center or disconnecting
means rated greater than 600 amps to 1000 amps and
each transformer or generator rated greater than 112.5
kW or 112.5 kVA:
Each: $500.00
Each motor or electrical device rated greater than 200 hp
or 200 kVA, each service equipment, panel board, switch
board, switch gear, motor control center or each service
equipment panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor
control counter or disconnect means rated greater than
1,000 amps:
Each: $750.00
(7) The fee charges for electrical work for each permanently
installed private swimming pool or hot tub/jacuzzi or
fountain excluding panel board and underwater lighting
(include motor pumps, disconnect switches and "req"
receptacles):
Each: $100.00
Public pools: $300.00
Based on the number of electrical fixtures and ratings of
electrical devices set forth in paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and
(5):
Minimum fee: $300.00
(8) The fee for the installation of single or multiple station
smoke or heat detectors and fire, burglar or security alarm
systems in one and two family dwellings:
Each: $50.00
For fire, burglar, and security alarm system and detectors
in buildings other than one or two family dwellings — the
fee shall be charged as per paragraphs (1) and (2).
Minimum fee: $75.00
(9) For installation consisting of multi-meter stacks — the fee
shall be based on the ampere rating of the main bus —
individual load side panel boards shall be charged as per
paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), (6).
(10) For electrical work requiring replacement or service
entrance conductors or feeder conductors only the fee
shall be charged as per paragraphs (2) — (6).
§ 9A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9A-3
1:246
(11) The fee charged for processing equipment shall be based
on the ampere rating of the over current device protecting
the conductor feeding the process' equipment or cut off
device — see paragraphs (1) — (6).
(12) For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilization equipment and motors
which are part of premises' wiring, except portable plug
in-type, shall be counted.
(13) For solar photovoltaic systems in any use group the fees
are as follows:
One to 50 modules $125.00
51 — 100 modules $175.00
100 — 250 modules $375.00
250 — 500 modules $700.00
Greater than 500 modules $700.00 with an additional
$1 per module over 500
(d) Fire protection and other hazardous equipment: sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas and oil fired appliances not
connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems,
incinerators and crematoriums.
(1) The fee for 20 or fewer heads or detectors shall be $60.00;
for 21 to and including 100 heads or detectors, the fee
shall be $120.00; for 101 to and including 1,000 heads the
fee shall be $2.00 per head or detector; for over 1,000
heads or detectors the fee shall be $1.00 per head or
detector.
(2) The fee for each standpipe with three inch and four inch
risers shall be $100.00.
The fee for each standpipe with six inch and eight inch
risers shall be $150.00.
The fee for each private fire hydrant shall be $75.00.
The fee for each fire pump shall be $100.00.
(3) The fee for each independent pre-engineered CO2 system
shall be $100.00.
The fee for each independent pre-engineered dry chemical
or wet chemical system shall be $100.00.
The fee for each independent pre-engineered halo
generated system shall be $100.00.
§ 9A-3 GENERAL § 9A-3
1:247
The fee for underground piping supply without hydrant
shall be $60.00.
(4) The fee for each local fire alarm system in Use Groups R-3,
R-4 and R-5 shall be $50.00.
The fee for each remote fire alarm system in Use Groups
R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be $75.00.
(5) The fee for commercial alarm systems shall be $100.00 for
each panel, $2.50 for each device (pull station, detector
and sensor) and $5.00 for the alteration of each detector
and sensor.
(6) The following mechanical fees shall apply for gas or oil
heating appliances (without plumbing):
New — Residential: $100.00 each
Replacement — Residential: $ 50.00 each
New — Commercial: $150.00 each
Replacement — Commercial: $ 75.00 each
Industrial ovens: $ 50.00 each
Commercial hoods and kitchen exhausts: $ 100.00 each
Spray booths: $ 50.00 each
Incinerators: $350.00 each
Crematoriums: $350.00 each
Commercial appliances: $15.00 each
Unit heaters — Commercial: $35.00 each
Unit heaters — Residential: $25.00 each
(7) The fee for installation of an underground fuel storage
tank 5,000 gallons or less in capacity shall be $70.00; for
an underground tank with 5,001 to 12,000 gallon capacity,
the fee shall be $100.00; for installation of an underground
tank with over 12,000 gallons capacity, the fee shall be
$150.00.
(8) The fee for installation of a residential aboveground fuel
storage tank with capacity of 660 gallons or less shall be
$50.00; for installation of an aboveground tank with over
660 gallons capacity, the fee shall be $75.00. The fee for
installation of a commercial above ground fuel storage
tank with capacity under 2000 gallons shall be $75.00. The
fee for installation of a commercial above ground fuel
§ 9A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9A-3
1:248
storage tank with capacity over 2000 gallons shall be
$85.00.
(9) The fee for removal of a fuel storage tank is $50.00.
(10) The fees for fire subcode construction type permits shall
be:
Fire and party walls: $25.00 each
Fire separation: $20.00 each
(11) Fire and Draft Stopping:
R-3 Use Group: $25.00 each
Other Use Groups: $35.00 each
Multi-stories over (2) floors: $25.00 each
Exit and emergency
Lighting: $10.00 each
Fireplaces (Masonry or metal): $75.00 each
Solid fuel stoves: $75.00 each
Masonry or metal chimney: $75.00 each
Chimney relining or repair: $75.00 each
3. Certificates and other permits:
(a) The fee for demolition shall be $100.00 for each story of the
structure to be demolished; the owner of the building to be
demolished or person applying for a demolition permit shall
provide a cash or paper bond in an amount one and one-half
times the estimated cost of the demolition, clearing and filling
in of the site which shall require the completion of the work,
and the clearing and filling in of the site and shall protect and
indemnify the borough against loss or damage; upon
satisfactory completion of the work, the bond shall be
returned.
(b) The fee for a permit to move a building or structure from one
lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be
$100.00 plus $10.00 per each $1,000.00 of the actual cost of
the new foundation; the owner of the building to be moved or
the person applying for the permit shall furnish a cash or paper
bond in the amount of one and one-half times the cost of
moving, filling and grading of the lot, and foundation
construction which shall require the completion of the work
and the restoration of the site; upon satisfactory completion of
the work, the bond shall be returned.
§ 9A-3 GENERAL § 9A-3
1:249
§ 9A-4. ANNUAL REPORT TO MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL.
[Ord. 19-1976, S 4; Ord. 5-1990, SS 1, 2; Ord. 19-1993, S 2; Ord. No.
2015-14]
On or before February 10 of each year, the Construction Official shall, with
the advice of the subcode officials and in consultation with the Municipal
Finance Officer, prepare and submit to the Mayor and Borough Council a
report detailing the receipts and expenditures of the Flemington Building
Department and indicating his recommendations for a fee schedule, based
on the operating expense of the agency.
§ 9A-5. COLLECTION FOR REQUIRED SUPPORT PROGRAMS. [Ord.
19-1993, S 3; Ord. No. 2015-14]
In order to provide for the training and certification and technical support
programs, the Flemington Building Department shall collect in addition to
the fees set forth in Section 9A-3 a surcharge fee to be based upon the
volume of new construction within the Borough of Flemington. Said fee
shall be accounted for and forwarded to the Bureau of Housing Inspection
in the manner herein provided. This fee shall be in the amount of $0.0016
per cubic foot volume of new construction and $0.80 per each $1,000.00 of
actual construction cost for renovations, alterations and repairs. The above
fees shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection on a quarterly
basis.
§ 9A-6. through § 9A-9. (RESERVED)
§ 9A-10. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy or approval shall be in
the amount of 10 percent of the total construction permit fee.
(d) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for a change of use group
and certificate of continuing occupancy shall be $100.00.
(e) The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy for each
construction trailer for up to six months shall be $100.00.
(f) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount
of $2.00 per square foot surface area of the sign computed on
one side only for double faced signs, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $35.00.
(g) The fee for a special event permit involving tents at local parks
shall be $50.00 per each tent up to ten tents and $500.00 over
ten tents.
(h) (Reserved)
(i) The fee for footing and foundation on any new building shall be
$100.00, 50 percent of which will be used for credit on the
update.
§ 9A-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9A-10.1
1:250
§ 9A-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Flemington, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 9A-10.2. Definitions; Word Usage. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Flemington or other public body and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater,
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries and
all springs, streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 9A-10.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering of any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
§ 9A-10.1 GENERAL § 9A-10.3
1:251
§ 9A-10.4. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Storm drain inlets identified in subsection 9A-10.2 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see paragraph c below.
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection 9A-10.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
a. Grates.
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
2. Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two (2) or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than
seven square inches or be no greater than two inches across the
smallest dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
§ 9A-10.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9A-10.4
1:252
§ 9A-10.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
This section shall be enforced by the Borough Police Department and/or the
Construction Official of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 9A-10.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment for a period
not exceeding ninety (90) days and/or a period of community service not
exceeding ninety (90) days for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted
to meet the design standard.
Chapter 9B
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 9B-1. GENERAL.
§ 9B-1.1. Short Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as 'Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Flemington."
§ 9B-1.2. Purpose and Policy of Chapter.
It is hereby found and declared that there exists in the Borough of
Flemington structures used for residential and nonresidential use which
are or may become in the future substandard with respect to structure or
maintenance or further that such conditions, including but not limited to,
structural deterioration and lack of maintenance constitute a menace to
health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and
inhabitants of the Borough of Flemington. It is further found and declared
that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration certain
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch;
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New-Jersey-Register-listed historic property.
§ 9A-10.4 GENERAL § 9B-1.2
1:253
properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and
initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time
the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same, and that by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and
the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability
and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhood
enhanced, and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance and condition of residential and nonresidential
premises; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of
residential and nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the violation of
this chapter. This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial preventive and
essential for the public interest and it is intended that this code be liberally
construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein.
§ 9B-1.3. Applicability.
Every residential and nonresidential building and the premises on which
it is situated in the Borough of Flemington, used or intended to be used
for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial occupancy, shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such building shall
have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after enactment of
this chapter, and irrespective of any premises or licenses which shall have
been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, for the
construction or repair of the building, prior to the date of this chapter. This
chapter does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the
construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or facilities
contained therein except as provided in the following paragraph. Where
there is a mixed occupancy, residential or nonresidential use therein shall
be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinances of the Borough of Flemington or
under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth
herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of the chapter impose a lower
standard than any other ordinances of the Borough of Flemington or laws
of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any other
such ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 9B-2. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND
OPERATOR — RESIDENTIAL.
§ 9B-2.1. Maintenance of Exterior of Premises and Structures.
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free
of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of the occupants, pedestrians
§ 9B-1.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-2.1
1:254
and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions
and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the
owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the
premises free of hazards which include but are not limited to the following:
a. Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
b. Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions, or storm
damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees
shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
c. Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects, and accumulations of
ice and snow which by reason of location aboveground level constitute a
danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
d. Ground surface hazards. Holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions and excretions of pets and other animals on paths, walks,
driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the
premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the premises.
All such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and
steps replaced and other conditions removed where necessary to
eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch
upon their discovery.
e. Recurring accumulations of storm water. Adequate run-off drains shall
be provided and maintained to eliminate any such recurrent or
excessive accumulation of storm water.
f. Source of infestation. Sources of infestation shall be eliminated.
g. Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound,
free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads of
safety.
h. Chimneys, flues and vents. Chimneys and all flues and vent attachments
thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, free from defects and so
maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions for which
they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft producing
equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of
the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke
tight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases.
i. Porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes. Porches, landings,
balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or
railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazards of
falling, and the same shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair
and free from defects.
§ 9B-2.1 GENERAL § 9B-2.2
1:255
§ 9B-2.2. Appearances of Exterior of Premises and Structures.
The exterior of the premises, the exterior of dwelling structures and the
condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the
appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of
maintenance in keeping with the residential standards of the neighborhood
and such that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not
constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element
leading to the progressive deterioration of the neighborhood with the
accompanying diminution of property values including the following:
a. Storage of commercial and industrial materials. There shall not be
stored or used equipment and materials relating to the business,
commercial or industrial uses unless permitted under the Land
Regulations of the Borough of Flemington for the premises.
b. Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and
bushes shall be kept trimmed and from becoming overgrown and
unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same constitute
a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property and impairing the
good residential character of the neighborhood.
c. Signs. All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair and printed
matter, pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be completely
maintained or when no longer in use completely removed immediately.
d. Reconstruction of walls and sidings. All reconstruction of walls and
sidings shall be of standard quality and appearance commensurate with
the residential character of the properties in the same block and on
both sides of the street on which the premises front, such that the
materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance are under
prevailing appraisal practices and standards will depreciate the values
of neighboring and adjoining premises as aforesaid.
e. Swimming Pools. Swimming pools and areas surrounding them shall be
operated in accordance with applicable State statutes or borough
ordinances and shall be regularly maintained.
f. General Maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure not inherently resistant to decay (including fences) shall be
maintained in good repair by owner or operator and all surfaces thereof
shall be kept painted or otherwise provided with a protective coating
sufficient to prevent structural deterioration and to maintain
appearances. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone and brick, excessive peeling of paint or other
condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the
end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards
eliminated and adjoining properties and the neighborhood from
blighting influences.
§ 9B-2.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-2.2
1:256
§ 9B-2.3. Structural Soundness.
Every dwelling and accessory structure and every part thereof shall be kept
structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety, health or fire
hazards, including:
§ 9B-3. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND
OCCUPANTS — NON-RESIDENTIAL.
§ 9B-3.1. Maintenance of Exterior of Premises and Structures.
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of
all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions and any
of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or
operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises
free of hazards.
§ 9B-3.2. Appearance of Exterior of Premises and Structures.
The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained by the owner or operator so that the appearance of
the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance
in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood and such that the
appearance of the premises and the structures shall not constitute a
blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the
progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood with the
accompanying diminution of property values including the following:
g. Front Yard Parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle, or permit or suffer the same to be done in any front yard areas
of premises occupied by a dwelling or hotel, except on driveways and
parking areas constructed and installed in compliance with applicable
borough ordinances.
a. Exterior Walls, Siding and Roofs. Exterior walls, siding and roofs shall
be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects.
b. Painting and Other Protective Coating. All exposed surfaces susceptible
to decay shall be kept at all times painted or otherwise provided with a
protective coating sufficient to prevent deterioration.
c. Weather and Water Tightness. Every dwelling shall be so maintained as
to be weather and water tight. Exterior walls, roofs, windows, window
frames, doors, door frames, foundations and other parts of the
structure shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the
structure and prevent excessive drafts. Damaged materials must be
repaired or replaced promptly; places showing signs of rot, leakage,
deterioration or corrosion are to be restored and protected against
weathering seepage.
§ 9B-2.2 GENERAL § 9B-3.2
1:257
a. Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and
bushes shall be kept trimmed and free from becoming overgrown and
unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same constitute
a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property.
b. Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by reason of other regulations or as lawful
nonconforming shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which
have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has
excessively cracked or peeled shall with their supporting members be
removed forthwith or put into a good state of repair. All non-operative
or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith.
c. Signs or advertisements. Except for "For Rent" signs, any temporary
sign or other paper advertising material glued or otherwise attached to
a window or windows or otherwise exposed to public view and
permitted by ordinance of the borough shall be removed:
1. At the expiration of the event or sale for which it was created; or
2. Within 60 days after the erection, whichever shall occur sooner.
Except during the course of repairs or alterations, no more than
33-1/3 percent of the square footage of any single window display
area shall be devoted to signs or other temporary advertising
material attached to said window or otherwise exposed to the
public view.
d. Awnings and Marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not
constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or
marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing
they shall, together with their supporting members, be removed
forthwith. In the event said awnings or marquees are made of cloth,
plastic or other similar materials said cloth or plastic where exposed to
the public view shall be maintained in good condition and shall not
show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing
or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public
domain.
e. Reconstruction of Walls and Sidings. All reconstruction of walls and
sidings shall be of standard quality and appearance commensurate with
the character of the properties in the same block and on both sides of
the street on which the premises front, such that the materials used will
not be of a kind that their appearance under prevailing appraisal
practices and standards will depreciate the values of neighboring and
adjoining premises as aforesaid.
§ 9B-3.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-3.3
1:258
§ 9B-3.3. Structural Soundness.
The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences,
signs and store fronts) shall be maintained by the owner or operator in good
repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or otherwise provided
with a protective coating sufficient to prevent structural deterioration and
to maintain appearances. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken
glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint
or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance
to the end that the property itself may be preserved and safety and fire
hazards eliminated.
§ 9B-3.4. Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas.
§ 9B-4. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
§ 9B-4.1. Public Officer.
a. Store Fronts. In the event repairs to a store front become necessary,
such repairs shall be made with the same or similar materials used in
the construction of the store front in such a manner as to permanently
repair the damaged area or areas. Any cornice visible above a store
front shall be kept painted, where required, and in good repair.
a. Surfaces. The surface of all off-street parking and loading areas shall be
maintained free from debris, litter, water accumulations and pot holes.
b. Lighting. Existing lighting shall be maintained in good working order, in
off-street parking areas which are used at night and do not presently
have lighting, adequate lighting shall be provided. All lighting shall be
so arranged and maintained as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting
residential lands.
c. Pavement Marking. Each automobile parking space shall be the size as
required by the applicable borough ordinance and pavement directional
arrows shall be per the aforesaid ordinance.
a. Enforcing Officer. The provisions of the within chapter shall be enforced
by the property maintenance inspector. The mayor shall nominate and
appoint a property maintenance inspector with the advice and consent
of the common council of the borough. The term of office of the property
maintenance inspector shall begin on January 1 and expire one year
thereafter on December 31 except that the term of office of the first
property maintenance inspector appointed hereunder shall be from the
date of appointment and qualification to December 31 next ensuing.
The property maintenance inspector shall report directly to the mayor
and common council of the borough.
b. Absence of Public Officer. The mayor, in the same manner set forth in
subsection 9B-4.1a, may appoint a deputy property maintenance
§ 9B-3.3 GENERAL § 9B-4.1
1:259
§ 9B-4.2. Inspections.
All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to inspections
from time to time by the public officer. At the time of such inspections,
the building and all parts of the premises must be available and accessible
for such inspections and the owner, operator and occupant are required
to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate inspections. Such
inspection shall be made between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. prevailing time
unless one of the following conditions exist:
§ 9B-4.3. Entry Refusal.
Where the public officer or his agent is refused entry or access is otherwise
impeded or prevented by the owner or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this chapter
and subject to the penalties hereunder.
§ 9B-4.4. Search or Access Warrants.
In addition to the provisions of subsection 9B-4.3, the public officer, may,
upon affidavit, apply to the judge of the municipal court or other court of
proper jurisdiction for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual
conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing
that a nuisance or violation of this chapter exists on the premises, and if the
judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize
the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to an inspection of that
part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation exists. Warrants for
access may be issued by the judge.
§ 9B-4.5. Procedure.
The following procedural rules will govern in the administration of this
chapter.
inspector who shall have all powers and perform all the duties of the
property maintenance inspector during his absence or disability.
a. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection;
b. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can only be apprehended and detected by inspections during
other than the prescribed hours or which require immediate inspection
after being reported;
c. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an
immediate threat to health or safety requiring an inspection and
abatement without delay.
a. Notice. Where a violation of this chapter or the regulations thereunder
is found to exist, a written notice from the public officer shall be served
on the person or persons responsible for the correction thereof. The
§ 9B-4.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-4.5
1:260
notice shall specify the violation or violations committed, and what
must be done to correct or abate the violation.
b. Service of Notice. Notice may be served personally or by prepaid
telegram or by mail with postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the last
known address of the person to be served. Where it is ascertained that
the owner does not reside on the premises, the "last known address"
shall be the address of the owner as shown in the office of the tax
collector of the borough. If the last known address cannot be
ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside front entrance of
the building. The public officer shall file and provide notice to any
owner and operator of any violation at any address other than the last
known address provided hereunder if such other address is filed with
the public officer personally or by certified mail addressed to the public
officer. Service upon an owner or operator may be also attained by
service of any notice upon a member of the family of the owner or
operator. Date of service of this notice shall be determined where
service is mailed as of the day following the day of mailing for notice to
addressees within the borough and as of the fourth day after the day of
mailing for notice to addressees outside the borough. Where the day of
service would fall upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not
ordinarily delivered, the day of service shall be the next regular delivery
day.
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. Extensions for Corrections or Abatements. The public officer may
extend the time for correction or abatement of the violations for an
additional period not to exceed 30 days, except where major or capital
improvements or renovations are involved in which instance the time
completion may be extended for a period not to exceed 90 days beyond
the expiration date of the original notice.
f. Summary Abatement in Emergency. Where the violation or condition
existing on the premises is of such a nature as to constitute an
immediate threat to life and limb unless abated without delay, the
public officer may either abate the violation or condition immediately or
order the owner or operator to correct the violation or condition within
a period of time not to exceed three days and upon failure to do so, the
public officer shall abate the condition immediately thereafter.
g. Cost of Abatement to Be Liened. Where abatement of any nuisance as
defined herein, correction of a defect in the premises or bringing the
premises into compliance with the requirements of any municipal
ordinance or State law applicable thereto requires expending the
borough monies therefore, the public office shall present a report of the
work proposed to be done to accomplish the foregoing to the mayor and
common council of the borough with an estimate of the cost thereof
along with a summary of the proceedings undertaken by the public
§ 9B-4.5 GENERAL § 9B-4.5
1:261
§ 9B-5. PENALTIES.
§ 9B-5.1. Fines.
A violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation committed hereunder
officer to secure a compliance including notice as served upon the
owners or operators as the case may be, and hearings and orders
of the public officer with reference thereto. The mayor and council
may thereupon by resolution authorize the abatement of the nuisance,
correction of the defect or work necessary to place the premises in
proper condition and in compliance with ordinances of the borough and
the laws of the State. The public officer may thereafter proceed to have
the work performed in accordance with the said resolution at borough
expense not to exceed the amount specified in the resolution, and shall
upon completion thereof submit a report of monies expended and the
costs to the mayor and council. After review of the same, the mayor
and council may approve the costs whereupon the same shall become a
lien against the premises collectible as provided by law. A copy of the
resolution approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by the
mayor and council and filed with the tax collector of the borough who
shall be responsible for the collection thereof.
h. Notice on Hearing Not Required.
1. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsections 9B-4.5a and
9B-4.5b, violation of subsection 9B-4.3 entitled Entry Refusal may
be prosecuted without notice by the filing of a complaint by the
public officer in municipal court.
2. Where there is a failure to comply with a notice given pursuant to
subsection 9B-4.5a or in the public officer's judgment any work
required in the notice has not been completed, the offender may be
prosecuted by the filing of a complaint by the public officer in
municipal court. The court may in its discretion impose such fine,
penalty or judgment as permitted by Section 9B-5.
i. Effective Notice. For the purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the
service of a notice on an owner whether or not the owner is also the
operator shall constitute notice of violations set forth herein until said
violations are abated in conformity with this chapter and the other
applicable ordinances of the Borough of Flemington.
j. Judicial Proceeding. In addition to any other remedies provided by this
chapter, by any other ordinances of the borough or by State statutes,
the public officer may institute a judicial proceeding for a judgment
directing the deposit of rents into the court for the purposes of
remedying violations of this chapter as provided by N.J.S.A. 2A:42-85, et
seq. or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12h, or the appointment of a custodian pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12g.
§ 9B-4.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-5.1
1:262
or 90 days in jail or both. Each violation of a section or subsection of this
chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation independent of any
other section or subsection. Each day's failure to comply with any section or
subsection shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 9B-5.2. Liability of Officers and Agents.
Where the defendant is other than a natural person or persons, subsection
9B-5.1 shall also apply to any agent, superintendent, officer, member or
partner who shall alone or with others have charge, care or control of these
premises.
§ 9B-6. ABROGATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the borough or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of
any other ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the borough by any other law
or ordinance.
§ 9B-7. DEFINITIONS.
§ 9B-7.1. Meanings.
The following terms, whenever used here or referred to in this chapter shall
have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or
located on the same premises.
BUILDING — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy or use for public,
institutional, residence, business or storage purposes.
DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure or part thereof, used
and occupied for human habitation or intended to be used, and includes any
appurtenances belonging thereto or used therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a group of interrelated rooms intended or
designed for nontransient residential use of one family:
a. Separated from the other spaces by lockable doors;
b. Having access to the outside without crossing another dwelling;
c. Having living and sleeping facilities.
This room or group of rooms shall be considered a dwelling unit if it has
any of the following: (1) any cooking facilities fixed or portable, or food
refrigeration facilities; or (2) any sanitary facilities.
d.
§ 9B-5.1 GENERAL § 9B-7.1
1:263
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Shall mean open spaces on the premises
outside of any building thereon.
FIRE HAZARD — Shall be defined as follows:
GARBAGE — (See also Refuse, Rubbish) shall mean putrescible animal and
vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Shall mean any building containing one or more
dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted
to a non-dwelling use or as a hotel.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person living in, sleeping in or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit, or any person using or having
actual possession of any nonresidential premises.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of
a dwelling or premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the
knowledge or consent of the owner.
Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which is so situated as
to endanger either persons or property;
a.
The creation, maintenance or continuance of any physical condition by
reason of which there exists a use, accumulation or storage for use of
combustible or explosive material sufficient in the amount or so located
or in such a manner as to put in jeopardy, in event of an ignition, either
persons or property;
b.
The obstruction to or of fire escapes, ladders which may be used as
escapes, exits or windows, likely, in the event of fire, to interfere with
the operation of the fire department or of the safety and ready egress
of occupants.
c.
Any public nuisance known at public law or in equity jurisprudence,
or as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or in the
ordinances of the Borough of Flemington;
a.
Any condition which may prove detrimental to health or safety of
children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon
an unoccupied lot, this includes, but is not limited to: abandoned wells,
shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned ice boxes, refrigerators,
motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber,
trash, fences, debris or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak or sumac,
which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;
b.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of
persons on or near premises where the conditions exist;
c.
d. Fire hazards.
§ 9B-7.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-7.1
1:264
OWNER — Shall mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with
others shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or
control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner
or as executer, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver or
guardian of an estate or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how
such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or
assigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed
to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the
portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot, or parcel of land including the
structures or buildings thereon.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the officer who is authorized by this
chapter to exercise the powers prescribed for him.
PUBLIC VIEW — Shall mean any premises, or any part thereof, or any
building or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public or
any member thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, parking lot, or from
any adjoining or neighboring premises.
REFUSE — (See also Garbage, Rubbish) shall mean all putrescible and
non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including but not limited
to: garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, and industrial waste.
REGISTERED MAIL — Shall mean registered mail or certified mail.
RUBBISH — (See also Garbage, Refuse) shall mean non-putrescible solid
wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes such as
paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean anything constructed, assembled or erected,
the use of which requires location on the ground or underground or
attachment to something having location on or in ground, and shall include
all fences, walls, tanks, towers, advertising devices, bins, tents, lunch
wagons, trailers dining cars, camp cars, or similar structures on wheel
or other supports used for business or living purposes. This includes any
structure equipped with a roof, whether permanent as temporary, such
as porches, awnings, canopies, swimming pools, summer houses, arbors,
balconies and similar elements, fences and signs, but does not include
patios, at grade or unroofed surfaces prepared for sports. The word
"structure" shall not apply to utility services entirely below the ground.
WEATHERING — Shall mean deterioration, decay, or damage caused by
exposure to the elements.
§ 9B-7.2. Meaning of Certain Words.
Whenever the words "accessory," "structure," "building," "dwelling,"
"dwelling unit," "premises," or "structure" are used in this chapter, they
shall be construed unless expressly stated to the contrary to include plurals
§ 9B-7.1 GENERAL § 9B-7.2
1:265
of these words as if they were followed by the words "of any part thereof."
The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as prospectively
§ 9B-8. UNFIT BUILDINGS.
§ 9B-8.1. Findings.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings or parts thereof in the Borough of Flemington which
are so old, dilapidated or have become so out-of-repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use are inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the health
and safety of the people of the borough and that a public necessity exists
for the repair, closing or demolition of such building or buildings or parts
thereof.
§ 9B-8.2. Enforcing Officials.
The zoning official, construction code official and property maintenance
officer of the borough are hereby appointed and designated as the public
officials who shall exercise the powers described in this section.
§ 9B-8.3. Authority of Enforcing Officials.
The public officials are hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this section, including the following powers, in addition to
others herein granted:
§ 9B-8.4. Standards.
a. To investigate the building conditions in the borough in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
b. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officials, agents and employees as
they deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
e. To delegate any of their functions and powers to such officials and
agents as they may designate.
a. The public officials may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if they find that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
§ 9B-7.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-8.4
1:266
§ 9B-8.5. Complaint; Notice; Hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officials by the borough council
or by at least five residents of the borough charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it appears
to the public officials, on their own motion, that any building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, the public officials shall, if their
preliminary investigation disclosed a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner or and parties in interest in such
building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officials or their
designated agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days after the serving of the complaint, that the owner and parties
in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts
shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officials.
§ 9B-8.6. Service of Complaint.
Complaints or orders issued by the public officials pursuant to this section
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officials in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and the public officials shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the county and
circulating in the borough in which the buildings are located. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be duly recorded or lodged for record with the clerk of the County of
Hunterdon.
other residents of the borough. Such conditions may include the
following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
1. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities.
2. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
3. Dilapidation.
4. Disrepair and structural defects.
5. Uncleanliness.
b. The public officials, in reaching such determination, shall be guided by,
among other things, the standards set by the construction code, zoning
ordinance, property maintenance ordinance, and health ordinances of
the borough and by the pertinent requirements of Title 26 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes.
§ 9B-8.4 GENERAL § 9B-8.7
1:267
§ 9B-8.7. Order to Repair or Remove.
§ 9B-8.8. Failure to Comply; Repair or Closure of Building by
Borough.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officials may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated and closed, and the public officials may cause to be posted on
the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the
use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 9B-8.9. Failure to Comply; Removal by Borough.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officials may cause such building to be removed or
demolished.
§ 9B-8.10. Assessment of Costs; Costs to Become Lien.
The amount of such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing or removal or demolition shall be a lien against the
real property upon which such cost was incurred. The detailed statement
of the aforesaid costs shall be filed with the custodian of the records of
tax liens for the borough, and a copy of the detailed statement shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested
and regular mail. If the building is removed or demolished by the public
officials, they shall sell the materials of such building and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal or demolition, and any
balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public
officials, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court
and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of
such court provided however, that nothing in this section shall be construed
a. If, after such notice and hearing, the public officials determine that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, they shall state, in writing, their findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the owner to
make the repair, alteration or improvement of the building within a
reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order, or, at the
option of the owners, to vacate or have the building vacated and closed
within the time set forth in the order.
b. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner may be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
§ 9B-8.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-8.10
1:268
to impair or limit in any way the power of the borough to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30
days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the superior court to contest the reasonableness of the amount
or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 9B-9. GOOD NEIGHBOR ORDINANCE.
§ 9B-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2012-05; Ord. No. 2013-5; Ord. No.
2013-15]
Whereas, P.L.1993, c.127, (S2422, Good Neighbor Act), was enacted to
permit the adoption of ordinances holding landlords to standards of
responsibility in the selection of tenants and supervision of their rental
premises, by virtue of this Act such landlords may be required to post
adequate bond against the consequences of disorderly behavior of their
tenants, and in the case of subsequent violations forfeit such bond, in whole
or part, in compensation for the consequences of such behavior.
The purpose of this section is to enable the Borough of Flemington to take
effective action to assure that excesses arising from irresponsible rentals,
when they occur, shall not be repeated, and that landlords be held to
sufficient standards of responsibility in order to preserve the peace and
tranquility of the borough for all residents.
§ 9B-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-05; Ord. No. 2013-5; Ord. No.
2013-15]
HEARING OFFICER — Shall mean Flemington Municipal Court judge.
LANDLORD — Shall mean the person or persons who own or purport to own
a building in which there is rented or offered to rent housing space for living
or dwelling under either a written or oral lease which building contains no
more than four dwelling units. In the case of a mobile home, "landlord" shall
mean the owner of an individual dwelling within the mobile home park.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — Shall mean a complaint which may form
the basis for proceedings in accordance with subsection 9-5.3.
HOUSING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the person authorized
by this section to issue notice of violations or summons to enforce
compliance with this section and to investigate and/or inspect complaints
and possible unsafe conditions and includes the rental housing officer,
zoning official, fire official, construction code official, and any police officer
of the Borough of Flemington.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person, including a minor, who resides or
intends to reside in a dwelling unit.
RENTAL PREMISES — Shall mean the entire property owned by the
landlord on which the rental unit in which the tenant resides is located,
§ 9B-8.10 GENERAL § 9B-9.2
1:269
inclusive of all buildings, and rental units, and open and other areas on the
property.
TENANT — Shall mean any person, including a minor, who resides in a
dwelling unit on a continuous basis for more than 30 days.
§ 9B-9.3. Complaints; Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-05;
Ord. No. 2013-5; Ord. No. 2013-15]
a. If in any 24-month period a specified number, which shall not be less
than two of, there are two complaints, on separate occasions, of
conduct upon or in proximity to any rental premises, and attributable to
the acts or incitements of any of the tenants of those premises, have
been substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any court of
competent jurisdiction as a violation of any provision of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes or any municipal ordinance governing disorderly
conduct, the municipal governing body or any officer, Housing
Enforcement Officer or employee of the municipality designated by the
governing body for the purpose, including but not limited to the
Housing Enforcement Officer, may institute proceedings to require the
landlord of those premises to post a bond against the consequences of
future incidents of the same character. Each two additional such
complaints in any subsequent 24-month periods shall be a separate
basis under this section to institute proceedings to require the landlord
to post a bond.
b. 1. In the event a tenant is convicted of any of the conduct described in
subsection a of this section, the governing body, or any officer, Housing
Enforcement Officer or employee designated pursuant to subsection a
of this section, shall cause notice advising that the conduct specified
has occurred to be served on the landlord, in person or by registered
mail, at the address appearing on the tax records of the municipality.
1. The governing body or person designated pursuant to paragraph a
of this subsection shall cause to be served upon the landlord, in
person or by registered mail to the address appearing on the tax
records of the municipality, notice advising of the institution of
such proceedings, together with particulars of the substantiated
complaints upon which those proceedings are based, and of the
time and place at which a hearing will be held in the matter, which
shall be in the municipal building, municipal court or other public
place within the municipality, and which shall be no sooner than 30
days from the date upon which the notice is served or mailed.
c. At the hearing convened pursuant to paragraph b of this subsection, the
hearing officer shall give full hearing to both the complaint of the
municipality and to any evidence in contradiction or mitigation that the
landlord, if present or represented and offering such evidence, may
present. The hearing officer may consider, to the extent deemed
relevant by the hearing officer, prior complaints about the residents of
the property, even if those complaints did not result in a conviction. At
§ 9B-9.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 9B-9.3
1:270
Chapter 9C
(RESERVED)
Chapter 10
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 10-1. EXCAVATIONS.
§ 10-1.1. Permit Required; Emergencies. [Ord. 6-1965, S 1; Ord. No.
2015-17]
No person shall excavate, test drill or disturb any public street or road
surface or curbing or sidewalks within the right of way of any street or
road in the borough, including all sidewalks, streets and roads in private
developments not a part of the borough street system at the time of
excavation, but where it is contemplated that application will subsequently
be made to have the streets or roads become a part of the borough road
the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer shall determine
whether the landlord shall be required to post a bond in accordance
with the terms of the section.
d. Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the
judgment of the hearing officer, in light of the nature and extent of the
offenses indicated in the substantiated complaints upon which the
proceedings are based, to be adequate in the case of subsequent
offenses to make reparation for (1) damages likely to be caused to
public or private property and damages consequent upon disruption of
affected residents' rights of fair use and quiet possession of their
premises, (2) securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be
levied for such offenses, and (3) compensating the municipality for the
costs of repressing and prosecuting such incidents of disorderly
behavior; but no such bond shall be in an amount less than $500.00 or
more than $5,000.00. The municipality may enforce the bond thus
required by action in the Superior Court, and shall be entitled to an
injunction prohibiting the landlord from making or renewing any lease
of the affected premises for residential purposes until that bond or
equivalent security, in satisfactory form and amount, has been
deposited with the municipality.
e. A bond or other security deposited in compliance with subsection d of
this section shall remain in force for a period of three years. Upon the
lapse of the three year period the landlord shall be entitled to the
discharge thereof, unless prior thereto further proceedings leading to a
forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the bond or other security shall have
been had, in which case the security shall be renewed, in an amount
and for a period that shall be specified by the hearing officer.
§ 9B-9.3 GENERAL § 10-1.1
1:271
system, for the purpose of laying, changing, repairing or connecting any
water, gas, sewer pipe, storm drain or any electric, telephone or telegraph
pipes or conduits, or for any other purpose whatever without first having
obtained a permit from the borough clerk. In the event of emergency
where repairs must be made immediately, and the person charged with the
responsibility for making the repairs would be unduly delayed in seeking a
permit, the excavation may be made for the purpose of stopping a leak or
interruption in service of the utility. As soon as the leak or interruption in
service has been repaired, and an emergency no longer exists, the person
having made the excavation shall forthwith apply for a permit and comply
with all the other provisions of this section. In emergency matters and in the
absence of the clerk, a permit may be issued by the mayor or councilman in
charge of borough streets.
The power to regulate excavation and construction in the public streets is
contained in R.S. 40:67-1. The power to provide specifications for street and
sidewalk construction is part of the general police power, R.S. 40:48-2.
§ 10-1.2. Application. [Ord. 6-1965, S 2; Ord. No. 2015-17]
Any person desiring a permit shall file with the borough clerk, or other
designated official in the event of emergency, a signed application
containing the following information.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The purpose for which the opening is to be made.
c. A clear description of the location of the proposed opening.
d. Three complete copies of the plans and specifications showing the work
contemplated to be done, and indicating clearly the section of street
which the applicant desires to open. Three complete "as built plans"
shall be filed if any changes are made from the original plans.
e. The length, width and depth of the proposed opening.
f. The outside diameter of all proposed manholes.
g. The estimated date of commencement and the estimated date of
completion of the proposed work. These estimates may be based on
past experience in doing similar work. In the event of unforeseen
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, the applicant may
apply for an extension of the completion date.
h. The approximate cost of backfilling, tamping and repaving work in all
cases where a bond is to be furnished.
i. An agreement in writing to hold the borough harmless from any loss,
injury or damage whatsoever resulting from the course of construction,
whether directly or indirectly connected with the work, or from any
negligence or fault of the applicant, his agents, servants,
§ 10-1.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 10-1.2
1:272
§ 10-1.3. Definition. [Ord. 6-1965, S 3; Ord. No. 2015-17]
APPLICANT — Shall include the applicant's agents, servants,
representatives and any contractors employed by him.
§ 10-1.4. Construction Delays. [Ord. 6-1965, S 4; Ord. No. 2015-17]
The applicant shall, within 24 hours of excavation, continue construction,
installation, or repair of any installation as detailed in subsection 10-1.2(d).
Where the excavation will be open more than 48 hours, clearance and
permission shall be received in writing from the borough superintendent of
streets. No excavation shall be started on a Thursday or Friday unless it can
be completed and the surface restored by 6:00 p.m. Friday, emergencies
excepted.
§ 10-1.5. Safety Provisions. [Ord. 6-1965, S 5; Ord. No. 2015-17]
The applicant shall keep all openings and all excavated material properly
guarded and shall place and maintain warning lights of adequate nature to
warn the public from one hour before sunset to one hour after sunrise. No
portion of the street or curbing shall be left open at one time in excess of
500 linear feet.
§ 10-1.6. Excavation; Traffic. [Ord. 6-1965, S 6; & New; Ord. No.
2015-17]
No excavation may be made between 6:00 p.m. Friday to 7:00 a.m. Monday.
At all times during the course of construction one-half of the street shall
be open for public travel, unless the applicant provides and marks to the
representatives or contractors in connection with the performance of
the work covered by the plans.
j. Except as provided in section 10-4, relative to New Jersey Public Utility
Corporations, the applicant shall, as part of each application, annex
thereto a certificate by his liability insurance carrier acceptable to the
borough, showing that he has liability insurance, during the period
required for the proposed improvement in the following minimum
amounts.
1. For personal injury to one person, $100,000.00.
2. For personal injury for one accident, $300,000.00.
3. For property damage, $50,000.00.
k. Except as provided in section 10-3, relative to New Jersey Public Utility
Corporations, the applicant shall, as part of each application, annex
thereto a certificate showing that the applicant is covered by
Workmen's Compensation during the period required for the proposed
improvement.
§ 10-1.2 GENERAL § 10-1.6
1:273
satisfaction of the borough police, a suitable detour. The applicant shall, at
all times, be required to make provisions for local residents. On weekdays
from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., during the course of the construction and when
at least one-half of any road is made impossible to travel, the contractor
shall provide a flagman or uniformed personnel to direct
§ 10-1.7. Inspections. [Ord. 6-1965, S 7; Ord. 2005-1, S 1; Ord. No.
2015-17]
The borough engineer, or borough representative, shall inspect the work
periodically to insure compliance with this section. An applicant under this
section shall give the borough engineer or borough representative 48 hours
notice of excavation so that inspections of the work may be scheduled.
The applicant shall pay the cost of inspections by the borough engineer or
borough representative to the borough, whether such inspections are the
periodic inspections by the engineer or special inspections called for by
appropriate borough officials. Inspection charges should be unnecessary or
minimal, if the applicant complies with the provisions of this section.
§ 10-1.8. Time Limits; Work Completion by Borough. [Ord. 6-1965,
S 8; Ord. No. 2015-17]
All work performed shall be done within the time scheduled in subsection
10-1.2(g). If the applicant does not comply with this schedule, or if in
the judgment of the borough superintendent of streets he keeps open and
unrepaired any portion of the work for an unreasonable time, the street may
be refilled and repaired by the Borough of Flemington at the expense of the
applicant upon two days' notice having been given to the applicant.
§ 10-1.9. Work Site To Be Kept Clean. [Ord. 6-1965, S 9; Ord. No.
2015-17]
If dust, dirt or other detrimental material continues to arise as a result
of the work or neglect of the applicant, his agents, contractors or
representative, or if a nuisance is, in opinion of the borough superintendent
of streets, caused by the actions of any parties, the superintendent may
stop the work until the situation complained of is eliminated. Streets shall
be kept broom clean. If dust persists, streets may be required to be hosed
clean.
§ 10-1.10. Blasting; Care of Utilities. [Ord. 6-1965, S 10; Ord. No.
2015-17]
No blasting shall be allowed, unless approved by the borough engineer. All
work shall be conducted so as not to interfere with existing utilities, water
mains, sewer lines, gas pipes, or electrical or telephone conduits, or the
service connections thereof, and in the event of injury to such utilities it
shall be the duty of the applicant, at his own expense, to properly repair and
replace and otherwise correct the damage. The applicant shall not at any
time come closer than three feet to any utility line without the permission
§ 10-1.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 10-1.10
1:274
and supervision of the respective utility concerned. Such utility pipes shall
be protected and temporarily supported as directed by the utility company's
representatives, or borough engineer inspecting the excavation.
§ 10-1.11. Test Holes. [Ord. 6-1965, S 11; Ord. No. 2015-17]
Where test holes are drilled not exceeding nine square inches, such holes
shall be filled with hot tar to street level within 72 hours of repair of leak or
other utility damage.
§ 10-1.12. Larger Holes. [Ord. 6-1965, S 12; Ord. No. 2015-17]
Where holes or excavations exceed nine square inches, the applicant or his
contractor shall:
§ 10-1.13. Cutting and Repairing Surfaces. [Ord. 6-1965, S 13; Ord.
No. 2015-17]
All asphalt or macadam surface streets shall be cut in straight lines with a
pavement cutter. All concrete surface streets shall be cut in straight lines
with a saw or air-compressor drill.
a. Fill with quarry blend or other suitable backfill material as approved by
the borough engineer to within ten inches of the existing street surface.
The excavation shall be tamped sufficiently to keep future settlement to
a minimum, such tamping to be as directed by the borough engineer or
his representative.
b. Duplicate the existing surfaces with like surfacing material to conform
with the existing street surface, road surface, curbing, sidewalk areas
and grass plantings.
c. Replace all damaged or broken drain pipes or conductors, either
through the street or from buildings and residences to the street.
a. Pending the actual repaving operation stated in subsection 10-1.12, the
applicant may use a temporary fill in the excavation of such material as
may be directed by the superintendent of streets or borough engineer
to the end that no loose stones, mud or dirt may impede the flow of
traffic. The borough may, at any time, require any irregularity in the
surface to be taken care of immediately.
b. The applicant assumes the responsibility of refilling the excavation as it
may sink from time to time, and keeping it level with the balance of the
street surface.
c. After repavement, the applicant shall be under the duty of maintaining
the excavation for a period of 18 months, and assumes the
responsibilities of refilling the excavation as it may sink. In case of
undue settlement, the borough engineer, in his judgment, shall direct
the applicant to open the excavation to ascertain the cause of the undue
§ 10-1.10 GENERAL § 10-1.13
1:275
§ 10-1.14. Tunneling or Trenchless Technology. [Ord. 6-1965, S 14;
Ord. No. 2015-17]
§ 10-1.15. Disposal of Surplus Materials. [Ord. 6-1965, S 15; Ord.
No. 2015-17]
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to dispose of all surplus
materials from the excavation.
§ 10-2. FEES AND BONDS. [Ord. 6-1965, S 16; Ord. 17-1984; Ord.
14-1994, SS1, 2; Ord. 1997-15, S 1; Ord. 3-1999, S 1]
The fee for such permit shall be $50.00 per opening for four or more multifamily
residences, garden apartments, commercial properties and utilities
settlement and to remedy the same as required by the borough
engineer. All engineering costs will be charged to the applicant.
d. Upon the failure of the applicant to comply with any of these
requirements, the borough may do the necessary repairs and
replacements and charge the same to the applicant, as provided for in
subsection 10-1.8.
a. Defined as: Directional drilling, piercing tools, hogs, moles, missiles,
water boring equipment, auger boring equipment including pipe
jacking, plowing or insertion or pipe splitting.
b. No tunneling or trenchless technology shall be permitted within the
Borough of Flemington when the intended path crosses a road right-ofway
or public easement.
c. Special permission may be granted when extraordinary circumstances
exist. Applicant must submit plans signed and sealed by a New Jersey
Licensed Professional Engineer depicting the proposed trenchless
technology or tunneling path to the Director of Public Works for his
review. All plans shall be prepared utilizing horizontal and vertical
datum NAD 83 and NAVD 88 respectively. Upon his review the director
of public works in conjunction with the Borough Engineer may grant
permission with any conditions they feel appropriate to ensure safety
and compliance.
d. Fees. An applicant seeking special permission due to extraordinary
circumstances must submit a nonreturnable fee of $250.00 for the
Borough Engineer and Director of Public Works to review the
application. Upon review, if permission is granted, the Borough
Engineer and Director of Public Works may request a bond to be held by
the Borough of Flemington to cover any inspection fees and/or damages
that may be incurred by the Borough of Flemington in conjunction with
the tunneling or trenchless technology. The amount of the bond shall be
determined by the estimated inspection hours that may be necessary to
ensure compliance.
§ 10-1.13 FLEMINGTON CODE § 10-2
1:276
and $100.00 for single family through three multi-family residences. Such
fee shall be due and payable at the time the application is made to the
borough clerk. In addition to the foregoing, four or more multi-family
residence, garden apartment, commercial property and utility applicants
will be responsible for reasonable engineering and inspection fees, as set
forth in the following schedule:
§ 10-3. BOROUGH APPROVAL OF WORKS; RETURN OR RELEASE
OF BOND. [Ord. 6-1965, S 17; Ord. 14-1994, SS 1, 2]
All work prosecuted pursuant to a permit issued hereunder shall be subject
to acceptance and approval in writing by the superintendent of streets
or the borough engineer. For sidewalk repair and replacement, all bonds
posted pursuant to section 10-2 shall be released or returned upon the
above written approval. For all work other than sidewalk repair and
replacement, all bonds posted pursuant to section 10-2 shall be released
or returned not sooner than 18 months after the above approval and then
only upon the written certification by the superintendent of streets or the
borough engineer that the work has remained in a satisfactory condition for
the 18 months.
§ 10-4. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
§ 10-4.1. Duty to Maintain and Repair. [Ord. 22-1996]
It shall be the duty of the owner or owners of land abutting the sidewalks
and curbs within the borough to maintain such in reasonable repair at the
owner's proper costs and expense and in accordance with the standards and
specifications contained in this section.
a. Any opening area less than 100 square feet or greater: $250.00.
b. Any opening area 100 square feet or greater: $250.00, plus $70.00 for
each additional 100 square feet of opening area or percentage thereof.
c. A three-foot width shall be used for purposes of determining the
inspection fee only.
d. All applicants; single family residences, multi-family residences, garden
apartments, commercial properties and utilities, shall also deposit a
bond with the borough clerk for each permit in an amount to be
determined by the borough engineer. The bond may be posted in cash
or in lieu of cash by way of a surety bond issued by a responsible
bonding company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey in a
form acceptable to the borough clerk. Corporations subject to
regulation by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners may file a
corporate bond on a yearly basis in the amount of $5,000.00.
§ 10-2 GENERAL § 10-4.2
1:277
§ 10-4.2. Responsibility of Landowner for Cost of Construction and
Repair. [Ord. 22-1996]
Notwithstanding an owner's responsibility to maintain the curbs and
sidewalks abutting the improvement, the property maintenance inspector
of the Borough of Flemington or borough engineer may certify to the
borough council that any sidewalks and curbs are in need of construction,
repair, alteration, relaying or maintaining, and that the expense of said
construction, repairing, altering, relaying or maintaining shall be borne by
the landowners abutting the improvement.
§ 10-4.3. Notice to Owner of Required Improvements. [Ord.
22-1996]
The borough council, upon receipt of the certification set forth in subsection
10-4.2 hereof, shall determine the necessity of said improvement, and, if
it deems that said improvement is necessary, it shall by resolution, cause
a notice in writing to be served upon said abutting owners or occupants
of said lands, requiring the necessary specified work to said curb and/or
sidewalk to be done by the said owner or occupant within a period of not
less than 30 days from the date of service of such notice.
§ 10-4.4. Manner of Serving Notice.
Whenever any said abutting lands are unoccupied and the owner cannot be
found within the municipality, the same may be mailed, postage prepaid,
to his or her post office address, if the same can be ascertained. In the
event that such owner is a nonresident of the municipality or his or her post
office address cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for
four weeks, once a week, in the same newspaper published in the state and
circulating in said municipality.
§ 10-4.5. Proof of Service.
Proof by affidavit of service of such notices shall be filed within ten days
thereafter with the officer in charge of the tax liens of the borough.
§ 10-4.6. Failure to Comply; Work to Be Done by Borough; Costs to
Become Lien.
In the event that the owner or occupant of such abutting lands shall not
comply with the requirements of said notice, it shall be lawful for the
property maintenance inspector of the municipality, to cause the work
required to be done and paid for out of municipal funds available for
that purpose. The cost of such work shall be certified by the property
maintenance inspector to the department or person having charge of the
collection of assessments in such municipality. Upon filing the said
certificate of costs, the amount of the cost of such work shall be and become
a lien upon the said abutting lands in front of which such work was done,
to the same extent that assessments for local improvements are liens in the
municipality, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
§ 10-4.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 10-4.6
1:278
collection of such other assessments and shall bear interest at the same
rate. In addition thereto, the municipality may commence, in any court
having competent jurisdiction thereof, an action against the owner of said
lands to recover said amount.
§ 10-4.7. Standards and Specifications.
§ 10-4.8. Compliance with Standards.
All improvements herein provided for, as nearly as practicable, shall
conform to the grade and lines established by this borough and approved
by the borough engineer, and all work performed shall be done in a good
and workmanlike manner to the standards prescribed herein and to the
reasonable satisfaction of the borough street supervisor or borough
engineer.
§ 10-4.9. Work Done by Borough.
Where the construction or repair work herein provided for is performed by
the borough, it shall be done under the supervision of the borough engineer
or street supervisor, and all materials used for said improvements where
the work is done by the borough shall be inspected and approved by such
supervisor.
§ 10-5. SHADE TREES.
a. All sidewalks shall be constructed, laid and maintained at a width of
four feet except in the Main Street business district between Mine
Street and Capner Street, where the said walks shall be from the front
wall of the building to the curb of the street.
b. All sidewalks shall be at least four inches thick and any and all
sidewalks laid over driveways shall be six inches thick, with
reinforcement.
c. All sidewalks shall be according to the mixture and method of laying the
same at the various times of the year, and the same shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications on file with the borough clerk.
d. All sidewalks shall be laid in accordance with the plans of the borough
engineer.
e. All sidewalks shall be curbed or re-curbed with curbs of concrete 18
inches deep, which shall be eight inches wide at the top and nine inches
at the base or Belgian block curb as determined by the borough, and all
curbs shall be composed and formed in accordance with the
specifications on file with the borough clerk.
f. No person or persons or corporations shall permit any discharge of roof
or surface water on the surface of the sidewalks in the borough, but
such water shall be piped underneath the same, and in the construction
of said sidewalks plans shall be made therefor.
§ 10-4.6 GENERAL § 10-5.1
1:279
§ 10-5.1. Shade Trees Required.
Shade trees shall be planted in locations designated by the borough council
or shade tree commission. If any sidewalk is replaced, repaired, maintained,
or newly constructed, where a shade tree is designated to be planted, then
a tree grate shall be installed by the abutting landowner in accordance with
the following standards and specifications. However, the installation of a
tree grate shall not be required for residential properties unless specifically
required by the borough engineer.
§ 10-5.2. Tree Grates Required.
Where sidewalk is extended to the curb, cast iron tree grates as indicated
shall be installed around newly planted trees in accordance with the
specifications. Whenever sidewalk is replaced, repaired or maintained
around or near an existing tree deemed to be in adequate health to remain
by the shade tree commission, then a cast iron grate as indicated shall
be installed around the existing tree in accordance with the specifications.
However, the installation of a tree grate shall not be required for residential
properties unless specifically required by the borough engineer.
§ 10-6. LANDOWNER'S PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY NOT
RELINQUISHED.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to relinquish a landowner's
primary responsibility for the maintenance and repair of any curb and/or
sidewalk abutting the landowner's property.
Chapter 11
UTILITIES
§ 11-1. WATER USE.
§ 11-1.1. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2012-11; Ord. No. 2015-6; amended
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-9]
The following regulations shall be considered a part of the contract with
every person who uses water, and the fact of using water shall be
considered as expressing assent on the part of the user to be bound thereby:
a. All applications for the use of water shall be made by the owner of the
property on blank forms furnished by the Water Department and shall
state fully all uses to which the water is to be applied, and should it
subsequently be required for other purposes, notice shall be given by
the owner before any change is made.
b. A supply of water for building or other special purposes shall be
separately applied for.
§ 10-5.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-1.1
1:280
c. "Service connection" shall mean a pipe or pipes connected to the main
and extending into privately or publicly owned property or premises for
supplying Borough water thereto.
d. "Tapping" or "making a tap" shall mean the physical act of breaking into
a main to install a service connection.
e. "Water service tap installation" shall mean the curb box and the portion
of the service connection which connects the curb box to the water
main and lies generally within the street right-of-way.
f. "User service line" shall mean the length of pipe, lying generally outside
of the street right-of-way, which connects the curb box to the building to
be served with water, and shall include a water meter installed in an
underground pit, as directed by and to the specifications of the Borough
of Flemington Water Department. Installation of meters in any building
shall be performed only when, and as permitted by, the Water
Department, upon the Department's determination that the meter
installation in an underground pit is not feasible. The user or property
owner shall be responsible for installation of the user service line,
except that water meters on all user service lines not exceeding a twoinch
diameter shall be provided and installed by the Water Department.
g. Where a tap for a service connection to any water main is required,
application shall be made either by the property owner or by the
licensed plumber contracting or doing the plumbing work on triplicate
blank forms furnished by the Water Department, and the applicant shall
pay a connection charge consisting of two separate fees: a service
connection fee, and a water tap installation fee.
1. The service connection fee shall be as indicated in § 11.1.2, Fees,
and shall be computed in the following manner to represent a fair
payment toward the cost of the system:
(a) The amount representing all debt service, including but not
limited to sinking funds, reserve funds, the principal and
interest on bonds, and the amount of any loans and interest
thereon, paid by the Borough of Flemington to defray the
capital cost of developing the system as of the end of the
immediately preceding fiscal year of the Borough shall be
added to all capital expenditures made by the Borough not
funded by a bond ordinance or debt for the development of the
system as of the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year.
(b) Any gifts, contributions or subsidies to the Borough of
Flemington received from, and not reimbursed or
reimbursable to any federal, state, county or municipal
government or agency or any private person, and that portion
of amounts paid to the Borough of Flemington by a public
entity under a fully executed water service agreement which is
not repaid to the public entity by the Borough of Flemington,
shall then be subtracted.
§ 11-1.1 GENERAL § 11-1.1
1:281
(c) The remainder shall be divided by the total number of service
units served by the Borough of Flemington at the end of the
immediately preceding fiscal year of the Borough, and the
results shall then be apportioned to each new connector
according to the number of service units attributed to that
connector. In attributing service units to each connector, the
estimated average daily flow of water for the connector shall
be divided by the average daily flow of water to the average
single-family residence in the authority's district, to produce
the number of service units to be attributed.
(d) The service connection fee shall be recomputed at the end of
each fiscal year of the Borough of Flemington, after a public
hearing is held, and shall be indicated in § 11.1.2, Fees. The
revised connection fee shall be imposed upon those who
subsequently connect in that fiscal year to the system.
(e) The foregoing notwithstanding, the Borough of Flemington
shall not impose any charges or fees in excess of the cost of
water actually used for any sprinkler system required to be
installed in any residential health care facility pursuant to the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A
26:2H-1 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder or in
any rooming or boarding house pursuant to the Rooming and
Boarding House Act of 1979, P.L. 1979, c. 496 (N.J.S.A
55:13B-1 et al.) and regulations promulgated thereunder. The
Borough of Flemington shall not impose fees or charges for any
fire protection system to a residential customer served by a
water service line of two inches or less in diameter.
(f) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-12, the combination of the
water service connection fee and water service charges shall
be such that the revenues of water supply facilities shall be
adequate to pay the expense of operation and maintenance of
the water supply facilities, including improvements,
extensions, enlargements and replacements to water supply
facilities, reserves, insurance, principal and interest on any
bonds, and to maintain such reserves or sinking funds therefor
as may be required under the bond covenants or any contracts,
or as may be deemed necessary or desirable.
2. Water service initial connection or change in size connection.
(a) The service initial connection or change in size connection fee
shall be as indicated in § 11.1.2, Fees.
(b) Water service taps shall be performed under the supervision of
the Water Department Superintendent or his agent. It shall be
the owner's or applicant's responsibility to hire a private
contractor to perform the installation at the owner's or
applicant's expense.
§ 11-1.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-1.1
1:282
§ 11-1.2. Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-11; Ord. No. 2015-6; Ord. No.
2015-18; Ord. No. 2016-14; amended 8-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-16; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-9]
The following annual charges, rentals and rates are hereby fixed to be
charged to all customers, both private, commercial and governmental:
(1) The owner or applicant shall be responsible for reasonable
inspection fees, and shall post with the Borough of
Flemington an initial inspection escrow in the amount set
forth in § 11.1.2, Fees. The owner or applicant shall be
advised of any anticipated shortage in escrow account of
inspection fees, and shall post and pay such fees in escrow
and as determined by the Water Department before any
further inspection shall be conducted or final approval
granted.
(2) Where a road opening permit is required by local
municipal ordinance, owner or applicant shall be
responsible to secure the road opening permit.
h. No water service connection or user service line shall be installed
unless it conforms to specifications promulgated by the Water
Department. A copy of such specifications shall be kept on file with the
Water Department and shall be open to inspection by any person
interested. The installation shall be done by a plumber qualified to do
plumbing work under municipal regulations.
i. Type K copper lines shall be used for all service lines from the meter to
the curb box if said lines do not exceed 1 1/4 inches in diameter. Larger
diameter service lines shall be Class 52 ductile iron pipe.
j. Any run of copper water line 1 1/4 inches in diameter or less and less
than 100 feet in length shall be one continuous run without couplings
unless otherwise approved, in writing, by the Water Superintendent.
k. The service initial connection or change in size connection fee shall be
due and payable upon the filing of an application for a water connection
permit with the Borough of Flemington Water Department on such
forms and subject to such information, documentation and data as may
be required by the Water Department. Any extra inspection costs shall
be due and payable prior to the water service being activated.
a. Meter service.
Meter Size
(inches) Per Quarter Per Year
5/8 $54.50 $218
3/4 short $54.50 $218
3/4 $87.25 $349
§ 11-1.1 GENERAL § 11-1.2
1:283
Meter Size
(inches) Per Quarter Per Year
1 $133 $532
1 1/2 $217.50 $870
2 $297 $1,188
3 $540 $2,160
4 $944.50 $3,778
6 $1,621.50 $6,486
b. Additional use charges.
1. From zero to 5,000 gallons used during quarter: $2.50 per 1,000
gallons.
2. From 5,001 to 19,000 gallons used during quarter: $5 per 1,000
gallons.
3. From 19,001 to 49,000 gallons used during quarter: $6 per quarter.
4. From 49,001 to 99,000 gallons used during quarter: $6.75 per
quarter.
5. From 99,001 to 599,000 gallons used during quarter: $7.50 per
quarter.
6. From 599,001 to 999,000 gallons used during quarter: $8.50 per
quarter.
7. From 999,001 and above gallons used during the quarter: $8.75
per quarter.
NOTE: All meter fees and usage fees will increase 10% beginning
in January 2020 and each January thereafter.
c. Fire service.
Fire Service Current
Public hydrant $200 per year
Private hydrant $575 per year
Sprinkler service, three inches $575 per year
Sprinkler service, four inches $1,250 per year
Sprinkler service, six inches $1,700 per year
Sprinkler service, eight inches $3,232 per year
Standby tank connection, two
inches
$205 per year
§ 11-1.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-1.2
1:284
§ 11-1.3. Water Meter Requirements. [Ord. No. 2013-12; Ord. No.
2015-6; Ord. No. 2017-7; amended 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-9]
All water must be metered. The Water Department will furnish all meters.
Fire Service Current
Standby tank connection, three
inches
$280 per year
Standby tank connection, four
inches
$305 per year
Standby tank connection, six
inches
$430 per year
Standby tank connection eight
inches and up
$660 per year
An approved detector check valve shall be installed in each fire service
connection by applicant. Initial filling of standby tanks and each
subsequent filling of standby tanks shall be charged at the same rate as
meter service charges. An activated detector check valve shall indicate
at least a tank filling and the user shall be charged accordingly.
d. Permit fees.
Permit Fee Rate Off-Hours Rate
Turning water on $55 $155
Turning water off $55 $155
Testing of meter $55 $155
Remove meter $55 $155
Special meter reading $55 $155
Transfer account None $35
*Temporary service to
construction site
$325/quarterly plus additional use
charges as detailed in § 11-1.2(a)
and (b)
Initial connection or change in size of existing connection to current
proposed water main must be installed by a private contractor.
3/4 and 1 inch $4,040
1 1/2 inch $4,040
2 inch $4,040
Over 2 inches $4,040
Hydrant flow test per scheduled
site visit:
$252.50 - Initial hydrant $100
Each additional hydrant
§ 11-1.2 GENERAL § 11-1.3
1:285
All water meters must be accompanied by a radio read meter reading device
located on the outside of the building in a location agreed upon by the
property owner and the Water Department.
§ 11-1.4. Billings; Delinquent Accounts. [Ord. 2-1965, SS 6 & 7;
Ord. 1-1979, SS 6—8; Ord. 3-1990, SS 1, 2; Ord. 9-1992, S 1; Ord.
2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6; Ord. No. 2016-14]
a. No one but an authorized employee of the Water Department shall turn
any valves or curb stops connecting a user's property to the water
mains.
b. The property owner must at all times protect the water meter from frost
and from hot water, or any other detrimental use or condition that may
harm the meter. The property owner shall be held responsible for the
repair and upkeep of the meter and for damage resulting from his
neglect. The property owner shall be held responsible for the repair and
upkeep of the plumbing pipes and valves connected to the meter; said
pipes and valves must be kept in such a condition as to facilitate the
removal and or the replacement of the meter without threat of damage
to the pipes and valves.
c. The water meter and remote meter reading device shall be installed
and shall remain in a location that is readily accessible to the Water
Department and which has been approved by the Water Department.
Absent special circumstances, the water meter is to be located as close
to the entrance of the water line into the building as possible. The water
meter and remote meter reading device may not be blocked or covered
up.
d. The location of the water meter and the remote reading device may not
be changed without written permission from the Water Department.
e. The Water Department may shut off the water supply of any customer
found to be in noncompliance of any section of § 11-1.3. Whenever the
valve or curb stop has been shut off for noncompliance, turnoff and turn
on charges as specified in § 11-1.2d shall apply.
a. The rentals and charges for water shall be billed quarterly. Bills shall
become due on the date due shown on the bill. Should any bill or part
thereof rendered for rental and charged for water remain unpaid for a
period of ten days, said bill or part thereof shall be considered
delinquent and subject to payment of interest at the prevailing rate
fixed for interest on delinquent real estate taxes from the due date until
such time as the bill is paid in full. Rental charges for water shall be a
lien upon the premises connected until paid and be collectible, together
with interest, costs and penalties in the same manner provided by law
for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 11-1.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-1.4
1:286
§ 11-2. NEW CONNECTIONS.
§ 11-2.1. Building Connection Required. [Ord. 3-1968, S 1; Ord.
17-1995, S 5; Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
The construction or drilling of a private water supply system for human
consumption, irrigation or any other purposes whatsoever shall be
prohibited after August 1, 1995, provided that any private residences
having an already approved private water supply system shall not be
required to connect to the public water supply system within the Borough.
§ 11-2.2. Alteration of Private Water System. [Ord. 3-1968, S 2; Ord.
17-1995, S 5; Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
b. All meters and billing shall be listed in the office of the Flemington
Water Department under the name of the property owner and he is
responsible for payment of same.
c. Once an account becomes delinquent in an amount in excess of $50.00
for a period of 90 days the water department shall shut off the water
supply. Whenever the valve or curb stop has been shut off for non
payment, turn off and turn on charges as specified in § 11-1.2d shall
apply in addition to the full amount of the delinquent bill plus interest.
d. A delinquency notice will be sent to a delinquent account owner once an
account becomes delinquent for thirty days warning the customer of
the pending shut off and the date shut off will occur.
e. A door knocker will be hung once a delinquent account reaches 60 days
past due notifying the account owner of the date the water service will
be turned off.
f. Payment must be made to the utility clerk via cash or certified check
clearing all delinquent balances and interest 24 hours prior to the
pending shut off date.
a. Where a resident having a private water supply system serving the
residence connects to the public water supply system of the Borough,
the private system shall be capped off and sealed in accordance with
applicable State and local regulations and shall not thereafter be used
for any purposes whatsoever.
b. However, nonresidential users who connect to the public water supply
system may continue use of a previously approved private water
system, but (i) only for purposes of irrigation or other purposes not
connected with human consumption or use and (ii) only if the owner or
users have installed and the water department has approved a reduced
pressure zone back flow preventive device as provided under the
regulations adopted pursuant to this New Jersey Safe Drinking Water
Act, N.J.A.C. 7:10-10.1 et seq.
§ 11-1.4 GENERAL § 11-2.3
1:287
§ 11-2.3. Connection Required for Occupancy Permit. [Ord. 3-1968,
S 3; Ord. 17-1995, S 5; Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new construction having
a human water supply system until the new construction has been
connected to the Borough water supply system for the purposes of
supplying water for human consumption or any other purpose.
§ 11-2.4. Leaks in Water Lines. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
§ 11-2.5. Line extensions. [Added 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-9]
a. After the water department has notified the property owner or user of a
leak in the line, by regular or certified mail, the owner or user has one
(1) week from the date of notification to make repairs. After one (1)
week, water service will be shut off until repairs are made. There will be
a charge of fifty-one ($51.00) dollars to have service turned back on if it
is cut off during work hours and one hundred fifty-five ($155.00) dollars
for non-work hours.
b. For purposes of paragraph a property owners or users shall be
responsible for the water lines from the right-of-way line of the street or
the curb stop, whichever is nearest to the water main in the street.
a. All water main line extensions shall be made at the expense of the
applicant therefor, except as hereinafter set forth, after determination
by the Mayor and Council through the Public Works Committee that the
Water Department has adequate distribution capacity and pressure to
service the same and that the same can be accomplished in accordance
with the Master Water Plan design for future expansion and, otherwise,
that the same is in the best interests of the existing customers of the
Water Department. The applicant shall submit five copies of a water
utility plan, plus a review fee of $500 to the Water Department for said
waterline extension. After approval by the Water Department, the terms
and conditions of such extension as agreed upon shall be formalized in a
written agreement between the applicant and the Borough. The
applicant shall be responsible for the costs of all engineering and legal
fees incurred by the Borough to review the water utility plan and
prepare the written agreement. In the event that the engineering and
legal costs are less than the review fee, the balance shall be returned to
the applicant.
b. No water main line extension agreement shall provide for any refund to
the installer thereof for all or any part of the cost thereof based upon
taps thereto or usage therefrom, and no contribution to the cost thereof
shall be made by the Borough except as provided in § 11.1.1c and
except as provided by the following:
1. Nothing herein contained is intended to limit the right of the
Borough to make water main line extensions as a local
improvement and assess the costs thereof against properties
§ 11-2.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-2.5
1:288
§ 11-2.6. Water reservation application and contract. [Added
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-9]
benefited thereby in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-13 and 14
where the application of such method of improvement shall be
deemed fair, equitable and impartial as among all persons similarly
circumstanced.
2. Nothing herein contained is intended to limit the right of the
Borough to make water main line extensions, with the cost thereof
to be allocated or paid in whole or in part by a method other than as
otherwise set forth in this subsection based upon supervening
public interest, or to modify an established pattern of allocating the
cost of water main line extensions where altered circumstances
reasonably so dictate.
a. Applicability. Any applicant, with the consent of the property owner,
within the service area of the Borough of Flemington water system, may
apply to the Borough of Flemington Water Department for water
reservation. An application for water reservation is required for any
proposed project that will require the construction of a new water main
extension for the service or any project that will generate an increase in
demand, as determined in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:10-12. If
necessary, the applicant shall be responsible to extend the Borough's
water main to the property and to construct other water system
improvements as may be necessary to reliably serve the proposed
development in accordance with the Borough's standards and any
applicable water service agreement and any reasonable standards
established by the Water Department's consulting engineer.
b. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOROUGH OF FLEMINGTON WATER SYSTEM SERVICE AREA —
Shall be depicted on the water service area map maintained and
periodically updated by the Borough of Flemington Water Department,
showing all existing properties served, limits of existing water
distribution system infrastructure, and surrounded by a service area
boundary.
LARGE WATER PROJECT — Any project not fitting the definition of
a "small water project" for which the water reservation requested is
greater than 1,000 gallons per day or requires water system extension
permits from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE — Shall refer to two members of the
governing body appointed by the Mayor whose responsibility shall be
the supervision, management and control of the Flemington Water
Department. Any decision of the Public Works Committee is subject to
the review and approval of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Flemington.
§ 11-2.5 GENERAL § 11-2.6
1:289
QUARTERLY LETTER OF WATER AVAILABILITY — The letter published
by the Borough of Flemington Water Department which defines the
amount of water available at the time of publication of the letter.
Developers are advised that such quarterly letter of water availability
is subject to the progress and volume of water reservation applications
by other applicants as well as the variable nature of existing system
demands and that they pursue their land use development and
regulatory approvals needed to secure eligibility for water reservation
application at their own risk. The Borough cannot and does not
guaranty that the quantities of water set forth in the quarterly letter of
water availability will exist in the future but will make its best efforts
to produce those quantities subject to regulation and oversight by the
New Jersey Department of Environment Protection (DEP), regulations
of the water availability and other factors.
SMALL WATER PROJECT — Any project for which the water
reservation amount requested is less than 1,000 gallons per day.
WATER RESERVATION — The binding commitment of the Flemington
Water Department to provide potable water service in sufficient quality
and quantity to a proposed project in accordance with applicable water
system regulations and standards. Project-specific conditions may
require the formulation and execution of a project-specific agreement
addressing water supply and infrastructure improvements beyond that
established by the water reservation ("water agreements"). A water
reservation is valid for one year and can be renewed in accordance with
the review and renewal procedures set forth herein.
WILL SERVE LETTERS — The ability for the Flemington Water
Department to provide a nonbinding, written confirmation of water
availability for a particular project located within the Flemington Water
Department's service area. Said approval will only be provided if there
is currently adequate capacity in the Borough's water supply systems
based on a firm capacity calculation as defined by the NJDEP in N.J.A.C.
7:10-11.6(a), using a peak daily demand as defined herein and
prescribed under N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.4(a)(7), as well as sufficient water
allocation established by the NJDEP in its water allocation permits
issued to the Borough of Flemington Water Department. The receipt of
a will serve letter by an applicant does not preclude an applicant from
applying for water reservation as indicated above.
c. Application. The application for water reservation shall be on the forms
prescribed by the Water Department, which shall include but not be
limited to the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The address of the property and the tax lot and block designation;
3. A description of the existing use of the property;
4. A description of the proposed use of the property and/or the type of
building(s) to be constructed thereon;
§ 11-2.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-2.6
1:290
5. An approved preliminary and/or final subdivision plan, site plan
and/or any necessary variance approval, general development plan,
zoning permit or redevelopment plan of the proposed project
indicating the number of proposed lots and the proposed uses on
each lot.
6. Proof of submission to the Council on Affordable Housing
requesting substantive certification and/or an approved letter from
the Council on Affordable Housing which provides substantive
certification for municipally funded affordable housing projects, or
a court-ordered final judgment of response as it relates to
affordable housing within the municipality in question;
7. An estimate of the average daily water usage required by the
proposed use of the property;
8. An estimate of the dates of anticipated water service connection
and water meter installation to the Borough's water system;
9. An agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the
provisions of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the Borough; and
10. Any additional information as may be required by the Water
Department or its consulting engineer to assist in the processing of
said application.
d. Application priority.
1. All applications for water reservation will be reviewed for
completeness and, once deemed complete, assigned a water
reservation number and forwarded for review based upon the order
in which they were received by the Water Department Clerk. The
priority in terms of allocating capacity shall be based upon the
order in which water reservation applications are approved by the
Public Works Committee, with the exception of affordable housing
projects that are fully funded by the municipality and can provide
proof of submission to the Council on Affordable Housing
requesting substantive certification and/or written confirmation
from the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) that
their project has received substantive certification and/or a courtordered
final judgment of repose as it relates to affordable housing
within the municipality in question. Projects that fall under this
category shall receive priority and, if their application for water
reservation is deemed complete, shall have their water
immediately reserved so long as the other conditions in this section
have been met. In the event a municipality has its substantive
certification rescinded by COAH, or should it abandon the
approved project, it will relinquish its rights to its approved water
reservation, and said allocation will be available for future
applicants.
§ 11-2.6 GENERAL § 11-2.6
1:291
2. Unless explicitly listed in this section or required by state or federal
law, no other factors shall determine the priority of a water
reservation.
e. Time limit.
1. From the date of issue, an approved water reservation shall require
a contract prepared by the Borough of Flemington to be fully
executed by and between the Borough and the applicant that,
among other things, shall incorporate all the terms and conditions
of this section. No approval of a water reservation shall be effective
in the absence of the aforementioned fully executed contract. An
approved water reservation shall be valid for a period of one year.
Within 60 days of the expiration of the water reservation, the Water
consulting engineer shall conduct a review of the water reservation
and may request supplemental information from the applicant in
order to establish the validity and currency of the water
reservation. Applicants must maintain their eligibility for water
reservation by conforming to the conditions of their applicable land
use approvals, obtaining regulatory approvals and documenting
the efforts taken to advance the proposed project. To extend the
validity period of the approved water reservation, developers must
establish that they have acted diligently and taken all reasonable
steps to advance the development of the proposed project. They
must demonstrate they have diligently pursued any required land
use approvals, secured or diligently pursued any other necessary
approvals from other agencies and acquired all necessary rights-ofway
or easements. Developers may be required to show evidence
they have met these goals to preserve their water reservation.
2. The water reservation shall be void unless water service is actually
extended to the subject property during the time period which the
water reservation is valid. The water reservation may be renewed
for longer periods at the discretion of the Public Works Committee
to coincide with the expiration date of or an extension granted for a
permit issued by NJDEP to construct/modify/operate public
waterworks facilities relating to the subject project. The applicant
must apply to the Public Works Committee for any such extensions
in writing.
3. In the event that the water service connection is not completed
within the period set forth above, the water reservation shall expire
if not renewed, and any portion of the water reservation for which
connections have not been made will revert to the Borough for use
in addressing other water reservation applications.
f. Water reservation fee. A water reservation fee in an amount to be
determined in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Water
Department shall be paid to the Water Department at the time of
application and at each renewal. Nonpayment of the water reservation
fee will result in termination of the water reservation.
§ 11-2.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-2.6
1:292
g. Transfer of water reservations. Transfer of an approved water
reservation is prohibited, with the exception of affordable housing
projects located within the same municipality, provided that all
interested parties consent. A water reservation within the Borough's
water supply system shall not be traded, sold or otherwise reallocated
by an applicant, unless the property identified in the water reservation
is sold to a new owner, in which case the water reservation will run with
the land to the extent necessary to affect the intent of the water
reservation. Water reservations for any project on specific parcels of
land shall not be assignable to any other project. In the event that a
project is abandoned or the construction of the same does not utilize
the entire water reservation granted to it, the unused allocation shall
revert to the Borough and shall become available for water reservation
in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subsection. Should
the scope of a project change and additional water allocation is
required, the incremental increase in allocation requested shall be
treated as a new water reservation application.
h. Small project water reservation applications and contract.
1. Application fee. An application fee, as provided in § 11.1.2, of $250
shall be submitted upon the filing of the application. Said fee shall
be used by the Borough to cover the administrative costs
associated with the review of the application.
2. Application review. Applications for water reservation as defined
above shall be reviewed by the Water Superintendent and/or Water
Engineer, who in turn will provide a recommendation to the Public
Works Committee. A water reservation, if approved by the Public
Works Committee, shall be issued upon receipt of a fully executed
contract prepared by the Borough of Flemington by and between
the Borough and the applicant that, among other things, shall
incorporate all the terms and conditions of this section. No water
reservation shall be approved unless the Water Superintendent
and/or Water Engineer determines that there is currently adequate
capacity in the Borough's water supply systems based on a firm
capacity calculation as defined by the NJDEP in N.J.A.C.
7:10-11.6(a), using a peak daily demand as defined herein and
prescribed under N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.4(a)(7), as well as sufficient
water allocation established by the NJDEP in its water allocation
permits issued to the Borough of Flemington Water Department.
No approval of a water reservation shall be effective in the absence
of the aforementioned fully executed contract.
3. Application determination. The Public Works Committee shall
approve or deny the application within 30 business days of receipt
of a complete application. The Borough reserves the right to extend
the time for the rendering of the aforesaid decision for a period not
to exceed five business days if additional time is required for
processing said application. The failure of the Borough to render a
§ 11-2.6 GENERAL § 11-2.6
1:293
decision within the aforesaid time period shall constitute a denial
of the application without prejudice.
4. Monthly report. The Water Superintendent will prepare and submit
a monthly report to the Water Department indicating the number
and total estimated usage of approved small project water
reservation applications.
i. Requests for will serve letters for small projects.
1. Request fee. A will serve letter request fee, as provided in § 11.1.2,
of $100 shall be submitted upon the filing of the application. Said
fee shall be used by the Borough to cover the professional and
administrative costs associated with the review of the request.
2. Request review. Requests for will serve letters as defined above
shall be reviewed by the Water Superintendent and/or water
engineer, who in turn will provide a recommendation to the Public
Works Committee. A will serve letter shall be issued, provided that
a determination is made that there is currently adequate capacity
in the Borough's water supply systems based on a firm capacity
calculation as defined by the NJDEP in N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.6(a), using
a peak daily demand as defined herein and prescribed under
N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.4(a)(7), as well as sufficient water allocation
established by the NJDEP in its water allocation permits issued to
the Borough of Flemington Water Department.
3. Review determination. The Public Works Committee shall approve
or deny the request within 30 business days of receipt of a
complete application. The Borough reserves the right to extend the
time for the rendering of the aforesaid decision for a period not to
exceed five business days if additional time is required for
processing said application. The failure of the Borough to render a
decision within the aforesaid time period shall constitute a denial of
the request without prejudice.
4. Expiration of will serve letter.
(a) All will serve letters will expire 90 days after the date of
issuance by the Flemington Water Department. Upon
expiration, the applicant relinquishes its rights to its approved
"will serve," and said allocation will be available for future
applicants.
(b) Upon written request by the applicant prior to the
aforementioned expiration date, applicants can request said
approval be extended. Applicants will be eligible for no more
than three additional ninety-day extensions should they be
requested. Under no circumstances will an applicant be
granted additional extensions other than what is previously
indicated above. Upon expiration of the requested
extension(s), the applicant relinquishes its rights to its
§ 11-2.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-2.6
1:294
approved "will serve," and said allocation will be available for
future applicants.
5. Extension request fee. A will serve letter extension request fee, as
provided in § 11.1.2, of $50 (per occurrence) shall be submitted
upon the filing of the extension request. Said fee shall be used by
the Borough to cover the professional and administrative costs
associated with the review of the request.
j. Large project water reservation applications and contract.
1. Application fee. An application fee, as provided in § 11.1.2, of
$1,500 shall be submitted upon the filing of the application. Said
fee shall be used by the Borough to cover the administrative and
professional consulting costs associated with the review of the
application.
2. Application review. Applications for water reservation for large
projects shall require the approval of the Public Works Committee.
The Public Works Committee's consulting engineer shall prepare
and submit a report to the Public Works Committee concerning the
nature of the allocation, the status of any required NJDEP
applications, an evaluation of any required system improvements
necessary to serve the project as well as an updated analysis of the
water system's firm capacity and peak daily demand. Specifically,
the Water consulting engineer shall evaluate the application
against the Water Utility's available firm capacity and allocation
limits as prescribed by regulations found at N.J.A.C. 7:10 and
N.J.A.C. 7:19. The report shall also address technical details of the
proposed project's service connection and water-related
improvements, including but not limited to materials, equipment,
regulations, easements, metering, etc. Applications will be
recommended for approval when no physical, technical, financial or
regulatory constraints prevent service to the proposed project.
3. Application determination.
(a) The Public Works Committee shall approve or deny the
application by resolution within 60 days of receipt of a
complete application. The Public Works Committee reserves
the right to extend the time for the rendering of the aforesaid
decision for a period not to exceed 30 days if additional time is
required for processing said application. The failure of the
Borough to render a decision within the aforesaid time period
shall constitute a denial of the application without prejudice.
(b) If an application is approved by the Public Works Committee, a
formal resolution will be prepared by the Municipal Attorney
authorizing the water reservation to the applicant. The
resolution may contain such terms and conditions as are
reasonably necessary to guarantee compliance with all federal,
state, county and local statutes, rules, and regulations. In
§ 11-2.6 GENERAL § 11-2.6
1:295
addition, the applicant shall be required to enter into a
contract prepared by the Borough of Flemington to be fully
executed by and between the Borough and the applicant that,
among other things, shall incorporate all the terms and
conditions of this Ordinance. No approval of a water
reservation shall be effective in the absence of the
aforementioned fully executed contract.
k. Requests for "will serve" letters for large projects.
1. Request fee. A will serve letter request fee, as provided in § 11.1.2,
of $250 shall be submitted upon the filing of the application. Said
fee shall be used by the Borough to cover the professional and
administrative costs associated with the review of the request.
2. Request review. Requests for will serve letters as defined above
shall be reviewed by the water engineer, who in turn will provide a
recommendation to the Public Works Committee. A will serve letter
shall be issued, provided that a determination is made that there is
currently adequate capacity in the Borough's water supply systems
based on a firm capacity calculation as defined by the NJDEP in
N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.6(a), using a peak daily demand as defined herein
and prescribed under N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.4(a)(7), as well as sufficient
water allocation established by the NJDEP in its water allocation
permits issued to the Borough of Flemington Water Department.
3. Review determination. The Public Works Committee shall approve
or deny the request within 60 business days of receipt of a request.
The Borough reserves the right to extend the time for the rendering
of the aforesaid decision for a period not to exceed 30 business
days if additional time is required for processing said application.
The failure of the Borough to render a decision within the aforesaid
time period shall constitute a denial of the request without
prejudice.
4. Expiration of will serve letter.
(a) All will serve letters will expire 90 days after the date of
issuance by the Flemington Water Department. Upon
expiration, the applicant relinquishes its rights to its approved
"will serve," and said allocation will be available for future
applicants.
(b) Upon written request by the applicant prior to the
aforementioned expiration date, applicants can request said
approval be extended. Applicants will be eligible for no more
than three additional ninety-day extensions should they be
requested. Under no circumstances will an applicant be
granted additional extensions other than what is previously
indicated above. Upon expiration of the requested
extension(s), the applicant relinquishes its rights to its
§ 11-2.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-2.6
1:296
§ 11-3. EMERGENCY WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.22
§ 11-3.1. Purpose; Intent. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
Protracted periods of high temperatures and limited rainfall may cause
excessive demands upon public and private water systems in the Borough
of Flemington. A temporary lack of sufficient water capacity may result in
a lowering of the normal water levels of the sources of water supply to
the Flemington Water Department. Excessive demands upon private water
systems in the Borough may result in a lowering of the normal water levels
of the sources of water supply to the Flemington Water Department. The
excessive use of water during the spring, summer and fall months caused by
sprinkling of lawns, filling of swimming pools, car washing and other similar
use not related to the use of water for domestic and sanitary purposes
and fire protection may cause a serious reduction in adequate pressure
in the water distribution systems of the Flemington Water Department.
In the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Borough of Flemington and those residents of Raritan Township supplied
with water by the Flemington Water Department, it is necessary to take
all reasonable precautions and measures promptly to conserve water and
maintain such water pressure as is necessary for sanitary, domestic and
firefighting purposes.
§ 11-3.2. Authorization to Declare Emergency. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord.
No. 2015-6]
In case of an emergency where the available supply of water becomes
dangerously low, the Borough Council of the Borough of Flemington is
hereby authorized to declare by resolution, the existence of a water
emergency. The resolution (hereinafter referred to as the "declaration")
adopted by the Borough Council, shall state that an emergency exists
requiring the implementation of measures for the conservation of water
for domestic, sanitary and fire protection purposes. The declaration of
emergency shall specify whether the emergency is one requiring full
curtailment or partial curtailment of nonessential water usage as defined in
§§ 11-3.3 and 11-3.4, respectively.
approved "will serve," and said allocation will be available for
future applicants.
5. Extension request fee. A will serve letter extension request fee, as
provided in § 11.1.2, of $125 (per occurrence) shall be submitted
upon the filing of the extension request. Said fee shall be used by
the Borough to cover the professional and administrative costs
associated with the review of the request.
22.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 27-1993,
14-997 and 17-1999.
§ 11-2.6 GENERAL § 11-3.3
1:297
§ 11-3.3. Full Curtailment of Nonessential Water Use. [Ord. 2008-6;
Ord. No. 2015-6]
Full curtailment of nonessential ''water use" shall mean an absolute
prohibition of the use of water from private wells and the Flemington Water
Department system for:
§ 11-3.4. Partial Curtailment of Nonessential Water Use. [Ord.
2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
Partial curtailment of nonessential water use shall mean the prohibition of
the use of water from private wells and the Flemington Water Department
system for all uses described in paragraphs a through g of § 11-3.3 except
that such uses are permitted in accordance with the following zone
schedule:
a. The sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass,
ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers or any other
vegetation;
b. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, or any other type of mobile
equipment, except in commercial car wash establishments;
c. The washing of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, porches and other
outdoor surfaces;
d. The washing of the outside of dwellings; the washing of the inside and
outside of office buildings;
e. The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment and
machinery;
f. The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a
similar use of water; and
g. The filling of swimming and wading pools except bona fide public and
club pools.
a. Zone 1: All properties west of Main Street, North Main Street and
South Main Street:
Tuesday night from 7:00 p.m. to Wednesday morning at 7:00 a.m.; and,
Friday night from 7:00 p.m. to Saturday morning at 7:00 a.m.
b. Zone 2: All properties east of Main Street, North Main Street and South
Main Street:
Wednesday night from 7:00 p.m. to Thursday morning at 7:00 a.m.; and,
Saturday night from 7:00 p.m. to Sunday morning at 7:00 a.m.
The occurrence of a holiday on a permitted day in a particular zone or
on nonpermitted days shall not affect the schedule established herein.
§ 11-3.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-3.5
1:298
§ 11-3.5. Publication and Posting of Declaration. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord.
No. 2015-6]
Immediately following the passage of any emergency declaration
hereinabove described, copies of the declaration shall be published in a
newspaper circulated in the Borough of Flemington and posted in Borough
Hall.
§ 11-3.6. Effect of Declaration. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
The declaration of any emergency shall be conclusive of the fact of the
existence of such emergency and shall be binding upon all persons upon the
filing of the same in the office of the Borough Clerk and the publication and
posting thereof as provided in § 11-3.5.
§ 11-3.7. Termination of Declaration. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No.
2015-6]
The declaration of emergency shall continue in full force and effect, except
as amended, until terminated by a resolution of termination adopted by the
Borough Council. Immediately following the passage of any resolution of
termination, copies thereof shall be published in a newspaper circulated in
the Borough of Flemington and posted in Borough Hall.
§ 11-3.8. Inspections. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
During a declared water emergency, all premises receiving water from
private wells and from the Flemington Water Department system shall be
subject to inspection between sunrise and sunset by Flemington Water
Department employees or any other person duly authorized and appointed
by the Borough Council to perform inspections to oversee compliance
during the water emergency. It shall be a violation of this subsection for any
person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or prevent any such inspection as is
described herein. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the power of the
police department of the Borough of Flemington to conduct a search of any
premises at any time when it has probable cause to believe that a violation
of this section has been committed.
§ 11-3.9. Use of Water During Emergency to Be a Violation. [Ord.
2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to use water from
a private well or the Flemington Water Department system at any time
during a water emergency in a manner prohibited by any declaration issued
pursuant to this section.
§ 11-3.10. Continuing Use Deemed Health Hazard; Notice of
Violation; Abatement of Hazard. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
In the event that there is on any premises a continuing usage of water
from a private well or the Flemington Water Department system by any
§ 11-3.5 GENERAL § 11-3.10
1:299
person in a manner prohibited by any declaration issued pursuant to this
section, such continuing usage is hereby declared to be a health hazard. The
owner, occupant and/or operator of the premises whereon the violation is
occurring shall be served with written notice of the violation by the delivery
to any such owner, occupant and/or operator or the agent or employee of
any of the same actually on the premises. If no such person is present, the
notice shall be posted on the premises. If, after the passage of one hour
from the delivery or posting of such notice, the health hazard has not been
abated, any employee of the Borough of Flemington or Flemington Water
Department is hereby authorized to enter upon the premises to abate the
health hazard. Thereafter, the Borough of Flemington or the Flemington
Water Department, as the case may be, shall assess the costs of such
abatement against the owner, operator and/or occupant of the premises.
§ 11-3.11. Violations. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6; amended
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-9]
The Public Works Director of the Borough of Flemington, the Water
Superintendent or their designee shall have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter by the discontinuance of water service for failure
to pay any amount owing within 30 days after the date the amount is due
and payable, if written notice of the proposed discontinuance of service and
of the reasons therefor has been given, within at least 10 days prior to the
date of discontinuance, to the owner of record of the property in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-13. In the event that notice is provided by mail, the
notice requirements shall be satisfied if the mailing is made to the last
known address of the owner of record and is postmarked at least 10 days
prior to the date of discontinuance. If water service is discontinued for a
violation of this chapter, the fee to have the service resumed shall be $100.
§ 11-3.12. Separate Violations. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this section
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 11-3.13. Severability. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6]
If any subsection or paragraph of this section is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such subsection or paragraph shall, to the extent
that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force
and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate the
remaining subsections or paragraphs of this section.
§ 11-3.14. Field Service Charges. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6;
Ord. No. 2017-7]
In the event that the Borough needs to make a repair to a leak for a
customer or for a contractor the following fees will apply.
a. Equipment Hourly Rates:
§ 11-3.10 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-3.14
1:300
§ 11-3.15. Line Stopping Fee. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6; Ord.
No. 2017-7]
If a contractor breaks or damages a Borough water main and/or halts water
service to any home or business, the following fees will apply:
Single-Family Dwelling: $200.00
Two or More Family Dwelling: $500.00
Single Business: $1,000.00
Multi-Business: $5,000.00 and up
§ 11-3.16. Inspections and Calibrations. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No.
2015-6; Ord. No. 2017-7]
§ 11-3.17. Irrigation Charges. [Ord. 2008-6; Ord. No. 2015-6; Ord.
No. 2016-14; Ord. No. 2017-7; amended 4-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-9]
Irrigation Definition: Anyone that has a buried lawn water device shall be
required to have a separate meter and shall be charged at the following
rate:
1. Backhoe: $88.00
2. Dump truck: $52.00
3. Service truck: $52.00
4. All parts: 147% of the price of the part
Labor shall be as follows: The current rate in which the Collective
Bargaining Agreement stipulates including time and a half for all
non-regular business hours.
a. Inspections on Sale of Property: The Borough shall have the right to
enter homes and/or businesses to inspect for meters that may have
been altered or damaged and to verify that all meters are up to date and
read outs are accurate. Fee $30.00/inspection.
b. Calibrations: Beginning January 1, 2018 all meters 3/4 to two (2) inches
shall be calibrated every five (5) years at the Boroughs expense. Any
meter bigger than two (2) inches shall be calibrated every year at the
Borough's expense. All calibration shall be completed by June 1 of each
year and by a certified calibration company. If a meter is found to be
defective or broken the meter needs to be replaced in one (1) week's
time.
a. From 0 to 5,000 gallons used during quarter: $3 per 1,000 gallons.
§ 11-3.14 GENERAL § 11-3.17
1:301
§ 11-3A. OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION.
§ 11-3A.1. Outdoor Landscape Water Use Restrictions.
Restrictions on outdoor landscape water use apply to all customers of the
Flemington Water Department unless expressly exempted in § 11-3A.5.
Exemptions. Such water use shall conform to the following outdoor
landscape water use restrictions:
b. From 5,001 to 19,000 gallons used during quarter: $5.50 per 1,000
gallons.
c. From 19,001 to 49,000 gallons used during quarter: $6.50 per quarter.
d. From 49,001 to 99,000 gallons used during quarter: $7.25 per quarter.
e. From 99,001 to 599,000 gallons used during quarter: $8 per quarter.
f. From 599,001 to 999,000 gallons used during quarter: $9 per quarter.
g. From 999,001 and above gallons used during the quarter: $9.25 per
quarter.
NOTE: All irrigation usage fees will increase 10% beginning in January
2019 and each January thereafter.
a. Lawn watering with a hose or hose-end sprinkler.
1. Such watering may be performed on Tuesdays and Thursdays only,
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or between 5:00 p.m.
and 8:00 p.m.;
2. The watering of any single area shall not exceed 30 minutes per
day;
3. Flowers, shrubs and vegetables may be watered as needed with a
hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle;
4. No hose or hose-end watering shall be permitted when it is raining.
b. Irrigating lawns and landscapes with automatic irrigation systems
equipped with a conventional irrigation controller (this includes all
systems that do not have a "SMART' controller as defined in § 11-3A.1c).
1. Such water may be performed only on Tuesdays and Thursdays,
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., or between 5:00 p.m.
and 8:00 p.m.;
2. Operation of any irrigation zone equipped with spray (mist) heads
shall not exceed 15 minutes per zone. Operation of any irrigation
zone equipped with rotary sprinkler heads shall not exceed 30
minutes per zone.
c. Irrigation with systems equipped with a SMART controller.
§ 11-3.17 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-3A.1
1:302
1. To qualify for this provision, the SMART controller must have met
the minimum requirements of IA-SWAT protocol testing. Lists of
climate-based and sensor based controllers that have successfully
completed the protocol testing can be found at http://www.
irrigation.org/SWAT/Industry/ia-tested.asp.
2. The property owner must register the SMART controller with the
municipality, which shall then issue the property owner a yard
placard that must be displayed to signify that the property is
irrigated with a SMART controller.
3. The SMART controller must be programmed by an EPA WaterSense
Partner who holds a New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor
Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
(a) The SMART controller must be programmed to irrigate on
Tuesdays and Thursdays only, between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m., or 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.;
(b) Proper sprinkler head data and accurate soil/plant/irrigation
information must be entered;
(c) The SMART controller programming data shall be posted at
the controller;
(d) The WaterSense Partner must make a minimum of two site
visits after the initial programming to adjust and fine-tune the
irrigation schedule.
d. Irrigation systems programmed and monitored by an irrigation
manager.
1. The property owner must designate a qualified person as the
irrigation manager and register that person and his/her defining
qualifications with the municipality, which shall then issue the
property owner a yard placard that the owner must display
signifying that the property is irrigated by an irrigation manager.
2. The irrigation manager must be an EPA WaterSense Partner or
show evidence of successfully completing one of the approved
courses listed below:
(a) Rutgers University Continuing Education Course, Irrigation
Systems: Scheduling;
(b) Irrigation Association's online course, Landscape Irrigation
Scheduling;
(c) A comparable course offered by a recognized continuing
education facility or professional association.
§ 11-3A.1 GENERAL § 11-3A.1
1:303
3. A property-specific irrigation program shall be developed by the
irrigation manager based on plant variety, soil type, exposure,
slope, precipitation rate, and irrigation efficiency.
4. Weekly adjustments shall be made to the irrigation schedule based
on current evapotranspiration (ET) rates or weather conditions.
5. If it is found that an irrigation manager does not follow any of the
terms prescribed in this subsection, they may be disqualified from
acting as a properties irrigation manager.
e. Provisions applicable to all automatic irrigation systems.
1. Such systems shall be equipped with an operational automatic rain
sensor device that disables the system when a predetermined
amount of rainfall has occurred. Each rain sensor device shall be
capable of and programmed to interrupt the automatic irrigation
cycle when 1/4 inch of rain has fallen.
2. Any work performed on a system as a result of any inspection made
by the homeowner or a professional must be in compliance with the
Landscape Irrigation Contractor Certification Act of 1991 (N.J.S.A.
45:5AA-3).
3. Flowers and shrubs irrigated with drip or micro irrigation may be
watered on Tuesdays and Thursdays only, between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.
f. All new irrigation systems must comply with the following:
1. The system must be installed by an EPA WaterSense Partner who
holds a New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor Certificate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
2. New Jersey Irrigation Best Management Design Practices, as listed
below, must be followed, which require:
(a) Designing a system that insures sufficient operating pressure
at the sprinkler head;
(b) Dividing irrigated areas into hydro-zones of turf and plants
with similar water requirements;
(c) Creating zoning systems according to exposure;
(d) Considering the soil type so the sprinkler irrigation
precipitation rate is compatible with the soil infiltration rate or
dividing the zone runtimes into multiple short cycles;
(e) Providing separate control of sloped areas;
(f) Preventing sprinkler heads from overthrowing onto driveways,
roads, and sidewalks;
§ 11-3A.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-3A.1
1:304
(g) Providing for separate irrigation for parkway strips between
curbs and sidewalks that minimizes overthrow onto walks,
pavement, and other impervious surfaces;
(h) Using pressure regulating technology as necessary to ensure
sprinkler heads operate within the manufacturer's
recommended range. The pressure regulation may be:
(1) A pressure regulation device at the point of connection;
(2) Pressure regulation at each remote control valve;
(3) Pressure regulation at the sprinkler head;
(4) A combination of the above.
(i) Irrigating all flowers and shrubs with drip and/or microirrigation;
(j) Including check valves in low sprinkler heads to prevent lowpoint
drainage;
(k) Having a pressure regulating device and wye strainer on each
drip/micro control valve.
3. The system must have a SMART controller capable of estimating or
measuring depletion of available plant soil moisture and operating
the irrigation system only to replenish the water as needed while
minimizing excess water use.
(a) The SMART controller must have undergone SWAT testing and
be listed on the Irrigation Association website
www.swatirrigation.org;
(b) The SMART controller must be programmed by an EPA
WaterSense Partner who holds a New Jersey Landscape
Irrigation Contractor Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
(1) Proper sprinkler head data and accurate soil/plant/
irrigation information must be entered;
(2) The SMART controller programming data shall be posted
at the controller;
(3) The WaterSense partner must make a minimum of two site
visits after the initial programming to adjust and fine-tune
the irrigation schedule.
g. Upon a Declaration of Water Emergency by the Borough governing
body, additional restrictions may be imposed and shall supersede the
restrictions in this section.
§ 11-3A.1 GENERAL § 11-3A.1
1:305
§ 11-3A.2. Violations.
§ 11-3A.3. Enforcement of Water Conservation Guidelines.
The water use restrictions and automatic rain sensor requirement imposed
pursuant to this section shall be enforced by Flemington Water Department
staff. Whenever a staff member shall find a violation of the water use
restrictions such authorized official shall issue a written warning and
explain the penalties for a second and third offense, as provided in §
11-3A.4. The staff member shall keep such records as may be reasonable
and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and businesses
that have been warned upon a first offense. The staff member is hereby
empowered to write summons for the violation of the water use restrictions
imposed pursuant to this section.
§ 11-3A.4. Penalties.
After a warning for a first offense in accordance with § 11-3A.3 above,
any person or business that thereafter violates the water use restrictions
imposed pursuant to this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions
provided in § 11-3, Emergency Water Use Restrictions.
§ 11-3A.5. Exemptions.
The restrictions outlined in § 11-3A do not apply to the following:
h. State of New Jersey requirements shall supersede those identified in
this section in all cases in which the State requirement is more
stringent.
a. Violations of § 11-3A include knowingly or recklessly watering or
irrigating or permitting irrigation of lawn or landscape on owned,
leased, or managed property that results in the following:
1. Watering during any form of precipitation;
2. Water leaking from any irrigation equipment;
3. Water puddling on landscape or impervious surfaces;
4. Water run-off from irrigated property;
5. Irrigating on days not permitted in this section;
6. Irrigating at hours not permitted in this section.
b. Violators of these guidelines and requirements are subject to fines and
penalties as described in § 11-3A.4, Penalties.
c. All water users in the Borough of Flemington are responsible for
preventing the above-referenced violations.
§ 11-3A.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-3A.5
1:306
§ 11-3B. (RESERVED)23
§ 11-4. SEWER FEES AND RULES AND REGULATIONS.24
Prior ordinances codified in this § 11-4 include Ordinance Nos. 2-1973,
4-1973, 5-1973, 6-1973, 2-1974, 8-1979, 29-1979, 2-1982, 2-1986, 4-1988.
§ 11-4.1. Definitions.
Definitions of words and phrases as used in this section shall be as follows:
a. Outdoor water use from rain water harvesting, gray water, or reclaimed
water are exempt from the provisions of the section. Use of gray or
reclaimed water must have an approved NJPDES permit issued through
the NJDEP.
b. Outdoor water use for commercial farms producing harvestable crops,
commercial nurseries, sod farms and golf courses are exempt from the
provisions of the section.
c. Outdoor irrigation necessary for one day only where treatment with an
application of chemicals require immediate watering to preserve an
existing landscape or to establish a new landscape, which shall be
scheduled through the Flemington Water Department.
d. Outdoor irrigation necessary for the establishment of newly sodded
lawns or landscaping within the first 21 consecutive days of planting,
which shall be scheduled through the Flemington Water Department.
e. Visually supervised operation of an irrigation system by a person in
compliance with the New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor
Certification Act of 1991 (N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-1) and at the minimum rate
necessary in order to check system condition and effectiveness, which
shall be scheduled through the Flemington Water Department.
a. A sewer rental unit sometimes hereinafter referred to as "unit," shall be
considered to be the equivalent of a flow of 300 gallons of effluent per
day.
b. The word employee used herein, shall include proprietors and part-time
employees.
c. B.O.D. denoting biochemical oxygen demand, shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C, expressed in parts
per million, ppm, by weight.
d. R.T.M.U.A- shall mean Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
23.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2017-7 deleted material previously codified in subsections 11-3B.1
through 11-3B.16. Prior history includes Ord. No. 2012-7.
24.Editor's Note: This § 11-4 as adopted by Ordinance No. 2-1989 became effective January 1,
1989.
§ 11-3A.5 GENERAL § 11-4.1
1:307
§ 11-4.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. 14-1997, S 2]
§ 11-4.3. Permit and Fee Required for Sewer Connection. [Ord.
2-1989, S 2; Ord. 3-1989, SS 1, 3; Ord. 18-1995, S 1; Ord. 19-1995, S
1; Ord. 14-1997, S 1; Ord. 2004-23; Ord. 2005-32, S 1; Ord. No.
2015-22; Ord. No. 2016-14]
No person shall make connection to the sanitary sewer utility system
without first obtaining a permit to do so from the utility clerk. A connection
fee of $4,705.00 shall be charged and collected for each equivalent unit
as set forth in schedule of units in § 11-4.4 or pursuant to the NJDEP
Regulation N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23. Each application will be reviewed and
e. The words sanitary sewer utility system shall mean the Borough of
Flemington Sewer Utility System.
f. The word Borough shall mean Borough of Flemington.
g. The word meter shall mean a device which measures and indicates a
flow rate of sewerage or water.
a. Prohibitions.
1. Within the service area, it shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or permit to be deposited, in an unsanitary manner upon
public or private property, any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.
2. Within the service area, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, package
plant, or other facility intended for, or used for, the disposal of
sewage or wastewater.
b. Connection and use of public sewers required.
1. The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated
within the service area and abutting on any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there is now located, or may, in the future be located,
a public sanitary sewer of the Borough of Flemington, are hereby
required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this section within 120 days
after the date of official notice to do so. No connection shall be
made to the system trunk unless authorized in writing by the
administrative authority and a permit has been issued therefor.
c. Abandonment of private facilities. At such time as the public sewer
becomes available to a property and a connection is made to the sewer,
any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled within 180 days with a suitable
material approved by the Hunterdon County Board of Health.
§ 11-4.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-4.3
1:308
considered by the Sewer Superintendent in conjunction with the Borough
Engineer to determine which schedule of units is most applicable. Said
payment being due and payable in advance to the Borough of Flemington
Sewer Utility System before the time the connection or tie-in is made.
The amount of the connection fee shall be recomputed by the Borough at
the beginning of each calendar year in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:14A-8.
Notwithstanding the previous sentences, for purposes of calculating the
connection fee, the equivalent units for commercial or professional
establishments (including government offices) as described in § 11-4.4a,7,
shall be the quotient of one-tenth of the gross square footage divided
by 300. For purposes of calculating the connection fee or age restricted
housing units the equivalent units shall be the quotient of the anticipated
wastewater flow, as calculated in accordance with New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) flow criteria, divided by 300. The
NJDEP flow criteria for such units are as follows: 110 gallons per day (gpd)
for a one-bedroom unit, 170 gpd for a two-bedroom unit, and 225 gpd for
a three-bedroom unit. The anticipated wastewater flow shall be the product
of the number of each type of unit times the appropriate flow criteria.
It shall be the responsibility of the person making application for a sewer
connection permit to provide sufficient information for the Borough to
determine the number of equivalent units that are proposed for connection.
Costs incurred by the Borough, including its professionals, in determining
the connection fee shall also be the responsibility of the person making
application for a sewer connection through the establishment of an escrow
account.
§ 11-4.4. Sewer Charges. [Ord. No. 2013-4; Ord. No. 2015-7; Ord.
No. 2016-14; amended 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-9]
a. Sewer charges shall be made by the Borough of Flemington Sewer
Utility System to the owners of real property upon which buildings
stand in the Borough at the sanitary sewer rental or charge of a fixed
annual amount of $435.00 per year for each sewer unit, with an
increase of $25.00 annually, plus a variable cost of $0.00235 per gallon
of water usage, billable and payable in quarterly installments as
follows:
1. Single family dwelling 1 unit
2. Multiple family dwellings (2 or more)
per dwelling
1 unit
3. Boarder's room in a single or multifamily
residential dwelling, per room
1/2 unit
4. Boarding house, per person 1/2 unit
5. Hotel or motel, per room 1/2 unit
6. Restaurant with bar 5 units Plus 1 unit for
every 10 seats
§ 11-4.3 GENERAL § 11-4.4
1:309
7. Commercial or professional
establishment (including government
offices):
With 3 or less employees 1 unit
4 to 8 employees 2 units
9 to 12 employees 3 units
13 to 16 employees 4 units
Each additional 4 employees over 16 1 unit
8. Laundromat, per washing machine 1 1/4 units
9. Church 1 unit
10. Church with kitchen 2 units
11. Schools 1/12 unit Per student
plus 1 unit for each 4
employees
12. Automatic-drive-through car wash 10 units
13. Manual self-service car wash, per bay 2 units
14. Service station 1 1/4 units
15. Tavern 5 units
16. Club 1 unit
17. Club with bar 5 units
18. Restaurant, per 10 seats 1 unit
19. Movie theater, per seat 1/70 unit
20. Professional office with residential
dwelling
1 unit
21. Industrial user, per 4 employees (or
metered and sampling basis)
1 unit
22. Jail 40 units
23. Fairgrounds 60 units
24. Public restrooms (or metered and
sampling basis)
7 units
If the above schedule results in fractional units, the number of units
shall be increased to the nearest 1/4 unit.
Users with private wells shall pay the fixed cost for operations and
capital costs of the Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System,
plus the calculated amount of 40,000 annual gallons of variable cost
charges.
b. All charges for service shall be billed quarterly in accordance with the
schedule set up by the Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System,
copies of which are available at the Office of the Sewer Utility System,
§ 11-4.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-4.4
1:310
§ 11-4.5. Right of Inspection. [Ord. 2-1989, S 4.; Ord. 14-1997, S 1]
The officers, agents and employees of the Borough of Flemington, the
Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System and the R.T.M.U.A. shall have
unrestricted access at reasonable hours to all premises served by the
Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System to inspect the collection
system and to see that the requirements regarding the use of the customer's
sewer connection are being observed. Additionally, any owner of property
which discharges industrial waste into the sewer utility system shall, at
the owner's expense, provide suitable facilities to enable samples of such
wastes to be collected for analysis and further permit the authorized
representatives above-named to collect such samples from users within the
Borough.
§ 11-4.6. Damage to Property. [Ord. 2-1989, S 5; Ord. 14-1997, S 1]
Any damage to pipes, manholes, treatment facilities, appurtenances or
any other property of the Borough, the Borough of Flemington Sewer
Utility System or R.T.M.U.A. caused by the carelessness or neglect or
noncompliance with any applicable rule or regulation herein or otherwise
established pursuant to law shall be paid for by the customer, upon demand,
upon presentation of a bill therefor.
Borough Hall, 38 Park Avenue, Flemington New Jersey. Such sewer
charges are based upon estimated annual operating and capital costs
due and owing to R.T.M.U.A. and the operation and capital costs of the
Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System, and may be increased a
maximum of two percent per year hereafter.
c. Should any bill or part thereof rendered for sewer usage remain unpaid
for a period of ten days, said bill or part thereof shall be considered
delinquent and subject to payment of interest at the prevailing rate
fixed for interest on delinquent real estate taxes from the due date until
such time as the bill is paid in full. Charges for use of sewers shall be a
lien upon the premises connected until paid and be collectible, together
with interest, costs and penalties in the same manner provided by law
for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
d. Where premises or a building are occupied by more than one use set
forth in § 11-4.4 hereof, or by a combination of such uses, the charge
will be determined by applying the aforesaid rates to each use.
e. With respect to charges for properties which shall be connected for the
first time with the sewer utility system from and after the effective date
of this section, the charge for the first quarterly billing period shall be a
percentage of the fixed cost charge hereinabove set forth, equal to the
percentage of the quarterly period remaining after such connection.
The following quarterly bill will include the variable charge based on
the actual water usage during the initial connection quarter.
§ 11-4.4 GENERAL § 11-4.7
1:311
§ 11-4.7. Prohibited Discharge.
Under no circumstances will any of the following be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into the sanitary sewer utility system:
§ 11-4.8. Right to Install Meters.
The Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System reserves the right, if, in
its opinion, it is deemed desirable, to require the installation of meters on
any premises or buildings in the Borough for measuring or determining the
volume of water and sewage and to bill for sewer service based on flow
reflected by such meter, as opposed to billing on the unit charge set forth in
§ 11-4.4 hereof.
§ 11-4.9. Grease Interceptors.
Every restaurant and commercial food handling establishment in the
Borough shall install and keep in proper operating condition grease
a. Stream, storm, roof, surface, subsurface or other water.
b. Any toxic substances, such as gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or
other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
c. Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F.
d. Any liquid containing more than 100 ppm of fat, oil or grease, or matter
containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood or paunch manure.
e. Any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstructions or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage treatment plant or
sewage collector system.
f. Any liquid having a pH as determined by the engineers for the Borough,
the sewer utility system or R.T.M.U.A. lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel, or material which would
be harmful to the treatment of sewage.
g. Ground garbage, except the residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than onehalf
inch in any dimension.
h. Water produced from any air conditioner or air cooling process, device
or machine.
i. Any liquid from a restaurant or commercial food handling
establishment which does not have properly installed and functioning
grease interceptors as provided by Chapter VI of the National Standard
Plumbing Code.
§ 11-4.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-4.9
1:312
interceptors provided for in Chapter VI of the National Standard Plumbing
Code a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Borough Clerk, 38 Park
Avenue, Flemington, New Jersey.
§ 11-4.10. Assumption of Contractual and Financial Rights and
Responsibilities.
a. The Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System assumes the
obligation to perform all actions required to be performed by the
Borough, including the obligation to pay all sums when and if required
to be paid by the Borough as set forth in the following contracts:
1. Contracts between R.T.M.U.A. and the Borough dated April 8, 1970,
September 15, 1977 and February 26, 1988, copies of which are on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and available for inspection;
2. Contract between Insituform-Metropolitan and the Borough dated
August 17, 1988 in the amount of $804,422.75 for investigation and
rehabilitation of portions of the sewer utility system; and
3. All other contracts not herein specifically set forth presently
existing to which the Borough is party, the subject matters of which
pertain exclusively to the construction, operation and maintenance
of the sewer utility system.
The Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System shall succeed to
all of the Borough's rights and privileges set forth in the above
contracts.
b. The Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System assumes the
obligation to pay on behalf of the Borough all sums appropriated
pursuant to the following bond ordinances including, but not limited to,
principal and interest on bonds and bond anticipation notes, when and
if issued, expenses permitted in N.J.S.A. 40A:2-20 etc.:
1. Ordinance 5-1988 entitled "Bond Ordinance Providing for the
Investigation and Rehabilitation of Sewer Pipe and Diameter Pipe
of the Sewer System in the Borough of Flemington, County of
Hunterdon, State of New Jersey, Appropriating $900,000.00.
Therefor and Authorizing the Issuance of $855,000.00 Bonds or
Notes of the Borough for Financing Part of the Cost Thereof,"
introduced March 14, 1988 and adopted March 28, 1988, a copy of
which is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Borough Clerk; and
2. Ordinances 11-1988 entitled "Bond Ordinance Amending
Ordinance No. 5-1988 Providing for the Investigation and
Rehabilitation of Sewer Pipe and Diameter Pipe of the Sewer
System in the Borough of Flemington, County of Hunterdon, State
of New Jersey, in Order to Increase this Appropriation Therefor to
$970,000.00 and to Increase the Amount of Bonds or Notes
Authorized to $921,500.00" introduced July 18, 1988, adopted
§ 11-4.9 GENERAL § 11-4.10
1:313
§ 11-5. SANITARY SEWER UTILITY.
§ 11-5.1. Establishment of Sanitary Sewer Utility.
A municipal sanitary sewer utility is hereby established within the Borough
of Flemington in the County of Hunterdon and the State of New Jersey
for the regulation and use of sewers and the sewerage treatment plant,
to insure the proper operation and the protection and preservation of the
system, to fix the amount of charges therefor and to provide rules and
regulations therefor. Such system, including any treatment plant, pumping
stations and appurtenant structures, works and fixtures relating thereto
and all extensions and improvements thereof, situate within and without
the Borough of Flemington and constructed or acquired at public expense
by the Borough of Flemington, shall hereafter be operated, constructed,
maintained, managed and controlled by the Borough of Flemington as
a publicly owned sewer utility and shall, for accounting purposes, be a
separate entity having its own borrowing capacity, its own separate
accounts and its own separate property, whether real, personal or mixed,
within the meaning of N.J.SA. 40A:4-33, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-62 and N.J.S.A.
40:63-1 et seq., the amendments thereof and supplements thereto, and all
other provisions of other laws applicable.
§ 11-5.2. Title of System.
The sanitary sewer utility system for the Borough of Flemington shall be
known as the "Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System."
§ 11-5.3. Definition of Sewer System.
The sewer system to be operated, constructed, maintained, managed and
controlled as a publicly owned sewer utility shall consist of all pipes,
conduits, manholes, siphons, pumping and ejecting facilities, force mains,
treatment plants and other appurtenances installed on public roads or other
public property, rights-of-way, easements or private property by consent of
the owner, within and without the boundaries of the Borough of Flemington,
August 8, 1988, a copy of which is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk.
The Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System shall succeed to
all the Borough's rights to receive any and all grants from the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, or other source
for the construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater treatment
works.
c. The Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System assumes the
obligation to comply with the terms of a certain administrative consent
order entered into between the Borough and the Division of Water
Resources, Department of Environmental Protection dated July 14,
1988, and for the associated fines and penalties that may be assessed
thereunder for noncompliance.
§ 11-4.10 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-5.3
1:314
owned and maintained by the Borough of Flemington, or its authorized
agents, for the express purpose of collecting wastewater. It also includes
any such system installed by any private person or public agency within
the boundaries of the Borough of Flemington where the provisions of this
section are applicable by reason of the valid consent of the owner or
operator of said system, or any such system installed or maintained beyond
the boundaries of the Borough of Flemington where the provisions of this
section are applicable by reason of the valid consent of the owner or
operator of said system, or any such system installed or maintained beyond
the boundaries of the Borough of Flemington where the provisions of this
section are applicable by reason of the valid consent of the owner or
operator of said system, or any such system installed or maintained beyond
the boundaries of the Borough of Flemington where the provisions of this
section are applicable by reason of the valid consent of the municipality in
which such system is situated
§ 11-5.4. Sewer Utility Fund.
All monies derived from the operation of the Borough of Flemington Sewer
Utility System and any other monies applicable to its support shall be
segregated by the Borough and kept in a separate fund which shall be
known as the "Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility Fund" and, except
as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:4-35, shall be applied only to the payment of
the operating and upkeep costs of the system, capital costs of the system,
and the interest and debt redemption charges of any indebtedness now
or hereafter incurred by the Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility System.
Monies held in the separate fund shall be treated by the officers of the
Borough as monies held in trust for the Borough of Flemington Sewer Utility
System, and no banking institution accepting any such fund shall divert the
monies to any other purpose.
§ 11-5.5. Management and Operation of Sewer Utility.
a. The management and affairs of the sewer utility system shall be
conducted by the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Flemington, which may make such rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this section as it shall, from time to time, deem
necessary.
b. The Mayor shall appoint either a sewer utility commissioner or sewer
utility system committee which shall oversee the day to day operation of
the sewer utility system and be a line of communication between
personnel employed by such utility and the Mayor and Borough
Council. If the Mayor elects to appoint a committee instead of a sole
commissioner, such committee shall consist of three members. The
commissioners and committee members, as the case may be, shall be
members of the governing body and shall serve for terms of one year
commencing January 1 and expiring one year thereafter on December
31. The term of office of the commissioner and committee members, as
the case may be, for 1989 shall commence on date of appointment and
§ 11-5.3 GENERAL § 11-5.5
1:315
§ 11-6. PRETREATMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS AS TO FOOD
ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 11-6.1. Definition.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any business or other entity that
sells, processes, manufactures, makes or otherwise deals in or with and
empties into the sewer system food, food by-products, and/or other animal
products.
§ 11-6.2. Prohibited Wastes.
The following solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause obstruction to
the flow in the sewer lines, or otherwise interfere with the proper operation
of the treatment of sewage are prohibited from entering the sewer system;
any liquid containing oils, fats, wax, or grease (whether emulsified or not)
in excess of 100 mg/1 of solvent soluble materials, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150
degrees F (zero degrees and 65 degrees C); improperly shredded garbage,
animal guts or tissues, bones, hides, entrails, feathers, spent grains or hops,
milk or milk by-products, waste paper and such similar substances as may
be designated by the Flemington Borough Sewer Utility.
§ 11-6.3. Installation.
All food establishments shall install such grease traps, filters or other
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures designed to prevent such
above specified materials from entering the sewer system. A detail of the
plan for such grease traps, filters, etc., shall be supplied to the sewerage
shall expire on December 31, 1989. All sewer utility commissioners
and committee members shall serve without compensation over and
above the compensation to which they are entitled as members of the
governing body.
c. The Mayor shall appoint such full or part-time employees as he shall
deem necessary for the proper administration of the business of said
sewer utility system.
d. The salary of all full or part-time employees of the sewer utility system
shall be in such amount as shall be, from time to time, fixed by
ordinance of the Mayor and Borough Council.
e. All authorized employees or agents of the Borough and Borough sewer
utility system shall have the right to enter any buildings or premises, at
reasonable hours, for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works and to carry out any and all other
provisions of this section, or subsequent ordinances, rules and
regulations adopted by the Mayor and Borough Council for the
administration and operation of the sewer utility system.
§ 11-5.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-6.3
1:316
utility along with an outline of the establishment's operating procedures
to prevent entry into the sewer system. Such installation, plans and
procedures shall be approved by the sewer utility. In order to identify those
traps, filters, etc. which may be malfunctioning or are of a capacity or
design inadequate to properly intercept the waste discharged, each food
establishment subject to this section shall, at the owner's expense, install a
monitoring point(s) on the premises. The monitoring point(s) shall consist
of cleanouts extended to be flush with the existing grade at a point on
the premises as near to the sanitary sewer main as possible. Access to the
monitoring point(s) shall be kept reasonably open to the plumbing subcode
official or the sewer utility or its agents. Should a food establishment feel
that it should be exempt from some or all of the requirements of this section,
they may apply in person or in writing to the sewer utility. The sewer utility
may, for good cause shown, waive some or all of the requirements here set
forth. Such waiver shall apply only to the then owner and shall be in effect
only so long as the then existing use and/or procedures continue and only so
long as there is no evidence that prohibited wastes are entering the sewer
system.
§ 11-6.4. Maintenance.
All food establishments shall maintain such traps, filters, etc., in proper
working order and they shall perform the necessary operating procedures
on a continuous basis. Removal of trapped wastes shall be only by licensed
haulers. Each food establishment shall maintain a written record of trap
maintenance for a period of three years. All such records shall be readily
available for inspection by the Borough at all times.
§ 11-6.5. Inspections.
The plumbing subcode official, sewer utility, its agents or employees, may
inspect such filters, traps, etc., and such operating procedures to insure
that they are properly installed, maintained, cleaned out and to insure that
the operating procedures are being implemented.
§ 11-6.6. Cleanout.
In the event it shall be necessary to clean out, repair and/or replace any
sewer line due to failure to install and/or maintain such traps, filters, and/
or procedures, the cost of same shall be paid by the owner of such property.
In addition, should it become necessary for the Borough to clean out such
traps or filters the cost of the same shall be paid by the owner of such
property. Failure to pay shall result in the cost of same being added to the
sewer bill.
§ 11-6.7. New Establishments.
All new food establishments shall install and have approved such traps,
filters, etc. prior to commencing business.
§ 11-6.3 GENERAL § 11-6.8
1:317
§ 11-6.8. Existing Establishments.
Within 90 days after receipt of notice, all food establishments as of the
date of the adoption of this section shall provide the plumbing subcode
official with details as to existing traps, filters, pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures. Upon review and/or inspection by the plumbing
subcode official, said food establishments shall within six months install
and implement such traps, filters, pretreatment facilities and/or operating
procedures as determined by the plumbing subcode official in order to
comply with this section.
§ 11-6.9. Use of Bacteria Products.
Bacteria products used in the maintenance of grease traps, grease
interceptors or other pretreatment devices shall be preapproved by the
Borough and by the Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority
(RTMUA). The owners or managers of food establishments that wish to
use such products must obtain written approval from the Borough and the
RTMUA. Each site wishing to use a product must obtain separate approval.
As a minimum, a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) must be submitted to
the Borough and the RTMUA for approval of the product prior to beginning
treatment. The MSDS, or other information submitted, must identify all
active and inactive ingredients of the product.
§ 11-6.10. Inspection Fees.
An annual inspection fee of $50.00 shall be charged and payable to the
Borough of Flemington. In the event a reinspection is necessary, a fee of
$35.00 shall be charged and payable to the Borough of Flemington for each
reinspection.
§ 11-6.11. Penalties.
In the event of a failure to provide plans, failure to install and maintain,
and/or a failure to comply with operating procedures, or the refusal to
allow inspection, the sewer utility may, upon 30 days' notice to comply,
impose such surcharge upon the sewer bill as is reasonably estimated to
cover any existing or anticipated added costs due to such failure. Further,
in the event of such noncompliance, the sewer utility may, upon 60 days'
notice, terminate sewer service by the severance of sewer connection and
such shall not be restored until proof of elimination of such noncompliance
is supplied. In addition, the sewer utility may seek imposition of a court
ordered penalty of up to $250.00 per day for each day the offense continues.
§ 11-7. SUMP PUMPS.
§ 11-7.1. Connection to Sanitary Sewer System Prohibited.
No sump pump or other device which discharges drainage resulting from
rainwater, springs, wells, or other ground water shall be connected to the
Borough of Flemington sanitary sewer system.
§ 11-6.8 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-7.2
1:318
§ 11-7.2. Sump Pump Certificates.
Prior to the sale of any property located in the Borough of Flemington the
seller thereof shall obtain from the Borough of Flemington's Director of
Public Works or his/her designee, a certificate stating that no sump pump or
other device which discharges drainage resulting from rain water, spring,
wells or other ground water or prohibited discharge as defined under §
11-4.7 is connected to the sanitary sewer system in violation of § 11-7.1.
If the seller fails to comply with this or any subsection of this section,
the seller and the new owner after the sale will be jointly and severally
responsible for said compliance and all resulting penalties.
§ 11-7.3. Application for Certificate; Procedures; Fee.
Certificates of sump pump compliance shall be in accordance with the
following procedures:
a. Application; Fee.
Applications for certificates of sump pump compliance shall be filed
with the Borough of Flemington Director of Public Works by the seller
of the property at least ten days prior to the change in ownership.
Applications shall be submitted on the forms supplied by the Borough
of Flemington Director of Public Works and shall be accompanied by a
fee in the amount of $25.00.
b. Inspection.
1. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Borough of
Flemington Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall
conduct an inspection of the property to determine compliance
with the standards set forth in § 11-7.2.
2. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall inspect each
non-owner occupied residential property, each commercial
property and each property with five or more dwelling units to
determine compliance with this section. Thereafter, the director of
public works or his/her designee shall inspect on a schedule to be
determined by the director of public works or his/her designee the
property at least once every two years, except that any such
property that was sold and received a certificate in compliance with
this section during any such two-year period does not have to be
inspected during that two-year period. The fees shall be in
accordance with § 11-7.3a.
3. If a violation is discovered during the inspection, the property
owner shall be mailed a notice within three business days of the
inspection that clearly describes the violation.
§ 11-7.2 GENERAL § 11-7.4
1:319
§ 11-7.4. Penalties.
In the event of a failure to comply with any subsection of this section,
including but not limited a failure to provide plans, comply with the
operating procedures, or to timely obtain a sump pump certificate, or the
refusal to allow inspection, the sewer utility may, upon 30 days written
notice to comply, seek imposition of a court ordered penalty of up to $250.00
per day for each day the offense continues.
§ 11-8. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL.
§ 11-8.1. Purpose.
§ 11-8.2. Authority.
§ 11-8.3. Responsibility.
a. To protect the public potable water supply served by the Borough of
Flemington Water Department from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating, within its customers internal distribution system,
such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon
into the public water system.
b. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between its customer's in-plant potable water
system, and non-potable systems.
c. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
a. The Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, revised 1996, and the
statutes of the State of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 7:10, the water purveyor
has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved
sources, or any other substances, from entering the public potable
water system.
b. Borough of Flemington Ordinances, adopted.
a. The water department licensed operator shall be responsible for the
protection of the public potable water distribution system from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of
contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in
the judgment of the water department licensed operator, an approved
backflow device is required at the city's water service connection to any
customer's premises, the licensed operator, or his delegated agent,
shall give notice in writing to said customer to install an approved
backflow prevention device at each service connection to his premises.
The customer shall, within 90 days install such approved device, or
devices, at his own expense, and failure or refusal, or inability on the
part of the customer to install said device or devices within 90 days,
§ 11-7.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-8.3
1:320
§ 11-8.4. Definitions.
shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been properly installed.
a. Approved shall mean accepted by, the water department licensed
operator as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this
regulation, or as suitable for the proposed use.
b. Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water supply, on or available, to
the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water
supply.
c. Backflow shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances, under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes
of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended
source.
d. Backflow Preventer shall mean a device or means designed to prevent
backflow or back-siphonage. Most commonly categorized as air gap,
reduced pressure principle device, double check valve assembly,
pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb
vacuum breaker, residential dual check, double check with
intermediate atmospheric vent, and barometric loop.
1. Air gap shall mean a physical separation sufficient to prevent
backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable
water system and any other system. Physically defined as a
distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe
diameter but never less than one inch.
2. Atmospheric vacuum breaker shall mean a device which prevents
back-siphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is
either a negative pressure or sub-atmospheric pressure in a water
system.
3. Barometric loop shall mean a fabricated piping arrangement rising
at least 35 feet at its topmost point above the highest fixture it
supplies. It is utilized in water supply systems to protect against
back-siphonage.
4. Double check valve assembly shall mean an assembly of two
independently operating spring loaded check valves with tightly
closing shut off valves on each side of the check valves, plus
properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve.
5. Double check valve with intermediate atmospheric vent shall mean
a device having two spring loaded check valves separated by an
atmospheric vent chamber.
§ 11-8.3 GENERAL § 11-8.4
1:321
6. Hose bibb vacuum breaker shall mean a device which is
permanently attached to a hose bibb and which acts as an
atmospheric vacuum breaker.
7. Pressure vacuum breaker shall mean a device containing one or
two independently operated spring loaded check valves and an
independently operated spring loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check or checks. Device includes tightly
closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and
properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valve(s).
8. Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer shall mean an
assembly consisting of two independently operating approved
check valves with an automatically operating differential relief
valve located between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off
valves on each side of the check valves plus properly located test
cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve.
9. Residential dual check shall mean an assembly of two spring
loaded, independently operating check valves without tightly
closing shut-off valves and test cocks. Generally employed
immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a
containment device.
e. Backpressure shall mean a condition in which the owner's system
pressure is greater than the supplier's system pressure.
f. Back-siphonage shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures
or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from any source other than its intended source caused by the
sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.
g. NJDEP shall mean the State of New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Water Supply Administration.
h. Containment shall mean a method of backflow prevention which
requires a backflow prevention preventer at the water service entrance.
i. Contaminant shall mean a substance that will impair the quality of the
water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public
leading to poisoning or the spread of disease.
j. Cross-connection shall mean any actual or potential connection
between the public water supply and a source of contamination or
pollution.
k. Borough shall mean the Borough of Flemington.
l. Fixture isolation shall mean a method of backflow prevention in which a
backflow preventer is located to correct a cross connection at an inplant
location rather than at a water service entrance.
§ 11-8.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-8.4
1:322
§ 11-8.5. Administration.
§ 11-8.6. Requirements.
m. Owner shall mean any person who has legal title to, or license to
operate or habitat in, a property upon which a cross-connection
inspection is to be made or upon which a cross-connection is present.
n. Person shall mean any individual, partnership, company, public or
private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the State of New
Jersey, agency or instrumentality of the United States or any other legal
entity.
o. Permit shall mean a document issued by the Borough which allows the
use of a backflow preventer.
p. Pollutant shall mean a foreign substance, that if permitted to get into
the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a
moderate hazard, or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a
degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but
which does adversely and unreasonably effect such water for domestic
use.
q. Water service entrance shall mean that point in the owner's water
system beyond the sanitary control of the Borough; generally
considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and always before
any unprotected branch.
r. Licensed operator shall mean the water department licensed operator,
or his delegated representative in charge of the Borough of Flemington
Water Department, is invested with the authority and responsibility for
the implementation of a cross-connection control program and for the
enforcement of the provisions of the section.
a. The Borough will operate a cross-connection control program, to
include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the
requirements of the NJDEP's Cross-Connection Regulations and is
approved by the NJDEP.
b. The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible crossconnections
and shall follow the provisions of the Borough's program
and the NJDEP's Regulations if a cross-connection is permitted.
c. If the Borough requires that the public supply be protected by
containment, the owner shall be responsible for water quality beyond
the outlet end of the containment device and should utilize fixture
outlet protection for that purpose. He may utilize public health officials,
or their delegated representatives, to assist him in the survey of his
facilities and to assist him in the selection of proper fixture outlet
devices, and the proper installation of these devices.
a. Borough.
§ 11-8.4 GENERAL § 11-8.6
1:323
1. On new installations, the Borough will provide on-site evaluation
and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of
backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, will issue permit,
and perform inspection as required. Initial and subsequent periodic
testing of backflow preventers shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner.
2. For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the
Borough will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or
premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action
deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the
time allowed for the correction to be made. Ordinarily, 90 days will
be allowed, however, this time period may be shortened depending
upon the degree of hazard involved and the history of the device(s)
in question.
3. The Borough will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it
is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit
has been issued and which will be regularly tested to insure
satisfactory operation.
4. The Borough shall inform the owner by letter, of any failure to
comply, by the time of the first reinspection. The Borough will allow
an additional 15 days for the correction. In the event the owner
fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the
second re-inspection, the Borough will inform the owner by letter,
that the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated
within a period not to exceed five days. In the event that the owner
informs the Borough of extenuating circumstances as to why the
correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by
the Borough but in no case will exceed an additional 30 days.
5. If the Borough determines at any time that a serious threat to the
public health exists, the water service will be terminated
immediately.
6. The Borough shall have on file, a list of private contractors who are
certified backflow device testers. The owner of the building or
property will pay all charges for these tests.
7. The Borough will begin initial premises inspections to determine
the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval
of this program by the NJDEP, during the calendar year 2005.
Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial
premises.
b. Owner.
1. The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all cross-connections on his premises.
§ 11-8.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-8.6
1:324
§ 11-8.7. Degree of Hazard.
The Borough recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from
cross-connections. All threats will be classified by degree of hazard and will
require the installation of approved reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention devices, double check valves or pressure vacuum breakers.
2. The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the
Borough, shall at his expense, install, maintain, and test, or have
tested, any and all backflow preventers on his premises.
3. The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer
which is revealed by periodic testing.
4. The owner shall inform the Borough of any proposed or modified
cross-connections and also any existing cross-connections of which
the owner is aware but has not been found by the Borough.
5. The owner shall not install a by-pass around any backflow
preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on
the bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of
the device(s) must supply additional devices, installed in a parallel
arrangement as necessary to allow testing to take place.
6. The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved
by the Borough.
7. The owner shall install only backflow preventers approved by the
Borough or the NJDEP.
8. Any owner having a private well or other private water source must
have a permit if the well or source is cross-connected to the
Borough's system. Permission to cross-connect may be denied by
the Borough. The owner may be required to install a backflow
preventer at the service entrance if a private water source is
maintained, even if it is not cross-connected to the Borough's
system.
9. In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide potable water
for domestic purposes which is on the Borough's side of the
backflow preventer, such plumbing must have its own backflow
preventer installed.
10. The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
permits, annual or quarterly device testing as required by the
installation type, retesting in the case that the device fails to
operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance
with Borough or NJDEP requirements.
§ 11-8.6 GENERAL § 11-8.8
1:325
§ 11-8.8. Permits.
The Borough shall not permit a cross-connection within the public water
supply system unless it is considered necessary and that it cannot be
eliminated.
§ 11-8.9. Existing In-Use Backflow Prevention Devices.
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the Borough to
continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supercede
the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer, or result in an
unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has
increased, as in the case of a residential installation converting to a
business establishment, any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded
to a reduced pressure principle device, or a reduced pressure principal
device must be installed in the event that no backflow device was present.
§ 11-8.10. Periodic Testing.
a. Cross-connection permits that are required for each backflow
prevention device are obtained from the Borough. A fee will be charged
for the initial permit and for the renewal of each permit thereafter. Fees
are listed under § 11-1.2
b. Permits shall be renewed every year and are nontransferable. Permits
are subject to revocation and become immediately revoked if the owner
should so change the type of cross-connection or degree of hazard
associated with the service.
c. A permit is not required when fixture isolation is achieved with the
utilization of a non-testable backflow preventer.
a. All backflow devices shall be tested and inspected at least annually.
b. The Borough shall be notified at least 48 hours prior to testing. Borough
personnel, if deemed necessary by the Borough, shall witness testing.
c. The testing shall be conducted during the Borough's regular business
hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner, may require
additional charges to cover the increased costs to the Borough.
d. Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test will be
repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of
the repair the device will be retested at owners expense to insure
correct operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to
continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot
be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not
more than 30 days after the test date will be established. The owner is
responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device.
Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the owner
insuring that uninterrupted water service during testing or repair of
§ 11-8.8 FLEMINGTON CODE § 11-8.10
1:326
§ 11-8.11. Records and Reports.
§ 11-8.12. Fees and Charges.
The Borough will publish a list of fees or charges for the following services
or permits:
Chapter 13
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
§ 13-1. TITLE AND PURPOSE.
§ 13-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Flemington Borough Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Ordinance.
devices and is strongly recommended when the owner desires such
continuity.
e. Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than
specified in paragraph a above, in cases where there is a history of test
failures and the Borough feels that due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests
will be born by the owner.
a. Records. The Borough will initiate and maintain the following:
1. Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
2. Master files on cross-connection permits.
3. Copies of permits and permit applications.
4. Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the NJDEP.
b. Reports.
1. The Borough will submit the following upon request to the NJDEP.
2. Initial listing of low hazard cross-connections.
3. Initial listing of high hazard cross-connections.
4. Annual update lists of paragraphs 1 and 2 above.
5. Annual summary of cross-connection inspections.
a. Initial permit: $100.00.
b. Annual permit renewal: $50.00.
c. After-hours inspections or tests: $50.00.
§ 11-8.10 GENERAL § 13-1.2
1:327
§ 13-1.2. General Intent.
The general intent of this chapter is to control soil erosion and
sedimentation precipitated by development and caused by water runoff,
soil disturbances, destruction or removal of ground cover or plant life, and
grading and filling.
§ 13-1.3. Purposes.
This chapter is deemed essential and necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the borough of Flemington and the
surrounding communities by accomplishing the following purposes:
§ 13-2. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 13-2.1. Applicability.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be approved by the planning
board prior to the approval of site plan, subdivision, conditional use, zoning
variance, or construction permit involving more than 2,500 square feet
of soil disturbance. A soil disturbance for crop farming purposes shall be
exempt from this chapter providing farming is carried out in accordance
with a farm conservation plan or soil conservation service land practices.
§ 13-2.2. Planning Board Approval.
The soil erosion and sediment control plan or any major amendment shall
be approved by the planning board in the manner and form according to
the regulations hereafter set forth. In the case of subdivisions such review
and approval shall be part of the subdivision review process. In all other
instances review and approval shall be made within 30 days of submission
of a complete application unless, by mutual agreement in writing between
a. Maintain the useful life of reservoirs by preventing sedimentation.
b. Prevent dangers to life and property from flooding resulting from
excessive water runoff and clogging of drainage structures.
c. Preserve the recreational use of water bodies for swimming and fishing
by preventing stagnation.
d. Enhance the recycling of waste water by maintaining sufficient flows in
streams and rivers to maintain oxygen levels.
e. Prevent toxic materials, nitrates and pesticides from entering public
water supplies.
f. Reduce public expenditures for repair of public facilities resulting from
soil erosion and sedimentation.
g. Conserve the taxable value of property by enhancing the environmental
character of the borough.
§ 13-1.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 13-2.2
1:328
the municipality and the applicant, this period is extended for an additional
period. Failure of the
The applicant shall be provided with a written notice of such decision by the
borough engineer. A copy of such decision including name of applicant, site
location by street address and block and lot number, and proposed land use
shall be sent to the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District together
with any other information required by the District.
The planning board in approving said soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan, may impose lawful conditions or requirements designated or specified
on or in condition to the establishment, maintenance and continuance of any
use or occupancy of any structure of land.
§ 13-2.3. Minor Amendments.
Minor amendments to a soil erosion and sediment control plan may be
approved by the borough engineer who shall notify the planning board of
the nature and reason for the change with a copy to the Hunterdon Soil
Conservation District.
§ 13-2.4. Revocation of Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 13-3. STANDARDS.
§ 13-3.1. General Standards.
In the preparation of a soil erosion and sediment control plan, the following
general principles of design shall be adhered to:
a. Inspection shall be by the borough engineer during construction and
the applicant shall be required to have a certified plan on site during
construction.
b. The municipality may issue a stop construction order if a project is not
being executed in compliance with the certified plan.
c. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless there has been
compliance with the provisions of the certified plan for permanent
measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation. A formal report of
such compliance shall be filed with the construction official with a copy
to the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District.
a. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during development and when feasible, natural vegetation shall be
retained and protected.
b. Temporary plant cover and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical
erosion areas during development.
§ 13-2.2 GENERAL § 13-3.1
1:329
§ 13-3.2. Detailed Standards.
The detailed plans, specifications and standards in any soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be dictated by the characteristics of the
site plan to be developed and the nature of the development. All such plans
shall utilize the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee."
§ 13-4. IMPLEMENTATION.
§ 13-4.1. Timing.
The planning board shall require the construction and/or installation of
improvements of such other measures necessary to prevent soil erosion
and sedimentation prior to any site development work or the start of
construction.
§ 13-4.2. Bonding.
Improvements or such other measures on an approved soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan which may be required subsequent to the start
of construction or site development work may be deferred until such
appropriate time as when required. The planning board may provide for
the posting of performance guarantees and maintenance bonds in the same
manner as provided in the Subdivision Ordinance of the Borough of
Flemington.
§ 13-4.3. Review.
The planning board may refer soil erosion and sediment control plans to
the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District or such other local, county,
State or Federal agency as may be particularly qualified to review said plan.
§ 13-4.4. Special Situations.
In the event land is proposed to be cleared, graded, transported or
otherwise disturbed, except for crop farming as defined in subsection
13-2.1, where subdivision approval or building permit is not required, a
c. Temporary diversions and outlets shall be constructed and/or installed
to accommodate the increased runoff caused by the changed soil and
surface conditions during development.
d. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilating basins or silt traps shall be
installed to remove sediment from runoff waters.
e. Permanent final plant cover - lawn, ground cover, etc., shall be installed
as quickly as possible on any site.
f. Permanent improvements, such as roads, catch basins, curbs, etc., shall
be installed or constructed and completed as quickly as possible.
§ 13-3.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 13-4.4
1:330
grading permit shall be required. Said permit shall be issued by the borough
engineer after the borough engineer's approval of a soil erosion and
sediment control plan. The borough engineer may waive the requirement
for grading permit if, in his opinion, no apparent danger exists from soil
erosion or sedimentation.
§ 13-5. DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
CUT — Shall mean a portion of land surface area from which earth has been
removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground
surface to excavated surface.
DIVERSION — Shall mean a channel with or without a supporting ridge on
the lower side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
EMBANKMENT — Shall mean a man-made deposit of soil, rock or other
materials.
EROSION — Shall mean the wearing away of the land surface by the action
of wind, water or gravity.
EXCAVATION — See Cut.
EXISTING GRADE — Shall mean the vertical location of the existing ground
surface prior to cutting or filling.
FILL — See Embankment.
FINISHED GRADE — Shall mean the final elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the proposed design.
GRADING — Shall mean any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any
combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
GRADING PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued to authorize work to
be performed under this chapter in situations not requiring subdivision
approval or site plan approval.
GRASSED WATERWAY — Shall mean a natural or constructed path, usually
broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from a field, diversion or other site feature.
MULCHING — Shall mean the application of plant or other stable materials
on the soil surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant cover.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — Shall mean the ground surface in its
original state before grading, excavating or filling.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, both mineral and organic, that is
in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
§ 13-4.4 GENERAL § 13-5
1:331
SEDIMENT BASIN — Shall mean a barrier or dam built across a waterway
or at other suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, or silt or other
material.
SEDIMENT POOL — Shall mean the reservoir space allotted to the
accumulation of submerged sediment during the life of the structure.
SLOPE — Shall mean the degree of deviation of a surface from the
horizontal usually expressed in percent or degree.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material or
whatever origin that overlies bedrock and which can be readily excavated.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — Shall mean
a plan developed in accordance with the broad principles contained in
this chapter and based on the specific standards and specifications of
the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey as
Promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee."
STRIPPING — Shall mean any activity which removes or disturbs the
vegetative surface cover including cleaning or grubbing operations.
TEMPORARY PROTECTION — Shall mean stabilizations of erosive or
sediment producing area.
VEGETATIVE PROTECTION — Shall mean stabilization of erosive or
sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with:
WATERCOURSE — Shall mean any artificial or natural waterway, stream,
river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully,
ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed and
banks, and shall include any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or flood water.
§ 13-6. PENALTIES.
If any applicant fails to comply with the provisions of a certified plan, the
municipality may institute a civil action in Superior Court for adjunctive
relief to prohibit and prevent such violation or violations and said court
may proceed in a summary manner. Any person who violates any of the
provisions of this act, any standard promulgated pursuant to this act or
fails to comply with the provisions of a certified plan shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $3,000.00 to be collected
in a summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.
2A:58-1 et seq.).
a. Permanent seeding, producing long-term vegetative cover;
b. Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover; or
Sodding, producing areas covered with a turf of perennial sod-forming
grass.
c.
§ 13-5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 13-6
1:332
If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues
shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 17
SOIL REMOVAL
§ 17-1. REMOVAL PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
No person, firm or corporation shall remove soil from any lot, tract or
parcel of land in the Borough of Flemington and thereafter deposit the
same at any other place but the lot, tract or parcel of land from which the
same was removed, or the Flemington-Raritan Sanitary Land Fill, located
on Pennsylvania Avenue Extension, in the Township of Raritan, County of
Hunterdon and State of New Jersey, the same being known and designated
as Block 36, Lot 14 on the Township of Raritan tax map.
§ 17-2. VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter or fail to comply therewith shall severally, for each and every such
violation and noncompliance, forfeit and pay a penalty not to exceed the
sum of $500.00, or be imprisoned in the Hunterdon County Jail for a period
of not more than 90 days, at the discretion of the court or jurisdictional
officer before whom a conviction may be found. The imposition of the
foregoing penalties shall not bar the right of the municipality to specifically
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 18
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 18-1. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
a. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours hereinafter set
forth.
1. All parks will close 30 minutes after sundown.
2. All park areas will open at sunrise.
3. No person shall go into or remain in any park operated or
maintained by the Borough of Flemington, except during the time
when the park shall be open as provided in paragraphs a1 and a2
hereof.
4. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be
posted therein for public information.
§ 13-6 GENERAL § 18-1
1:333
§ 18-2. PERMITS.
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
chief of police in accordance with the following procedure:
b. Any section or part of any park maybe declared closed to the public by
the common council of the borough or at regular and stated intervals
(daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses as the
common council of the borough shall find reasonably necessary.
c. No vehicles nor devices with wheels, including bicycles, minibikes,
motor vehicles, wagons, carriages, strollers and carts shall be
permitted on tracks constructed and designated for running nor upon
any athletic fields in any parks owned and maintained by the Borough of
Flemington.
d. No motorized vehicles of any kind whatsoever shall be permitted in
parks except in designated parking areas, except that authorized
maintenance vehicles and emergency vehicles shall be permitted in
park areas.
The only exception shall be wheelchairs occupied by persons who are
physically disabled and requiring wheelchairs.
a. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the chief of police stating:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
3. The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
4. The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
5. Any other information which the chief of police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued hereunder.
b. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the chief of police shall
include the following findings:
1. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park
2. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.
3. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
§ 18-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 18-2
1:334
§ 18-3. ENFORCEMENT.
§ 18-4. VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or
4. That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the borough.
5. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
c. Within 15 days after the receipt of an application, the chief of police
shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit
and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the common
council of the borough by serving written notice thereof on the borough
clerk within ten days of said refusal. A copy of said notice shall also be
served on the chief of police within the same time and the chief of police
shall immediately forward the application and the reasons for his
refusal to the common council which shall consider the application
under the standards set forth under paragraph b hereof and sustain or
overrule the chief of police's decision within 21 days from the receipt of
the appeal by the borough clerk. The decision of the common council
shall be final and binding.
d. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permit.
e. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injury sustained by any persons whatever by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall
have been issued. The chief of police shall have the right to require any
permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to
members of the general public arising out of such permitted activities
in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by the chief of
police prior to the commencement of any activity or issuance of any
permit.
f. The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a
finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown.
a. The police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
b. The police department shall have the authority to eject from any park
any person or persons acting in violation of this chapter.
c. The police department shall have the authority to seize and confiscate
any property, thing, or device in the park, or used in violation of this
chapter.
§ 18-2 GENERAL § 18-4
1:335
supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500.00 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or both.
Chapter 19
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 19-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 19-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 1.0]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of the Borough of
Flemington, Hunterdon County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 19-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 1.0]
§ 19-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 1.0]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of Borough of Flemington are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
§ 18-4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 19-1.3
1:336
§ 19-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2009-10
§ 1.0]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 19-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Official
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or VO
zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a
one (1%) percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth
of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one (1%) percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 19-1.3 GENERAL § 19-2
1:337
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a one (1%) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood-plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
§ 19-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 19-2
1:338
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
two-tenths (0.2) foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 19-2 GENERAL § 19-2
1:339
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured
at the longest horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
§ 19-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 19-2
1:340
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 19-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 19-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2009-10
§ 3]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Flemington, Hunterdon County, New Jersey.
§ 19-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2009-10 § 3]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Flemington,
Community No. 340520, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 19-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No.2009-10 § 3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or imprisoned for not more
than ninety (90) days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Hunterdon
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 25, 2009.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Hunterdon County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34019CO263F,
34019CO351F; whose effective date is September 25, 2009.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 38 Park
Avenue, Flemington, New Jersey, 08822.
§ 19-2 GENERAL § 19-3.3
1:341
prevent the Borough of Flemington from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 19-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2009-10
§ 3]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 19-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 3]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 19-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 3]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Flemington, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 19-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 19-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2009-10
§ 4]
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
a. Development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in subsection 19-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and may include,
but not be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 19-3.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 19-4.1
1:342
§ 19-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No. 2009-10
§ 4]
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 19-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord. No.
2009-10 § 4]
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in subsection 19-5.2b; and
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 19-5.3a are met.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
19-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State
or other source, in order to administer subsections 19-5.2a, Specific
Standards, Residential Construction, and 19-5.2b, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
§ 19-4.1 GENERAL § 19-4.3
1:343
§ 19-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 4]
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 19-4.1a.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
19-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning Board as established by the Borough of Flemington
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
2. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, as provided by Law.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
§ 19-4.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 19-4.4
1:344
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood-waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 19-4.4a,4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing items (a)—(k) in subsection 19-4.4a,4 have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre,
§ 19-4.4 GENERAL § 19-4.4
1:345
§ 19-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 19-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 5]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
19-4.4a,4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
§ 19-4.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 19-5.1
1:346
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
§ 19-5.1 GENERAL § 19-5.1
1:347
§ 19-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 5]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 19-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 19-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood and Floodway Data, the following standards are required:
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net
area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings
may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation;
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least
two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). And, require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures;
or
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
§ 19-5.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 19-5.2
1:348
§ 19-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 5]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
19-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
§ 19-5.4. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2009-10 § 6]
This chapter shall take effect immediately after final passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 20
TAXICABS
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in subsection 19-4.3c,2(a).
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 19-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 19-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 19-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths (0.2) of a
foot at any point.
§ 19-5.2 GENERAL § 20-1
1:349
§ 20-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 1; Ord. No. 14-1998 § 1;
Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No.
2017-3]
The following words and phrases and their derivatives, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter indicated:
BAILEE — Shall mean a person to whom a taxicab is transferred or
delivered under a bailment.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Flemington.
CRUISING — Shall mean the practice of driving about the streets of the
Borough with a taxicab for the purpose of soliciting passengers or
presenting the purpose of the taxicab to the attention of prospective
passengers. A taxicab driving along the streets of the Borough for any
purpose other than while transporting a passenger or going to a definite
destination by the most direct route in response to a call for a taxicab by a
prospective passenger, or returning by the most direct route to the taxicab's
home terminus after discharging a passenger, or going to or from the said
terminus to the driver's home by the most direct route, shall be prima facie
evidence of "cruising."
DRIVER — Shall mean any person who drives a taxicab within the limits of
the Borough.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section of this chapter.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Shall mean transporting in such taxicab one
or more persons for hire along any of the streets or public highways of the
Borough.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, corporation or association in whose
name title to any taxicab is registered with the Motor Vehicle Commission
of the State of New Jersey, or who appears in such records to be the
conditional vendee or lessee thereof.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any individual, partnership, association,
corporation or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers, and
includes the plural as well as the singular.
STREET — Shall mean and include any street, avenue, park, parkway,
highway or other public place.
TAXICAB — Shall mean and include any automobile or motorcar, commonly
called "taxi," "limousine," "shuttle," etc., except busses engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced or
advertised to operate or run, or which is operated or run, over any of the
streets or public highways within the limits of the Borough of Flemington
aforesaid, and which accepts passengers for the transportation from points
or places to points or places within or without the Borough.
§ 20-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 20-2
1:350
§ 20-2. LICENSES REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 2; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall operate
any taxicab within the limits of the Borough unless both the taxicab and the
driver thereof are licensed pursuant to this chapter and conform to all the
provisions of all applicable statutes.
§ 20-3. CLASSES OF LICENSES. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 3; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
There are hereby established two (2) classes of taxicab licenses, to be
known as "taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license,"
respectively.
§ 20-4. ISSUED/OUTSTANDING LICENSES. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 4;
Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No.
2017-3]
There shall be no limit on the number of taxicab driver's licenses and
there shall be a limit of ten (10) taxicab owner's licenses that shall be
issued and/or outstanding simultaneously. Each license shall be issued to
the highest qualified bidder therefor at a sale by public auction for that
purpose conducted or supervised by the Borough Clerk. The minimum bid
for such licenses shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and Council,
which shall have the right to reject all bids where the highest bidder is not
accepted. As a condition of the award of such a license, the recipient shall
reimburse the Borough for any costs incurred by the Borough in complying
with the public notice requirements for the license. If more than one taxi
license is issued at the same public auction, the recipients thereof shall
equally split the costs of reimbursing the Borough for any costs incurred by
the Borough in complying with the public notice requirements.
§ 20-5. TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 5; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to operate
within the limits of the Borough any taxicab duly licensed hereunder and
under the laws of the State of New Jersey until the license granted pursuant
to the terms of this chapter either expires or is surrendered, suspended or
revoked, and shall not be transferable.
§ 20-6. TAXICAB OWNER'S LICENSE. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 6; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be
operated in the Borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder and duly
licensed under the laws of this State until the license granted pursuant to
the terms of this chapter either expires or is surrendered, suspended or
revoked, and shall not be transferable.
§ 20-2 GENERAL § 20-7
1:351
§ 20-7. QUALIFICATIONS OF TAXICAB OWNER'S LICENSEES. [Ord.
No. 6-1982 § 7; Ord. No. 14-1998 § 2; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No.
2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
§ 20-8. QUALIFICATIONS OF TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSEES. [Ord.
No. 6-1982 § 8; Ord. No. 14-1998 § 3; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No.
2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must conform to the following
requirements:
a. In the case of a corporation, no license shall be granted to operate a
taxicab unless the corporation is either incorporated or is duly
authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New Jersey. No
license shall be granted to operate a taxicab to any person who or to
any partnership or corporation that, or a member or officer of which,
has been convicted of any crime as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3.
b. (Reserved)
c. In order to ensure the safety of the public, no owner, lessee or bailee of
any taxicab shall operate, cause or permit such taxicab to be operated,
nor shall any license be issued hereunder, until and unless the applicant
shall have complied with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48: 16-1, et seq.,
relating to the filing of an insurance policy covering the owner or
operator of such vehicle for damages to persons for which he may
become liable by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of the
vehicle. All taxicab owner's and driver's licenses shall be effective and
operative only if such insurance policy or policies are in full force and
effect. The lapse of such insurance and the failure to submit proof that
such insurance is in full force and effect, including but not limited to
upon the expiration of any such insurance, shall cause the applicable
licenses to automatically be revoked until such time as proof of such
insurance is submitted. If the insurance policy expires during the
licensing period of January 1 and December 31, license holder must
submit an updated insurance certificate to the Borough Clerk within
thirty (30) days from the expiration date of the policy. Failure to submit
proof of insurance will cause the license to be temporarily revoked until
such time that proof of insurance can be supplied.
a. Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or older, and shall not have been
convicted of any crime as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3.
b. State the name of the licensed owner by whom he will be employed.
c. Fill out, in his own handwriting, upon a blank form to be provided by the
Borough Clerk, a statement giving his full name, residence, places of
residence for the preceding five (5) years; age, height, color of eyes and
hair, places of previous employment; whether he has ever been charged
with or arrested or convicted of a crime or other violation or of a
violation of this chapter and, if so, what the violation was; whether
§ 20-7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 20-8
1:352
§ 20-9. APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 9; Ord. No. 14-1998 § 4;
Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No.
2017-3]
previously licensed as a taxicab driver or chauffeur and, if so, whether
his license has ever been revoked and for what cause, which statement
shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed in the office of
the Borough Clerk.
d. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must file with his
application two (2) unmounted, unretouched photographs of himself in
such position as the Borough Clerk may direct, taken within thirty (30)
days preceding the filing of the application. Photographs are to be of a
size which may easily be attached to the license, one of which may be
attached when issued, and another to be filed with the application in
the office of the Borough Clerk. The photograph shall be so attached to
the license that it cannot be removed and another photograph
substituted without detection. Each licensed taxicab driver shall, upon
demand of any member of the Flemington Borough Police Department
or any citizen, exhibit his license or photograph for inspection.
e. Each applicant shall furnish a certified driver's abstract history
obtained from the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission within thirty
(30) days prior to the filing of the application and consent to the
Flemington Borough Police Department running an abstract at any time
that the person holds a taxi driver's license.
f. Each applicant shall have fingerprints taken and a criminal background
check performed at a location determined by the Flemington Borough
Police Department. The results of the background check shall be
submitted to the Chief of Police and the Borough Clerk and made a part
of the application.
a. Applications for a taxicab owner's license shall be made by the owner,
lessee or bailee thereof upon forms to be furnished by the Borough
Clerk and the application shall contain the following information:
1. If an individual, full name of applicant, street and post office
address, place of residence; places of previous employment;
whether ever charged with, arrested or convicted of a crime or
other violation of law, and if so, what crime or offense; whether
previously licensed to operate a taxicab has ever been revoked and,
if so, for what cause.
2. If a partnership, the firm name, main office, branch offices, names
and addresses and post office addresses of partners; places of
previous employment, whether ever charged with or arrested or
convicted of any crime or other violation of law, and, if so, what
crime or offense; whether any partner has been licensed to operate
a taxicab or as a driver or chauffeur of a taxicab and, if so, for what
cause.
§ 20-8 GENERAL § 20-9
1:353
§ 20-10. APPLICATION FOR TAXI DRIVER'S LICENSE. [Ord. No.
6-1982 § 10; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4;
Ord. No. 2017-3]
No person shall drive a taxicab until he shall have made application upon a
form provided by the Borough Clerk for a taxicab driver's license and shall
have procured the license as herein provided. Each person applying for a
license to drive a taxicab must furnish all of the information required in
Section 20-8, as well as satisfactory evidence that he has received a driver's
license under the State Motor Vehicle Act.
§ 20-11. EXPIRATION DATE OF LICENSES. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 11;
Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No.
2017-3]
All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the year of
issuance or renewal, unless sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked. No
license fee payable under this chapter shall be prorated, nor shall any part
thereof be refunded for any reason.
§ 20-12. FEES. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 12; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No.
2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3; amended 11-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-21]
3. If a corporation, name of corporation, main office, branch offices, in
what state incorporated and directors of corporation; place of
previous employment of each; whether any officer or director was
ever charged with, arrested or convicted of a crime or other
violation of law, and if so, what crime or offense; whether
previously licensed to operate or drive such taxicab has ever been
revoked and, if so, for what cause.
4. In addition to the foregoing, every application shall contain a
statement as to whether the applicant is the owner, lessee or bailee
of the taxicab sought to be licensed, the State license number of the
taxicab; the make, model and manufacturer's number; and the
number of persons it is capable of carrying.
5. All applications shall be duly verified by the affidavit of the
individual, a partner of the partnership or an officer of the
corporation seeking a license, as the case may be, and shall be
accompanied on forms to be provided by the Borough Clerk.
6. All applications shall contain the service prices for transportation
of passengers. Prices shall be of the owners choosing and provided
to passengers upon request, as well as posted in a conspicuous
place in the taxicab. The prices charged to passengers should be
the same as those stated on the application which can be amended
during the year to change the prices charged by filing the new
prices with the Borough Clerk before they go into effect.
§ 20-9 FLEMINGTON CODE § 20-12
1:354
§ 20-13. LICENSE ISSUANCE REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 13;
Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No.
2017-3]
a. The fee for taxicab owner license issuance shall be the amount paid by a
successful bidder for the license. The minimum bid for such license
shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and Council, which shall have
the right to reject all bids where the highest bidder is not accepted. The
subsequent annual renewal fee for such license shall be $500. However,
such a renewal only shall be awarded if all the conditions of the original
issuance and any additional condition(s) required by the Borough are
met. No such fees shall be refunded for any reason.
b. An annual inspection fee of $75 for each taxicab owner's license shall
be payable to the Flemington Borough Police Department at the time of
the inspection. A new inspection and accompanying $75 inspection fee
payable to the Flemington Borough Police Department shall be required
for any additional or replacement vehicle.
a. Any or all applications for licenses hereunder may be granted or denied
by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council may issue a
temporary probationary license for a period of up to and including one
hundred eighty (180) days for a cost of one hundred twenty-five
($125.00) dollars and request a review of all required documents at the
conclusion of the temporary period to ensure compliance.
b. No taxicab owner's license shall be issued until the motor vehicle to be
licensed has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined by
the Flemington Borough Police Department and found to be in safe
condition for the transportation of passengers. All licensed taxicabs
shall be clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted. The Mayor and
Council shall refuse a license to any applicant or, if already issued,
revoke or suspend the license of any vehicle found to be unsafe for the
transportation of passengers. All reports of inspections and
examinations shall be filed with the Borough Clerk and become a part of
the application filed for the licensing of the vehicle.
If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be in a safe condition for
the transportation of passengers and in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, upon the payment of the license fees required by this
chapter, the same may be licensed by delivering to the applicant a card
of such size and form as may be prescribed by the Borough Clerk. The
card shall contain the name of the applicant, the official license number
of the taxicab, the name of the owner, the State license number thereof;
the make, model, manufacturer's number of the taxicab, together with
the date of the inspection of the same, and a notice that in case of
any complaint, the Borough Clerk shall be notified, the license number
of the taxicab being given. The card shall have attached thereto the
signature of the Borough Clerk and shall contain blank spaces upon
which an entry shall be made of the date of each inspection of the
vehicle by the person making the inspection.
§ 20-12 GENERAL § 20-13
1:355
§ 20-14. NAMES OF VEHICLES. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 14; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
Every taxicab so licensed shall have displayed on both sides thereof the
word "taxi" in letters at least four (4) inches high or the name of the
operating owner containing the words "taxi" or "taxicab."
§ 20-15. NONTRANSFERABILITY. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 15; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
No license issued hereunder shall be sold, assigned, mortgaged or
otherwise transferred or hypothecated.
§ 20-16. REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES. [Ord. No.
6-1982 § 16; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4;
Ord. No. 2017-3]
c. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of all licensing requirements, there shall
be issued to the applicant a license to drive a taxicab for the licensed
owner named in his application. No licensed driver shall operate a
taxicab owned by a person other than the person named in the
application and license, unless the driver shall have first obtained a
license therefor from the Borough Clerk.
d. Each taxicab so licensed shall have displayed on the body of the vehicle
the taxi license number issued to that vehicle. The number shall be
three (3) inches in height and located in the center of the rear quarter
panels on the driver and passenger sides and the rear center line of the
trunk of the vehicle. Each taxicab shall also display the words
"Flemington Borough" on each rear door of the vehicle in letters three
(3) inches in height.
a. A taxicab owner's license issued hereunder may be revoked or
suspended at any time after notice and the opportunity for a hearing by
the Chief of Police, or a representative of the Flemington Borough
Police Department, the Borough Clerk and the Borough Attorney (the
"committee") if the vehicle is not in a safe condition for the
transportation of passengers, not kept in conformity with the terms of
this chapter, or used or its use permitted for any illegal business or
purpose, or for the violation of any statute or law of the State of New
Jersey or of the United States, or for a violation of any provision of this
chapter, or whenever in their discretion promotion of the public health,
safety and/or welfare will be enhanced. The Mayor and Council, after
being advised of the outcome of the hearing by the committee, shall
vote at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Council
whether to affirm, modify or reverse the suspension or revocation based
upon the same grounds set forth in this section. The Borough Clerk
shall notify the Chief of Police whenever such license has been
suspended or revoked by the Mayor and Council.
§ 20-13 FLEMINGTON CODE § 20-16
1:356
§ 20-17. POWER OF ATTORNEY. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 17; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
No taxicab owner's license shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall
have delivered to the Borough Clerk, concurrently with the filing of the
insurance policy hereinbefore referred to, a power of attorney executed
by said applicant wherein and whereby said applicant shall appoint the
Borough Clerk, as the applicant's true and lawful attorney for the purpose
of acknowledging service of any process out of any court of competent
jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity
granted under the insurance policy filed; and any license for a taxicab
issued upon such application shall continue effective, and the operation of
any taxicab thereunder shall be permitted, only so long as said power of
attorney shall remain in effect and unrevoked.
§ 20-18. (RESERVED)25
§ 20-19. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 6-1982 § 19; Ord.
No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord. No. 2017-3]
b. A taxicab driver's license issued hereunder may be revoked or
suspended at any time after notice and the opportunity for a hearing by
the Chief of Police, or a representative of the Flemington Borough
Police Department, the Borough Clerk and the Borough Attorney (the
"committee") for a violation of any State or Federal statute, including
but not limited to Title 39 of the statutes of New Jersey or the
equivalent in other states, or a Borough ordinance, including but not
limited to any of the provisions of this chapter, or, whenever in their
judgment, the promotion of the public life, health, morals or safety and/
or welfare will be enhanced by such suspension or revocation. The
Mayor and Council, after being advised of the outcome of the hearing
by the committee, shall vote at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Mayor and Council whether to affirm, modify or reverse the
suspension or revocation based upon the same grounds set forth in this
section. The Borough Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever
such license has been suspended or revoked by the Mayor and Council.
c. The Flemington Borough Police Department at any time during the
licensing year may run a driver's abstract history and advise the
Borough Clerk if a driver who is licensed has been convicted of a Title
39 or other violation.
a. Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall violate this
chapter or any of its provisions shall, upon conviction, be punished
either by imprisonment in the County jail for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days or by a fine not exceeding one thousand five hundred
($1,500) dollars or five hundred ($500.00) dollars for a first offense, one
25.Editor's Note: Former § 20-18, Cruising, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance No. 6-1982, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 14-1998.
§ 20-16 GENERAL § 20-19
1:357
§ 20-20. LIMOUSINE LICENSE. [Ord. No. 21-1998; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2013-24; Ord. No. 2014-14; Ord. No. 2016-4; Ord.
No. 2017-3]
All of the requirements of this Chapter 20 shall apply to limousines, except
as follows:
Chapter 21
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for a second offense, and one thousand
five hundred ($1,500.00) dollars for a third offense and every offense
thereafter, or both, in the discretion of the Court. [Ord. No. 6-1982
§ 19; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2014-14]
b. Nothing in this chapter shall exempt any person owning or operating
any taxicab from complying with the laws relating to the ownership,
registration and operation of automobiles in this State or any other
State or Federal statute or law and the penalties relating thereto.
a. License Required . No person shall hire, keep, or use for hire or pay, any
limousine utilizing the Borough of Flemington as a principal place of
business as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:16-18 without first having obtained a
license for that purpose from the Borough Clerk for such limousine,
which license shall be known as a "limousine license." Such license
shall be for a term of one (1) year from the date of issuance, shall be
renewable annually and shall be nontransferable.
b. Fee. The fee for the issuance of such license shall be in accordance with
Section 20-12 entitled "Fees." Each such vehicle used as a limousine
shall be licensed separately.
c. Qualifications. The Borough Clerk shall issue such license after
satisfactory compliance by the applicant with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
48:16-13 to 48:16-22 and approval by the Chief of Police and the
payment of the aforesaid fee.
d. Form and Content of License. There shall be a separate license issued
for each limousine to be licensed. The license shall be in writing,
numbered, signed by the Chief of Police on a form provided by the
Borough and shall contain the following information: the name,
business address, and business telephone number of the owner; the
number of the license, the make, model, year, serial number, and
license plate number of the vehicle; the name of the company supplying
insurance coverage, the policy number and the name, address and
telephone number of the insurance agent.
e. By Whom Issued. A limousine license shall be initially issued by the
Mayor and Council. Any renewals thereof shall be issued by the
Borough Clerk upon approval of the Chief of Police.
§ 20-19 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-1
1:358
§ 21-1. SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
§ 21-1.1. Policy Statement. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 1]
Stormwater management is the process of minimizing stormwater runoff
and directing stormwater appropriate nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures so as to control flooding, recharge
ground water and reduce pollution of water resources. Transport of
stormwater-related pollutants into local surface and ground waters can
result in: the destruction of fish, wildlife, and habitats; threats to public
health due to contaminated food and drinking water supplies; and losses of
recreational and aesthetic values. Stormwater management shall occur with
the understanding and acceptance of stormwater as a resource; low impact
and nonstructural measures shall be tailored to a site and applied wherever
and to the extent feasible.
§ 21-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 1]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for major development and to
reduce the amount of non-point source pollution entering surface and
ground waters. This chapter guides new development in a manner that is
proactive and minimizes harmful impacts to natural resources. Specifically,
this ordinance shall:
a. Reduce artificially induced flood damage to public health, life, and
property;
b. Minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes;
c. Minimize the deterioration of existing structures that would result from
increased rates of stormwater runoff;
d. Induce water recharge into the ground wherever suitable infiltration,
soil permeability, and favorable geological conditions exist;
e. Prevent an increase in non-point source pollution;
f. Maintain the integrity and stability of stream channels and buffers for
their ecological functions, as well as for drainage, the conveyance of
floodwater, and other purposes;
g. Control and minimize soil erosion and the transport of sediment;
h. Minimize public safety hazards at any stormwater detention facility
constructed pursuant to subdivision or site plan approval;
i. Maintain adequate baseflow and natural flow regimes in all streams and
other surface water bodies to protect the aquatic ecosystem;
j. Protect all surface water resources from degradation; and
k. Protect ground water resources from degradation and diminution.
§ 21-1 GENERAL § 21-1.3
1:359
§ 21-1.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 1]
§ 21-1.4. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance
Requirements. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 1]
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to
this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development approvals
under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In
their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and general welfare. This chapter shall be construed to assure
consistency with the requirements of New Jersey laws and acts amendatory
thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and
any existing or future municipal NJPDES Permits and any amendments or
revisions thereto or re-issuance thereof. This chapter is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter
imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
a. This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for the
following major developments that require preliminary or final site plan
or subdivision review:
1. Nonresidential major developments; and
2. Aspects of residential major developments that are not pre-empted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C.
5:21. The provisions of both this chapter and the RSIS are to be
applied and reviewed concurrently for any residential major
development.
3. In the case of agricultural or horticultural development that meets
the definition of "major development" under N.J.A.C. 7:8, a farm
conservation plan that addresses the protection of soil and water
resources shall be developed and implemented. Such a plan shall
be approved by the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District.
b. This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Borough of Flemington.
c. This chapter does not apply to activities of Hunterdon County, the State
of New Jersey and the government of the United States of America
when those activities are specifically exempted from municipal
regulation by relevant State or Federal law.
§ 21-1.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-2
1:360
§ 21-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. Where
common definitions exist, the definitions below are the same as or based
on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
AGRICULTURE OR HORTICULTURE OR AGRICULTURAL OR
HORTICULTURAL USE — Shall mean the use of the land for common
farmsite activities including but not limited to production, harvesting,
storage, grading, packaging, processing and the wholesale and retail
marketing of crops, plants, animals and other related commodities and
the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease and pest control, disposal of farm
waste, irrigation, drainage, and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean
construction for the purposes of supporting common farmsite activities,
including but not limited to: the production, harvesting, storage, grading,
packaging, processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops,
plants, animals, and other related commodities and the use and application
of techniques and methods of soil preparation and management,
fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste,
irrigation, drainage and water management, and grazing.
CATEGORY ONE (C1) WATERS — Shall mean waters of the State
designated in N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density caused by
subjecting soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also
decrease soil infiltration and permeability rates.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean the Hunterdon County Planning
Board, as designated by the County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review
municipal stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s).
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center, such as urban, regional, town, village, or
hamlet, as designated by the State Planning Commission.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
§ 21-2 GENERAL § 21-2
1:361
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
(2) or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development means: any activity that requires a State permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any activity including the clearing,
excavating, storing, grading, filling or transportation of soil or any other
activity that causes soil to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; well head protection areas; and ground water recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are those identified
by the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
GROUND WATER — Shall mean a body of water below the surface of the
land in a zone of saturation where the spaces between the soil or geological
materials are fully saturated with water.
HUC-14 — Shall mean a watershed as defined by the United States
Geological Survey with a 14-digit identifier, a subwatershed.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water
relative to natural conditions in the area.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water from precipitation
seeps into the soil to a level below the normal root soil of plant species.
KARST TERRAIN — Shall mean an area where karst topography, with its
characteristic surface and subterranean features, is developed as a result of
the dissolution of limestone, dolomite, or other soluble rock. Characteristic
physiographic features present in karst terrains include but are not limited
to sinkholes, sinking streams, caves, blind valleys, large springs and
subterranean drainage. See also limestone area.
LIMESTONE AREA — Shall mean an area of Hunterdon County underlain
by carbonate sedimentary rock consisting chiefly of calcium carbonate.
§ 21-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-2
1:362
Limestone is commonly used as a general term for the class of rocks that
consist of at least eighty (80%) percent calcium or magnesium carbonate.
See also karst terrain.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Shall mean methods incorporating
design measures to replicate predevelopment hydrology to reduce the
impacts of development at a lot-level basis, treating rainwater where it
falls by creating conditions that allow the water to infiltrate back into the
ground. LID emphasizes greater infiltration of stormwater on-site rather
than regarding the stormwater as a nuisance condition and disposable.
MAINTENANCE PLAN — Shall mean a document required for all major
development projects for stormwater management maintenance. The
document shall contain specific preventive maintenance tasks and
schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris,
or trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the
person or persons responsible for preventive and corrective maintenance
(including replacement).
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one (1) or more acres of land or would create onequarter
(1/4) acre or more of new impervious surface.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — Shall mean compliance with the
specific objective to the greatest extent possible taking into account
equitable considerations and competing factors, including but not limited
to, environmental benefits, pollutant removal effectiveness, regulatory
compliance, ability to implement given site-specific environmental
conditions, cost and technical or engineering feasibility.
MITIGATION — Shall mean an action by an applicant providing
compensation or offset actions for on-site stormwater management
requirements where the applicant has demonstrated the inability or
impracticality of strict compliance with the stormwater management
requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater
management plan, or in this local ordinance, and has received a waiver
from strict compliance from the municipality. Mitigation, for the purposes
of this chapter, includes both the mitigation plan detailing how the project's
failure to strictly comply will be compensated, and the implementation of
the approved mitigation plan within the same HUC-14 within which the
subject project is proposed (if possible and practical), or a contribution
of funding toward a regional stormwater control project, or provision for
equivalent treatment at an alternate location, or other equivalent water
quality benefit.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Borough of Flemington.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities that are not organized in a compact
form.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES — Shall
mean techniques that control or reduce stormwater runoff in the absence
of stormwater structures (e.g., basins and piped conveyances), such as
§ 21-2 GENERAL § 21-2
1:363
minimizing site disturbance, preserving important site features including,
but not limited to, natural vegetation, reducing and disconnecting
impervious cover, minimizing slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing
turf grass lawns, increasing time of concentration and maintaining and
enhancing natural drainage features and characteristics.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of plants, algae and other organisms or vegetation.
NUTRIENT CONCENTRATION — Shall mean the amount of a nutrient in
a defined volume of water (such as milligrams of nitrogen per liter). The
relationship between nutrient concentration and nutrient load can vary and
depends on the surface waterflow, the volume of water In the water body or
aquifer, and watershed characteristics.
NUTRIENT LOAD — Shall mean the total amount of a nutrient such as
nitrogen or phosphorus entering the water during a given time, such as
"tons of nitrogen per year", or "pounds of phosphorus per day." Nutrients
may enter the water from runoff, ground water recharge, point source
discharges, or the air (in the form of wet deposition such as rain or snow as
well as dry deposition).
PERMEABLE — Shall mean a surface or land cover capable of transmitting
or percolating a significant amount of precipitation into the underlying soils.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, the Borough of Flemington, or political subdivision of this
State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
POLLUTION — Shall mean the manmade or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water to the
extent that the pollutant concentration or level violates either the Ground
Water Quality Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9-6) or the Surface Water Quality
Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9B) of New Jersey.
PRECONSTRUCTION — Shall mean prior to the proposed major
development.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground, and becomes part of a ground water body.
§ 21-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-2
1:364
REVIEW AGENCY (MUNICIPAL) — Shall mean the municipal body or
official that is responsible for the review of a major development project for
compliance with the stormwater management requirements.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension and is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Shall mean any material(s) or machinery, located
at an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities, that could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to ground or surface
water. Source materials include, but are not limited to raw materials,
intermediate products, final products, waste materials, by-products,
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (a
constructed stormwater wetland).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or ground water recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean the flow of stormwater on or across
the surface of the ground, in drainage facilities or in storm sewers.
STREAM BUFFER — Shall mean a strip of land located immediately
adjacent to a stream channel consisting of natural, undisturbed vegetative
§ 21-2 GENERAL § 21-2
1:365
cover, which serves as a transition area between uplands and riparian lands.
A stream buffer may encompass wetlands, may be contained with a flood
plain or floodway or may extend beyond a wetland, floodplain or floodway
boundary.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER TECHNIQUES — Shall mean a stormwater
management measure that involves control of concentrated stormwater
runoff or infiltration such as stormwater basins, piped conveyance systems
and manufactured stormwater devices, and can include various types of
basins, filters, surfaces, and devices located on individual lots in a
residential development or throughout a commercial, industrial, or
institutional development site in areas not typically suited for larger,
centralized structural facilities.
TAILWATER — Shall mean the downstream surface water elevation at a
discharge (pipe, weir, spillway, channel, etc.).
THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES — Endangered species are
those whose prospects for survival in New Jersey are in immediate danger
because of a loss or change in habitat, over-exploitation, predation,
competition, disease, disturbance or contamination. Assistance is needed
to prevent future extinction in New Jersey. Threatened species are those
who may become endangered if conditions surrounding them begin to or
continue to deteriorate. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
those identified by the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — Shall mean the time it takes for stormwater
runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed
to the point of interest within a watershed.
TRANSITION AREA — Shall mean an area of protected upland adjacent
to a freshwater wetland that minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland
or serves as an integral component of the wetlands ecosystem. Also called
"buffer" area.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 21-3. GENERAL STANDARDS.
§ 21-3.1. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater
Management Measures. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 3]
§ 21-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-3.1
1:366
§ 21-4. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT.
§ 21-4.1. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies. [Ord.
No. 2006-1 § 4]
a. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
designed to meet the erosion control, ground water recharge, and
stormwater runoff quantity and quality standards in Section 21-4, as
described in technical guidance documents listed in Section 21-7. As
detailed in Section 21-4, to the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not
sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater management
measures necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into
the design along with the practicable nonstructural strategies.
b. The standards in this chapter apply to new major development and are
intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality
and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain ground
water recharge. The standards do not apply to major development to
the extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or Water
Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules.
a. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsections 21-4.2
and 21-4.3 shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this section into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into
the design of the project by preparation of the NJDEP Nonstructural
Strategies Points System (NSPS) spreadsheet and, if further review of
proposed nonstructural measures is necessary the preparation of the
NJDEP Low Impact Development checklist. If the applicant contends
that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons
to incorporate any or only specific nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in subsection 21-4.1b below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
or strategies considered and provide a basis for the contention. The
applicant bears the burden of proving any impracticability.
b. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into
site design shall:
1. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
2. Minimize the creation of new impervious surfaces and reduce,
break up or otherwise disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious
surfaces;
§ 21-3.1 GENERAL § 21-4.1
1:367
3. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation, except where native or natural vegetation is considered
invasive;
4. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post-construction;
5. Minimize land clearing and disturbance and overall site grading;
6. Minimize soil compaction;
7. Retain native, noninvasive vegetation, plant low-maintenance
landscaping, plant native vegetation, and minimize the creation of
lawns to reduce the use of fertilizers, pesticides and irrigation;
8. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging
into and through stable vegetated areas;
9. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use,
exposure and/or mobilization of pollutants and prevent or minimize
the release and transport of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(a) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash
and debris in drainage systems, including features that satisfy
subsection 21-4.1c below;
(b) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and
debris from drainage systems;
(c) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills
or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or
commercial developments; and
(d) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
application of fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules. Prior to
applying fertilizer, soil tests must be conducted on site to
determine the type of fertilization necessary.
c. Site design features identified under subsection 21-4.1b9(b) above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For exemptions to this
standard see subsection 21-4.1c3.
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
§ 21-4.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-4.1
1:368
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
2. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two (2) or more clear spaces) shall have an area
of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater than
two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
3. This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the review agency determines that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where flows from the water quality design storm as specified
in subsection 21-4.3a are conveyed through any device (e.g.,
end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or
a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one (1) of the following:
(1) A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8) inches
long and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide (this option
does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(2) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars, to the
elevation of the water quality design storm as specified in
subsection 21-4.3a;
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
d. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in subsections 21-4.2 and
21-4.3 shall be:
1. Dedicated to a government agency; or
2. Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the Hunterdon
County Clerk's office; or
§ 21-4.1 GENERAL § 21-4.1
1:369
§ 21-4.2. Erosion Control, Ground Water Recharge and Stormwater
Runoff Quantity Control Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 4]
3. Subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that
measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
e. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified
in subsection 21-7, or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org.
a. This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards
to control erosion, maintain ground water recharge, and control
stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development.
1. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
2. The minimum design and performance standards for ground water
recharge are as follows:
(a) Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and
ground water recharge in subsection 21-5.2, the design
engineer shall comply with at least one (1) of the following
standards:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
maintain one hundred (100%) percent of the average
annual preconstruction ground water recharge volume for
the site; or
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from
preconstruction to post-construction for the 2-year storm
is infiltrated.
(b) The following two types of stormwater runoff shall not be
recharged:
(1) Stormwater runoff from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are:
[a] Areas in industrial and commercial developments
where solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored, or applied;
[b] Areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored;
§ 21-4.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-4.2
1:370
[c] Areas where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; and 4)
areas where recharge would be inconsistent with a
Department approved remedial action work plan or
landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for spills
of toxic materials, such as gas stations and vehicle
maintenance facilities; and
(2) Stormwater runoff from industrial areas exposed to
"source material."
(c) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
ground water table and design the project site and all site
ground water recharge measures so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are
not limited to, raising the ground water table so as to cause
surface ponding, flooding of basements and other subsurface
facilities, and interference with the proper operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures in the vicinity of a ground water recharge measure.
3. The minimum design and performance standards for the control of
stormwater runoff quantity are as follows:
(a) Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and
ground water recharge in Section 21-5, the design engineer
shall comply with at least one (1) of the following standards:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the post-developed stormwater runoff hydrographs
from the project site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storms do
not exceed, at any point in time, the site's predeveloped
runoff hydrographs for the same storms;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area; or
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10-, and
100-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80 percent,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
§ 21-4.2 GENERAL § 21-4.2
1:371
§ 21-4.3. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed.
b. Any application for a new agricultural or horticultural development that
meets the definition of major development in Section 21-2 shall be
submitted to the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of this
section and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control.
a. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by eighty (80%) percent of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality control
if an additional one-quarter (1/4) acre or more of impervious surface is
being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under
a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. Daily limits of TSS (TMDL) may apply to the site
development based on conditions of regulatory approvals.
b. The water quality design storm shall be one and one-quarter (1.25)
inches of rainfall in two (2) hours. Water quality calculations shall take
into account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1, subject to revision due to subsequent rule
changes. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account
the implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
§ 21-4.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-4.3
1:372
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
c. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, subject to revision due to subsequent
rule changes. The current edition of the BMP Manual may be obtained
from the address identified in Section 21-7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and
other sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 21-7. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs
in Table 2 below. Alternative BMPs, removal rates and methods of
calculating removal rates may be approved if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative BMPs, removal rates and computational methods to the
review agency. Documentation for alternative rates and methods shall
consist of published (peer-reviewed) journal article or scientific paper.
A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the
removal rate, including documentation, shall be provided to the
Department at the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Source: New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment Device See subsection 21-6.3
Sand Filter 80
§ 21-4.3 GENERAL § 21-4.3
1:373
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Source: New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
d. If more than one (1) BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty (80%) percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AxB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal (expressed as a whole number) from
application of both BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number) applicable to the first
(upstream) BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number) applicable to the
second (downstream) BMP
In cases where three (3) (or more) BMPs are used in series, the
applicant shall calculate the TSS reduction for the two (2) most
upstream BMPs in the series using the above formula, then substitute
the result (R) of that calculation in the formula for "A" when calculating
the combined result with the next BMP in the series.
e. If there is more than one (1) on-site drainage area, the eighty (80%)
percent TSS removal rate shall apply to the discharge of each drainage
subarea, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
an area-weighted average.
f. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to
the maximum extent practicable, the post-construction nutrient load
from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water
quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the
maximum extent practicable, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize nutrient
removal while still achieving the performance standards in subsection
21-4.2 and 21-4.3. This standard may be superseded by a more
stringent numeric effluent limitation imposed under the New Jersey
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. Daily limits for nutrient loading (TMDL) may apply to the
site development based on conditions of regulatory approvals.
§ 21-4.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-4.3
1:374
g. Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may be
obtained from the address identified in Section 21-7.
h. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff and any new stormwater discharge point
to waters classified as FW1.
i. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all
waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and along all
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be designated and protected as follows:
1. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource
protection area in accordance with one (1) of the following, unless
superseded by a local Stream Corridor Protection Ordinance:
(a) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession.
(b) Encroachment within the designated special water resource
protection area under paragraph (a) above shall only be
allowed where previous development or disturbance has
occurred (for example, pre-existing active agricultural use,
parking area or maintained lawn area). The encroachment
shall only be allowed where the applicant demonstrates that
the functional value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than one hundred
fifty (150) feet as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of
the waterway or centerline of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this paragraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
2. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the
special water resource protection area and shall comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control In New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
3. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
§ 21-4.3 GENERAL § 21-4.3
1:375
§ 21-4.4. Maintenance Plan. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 4]
The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development
in accordance with Section 21-10.
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the
stabilization measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water resource
protection area, provided that:
(a) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of the Category One waterway;
(b) Stormwater discharges allowed by this subsection shall
achieve a ninety-five (95%) percent TSS post-construction
removal rate;
(c) Thermal pollution by stormwater discharges shall be
addressed to ensure no impact on the receiving waterway;
(d) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of
the special water resource protection area will be maintained
to the maximum extent practicable;
(e) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation District
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
(f) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
reviewed and approved by the Department.
4. A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
subsection 21-4.3i shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in subsection 21-4.3i1(a) above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special
Water Resource Protection Area to less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to
this subsection.
5. Subsection 21-4.3i does not apply to the construction of one (1)
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development and is on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that
the construction begins on or before February 2, 2009. [Ord. No.
2006-1 § 4]
§ 21-4.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-4.5
1:376
§ 21-4.5. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 4]
The following linear development projects are exempt from the ground
water recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsections 21-4.2 and 21-4.3.
§ 21-4.6. Waivers from Strict Compliance. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 4]
a. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
b. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable;
and
c. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or
trail with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet, provided that the
access is constructed of permeable material such as wood chips,
unpacked gravel, and porous pavement (See Section 21-7 for guidance).
a. A waiver from strict compliance with the ground water recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsections 21-4.2 and 21-4.3 may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis
acceptable to the review agency, that through the use of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies
and measures, the option selected complies with the requirements
of subsections 21-4.2 and 21-4.3 to the maximum extent
practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of subsections 21-4.2 and 21-4.3, existing structures currently in
use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned;
and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under subsection 21-4.6a3 above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of subsections 21-4.2 and 21-4.3 that were not
achievable on-site.
b. A waiver from strict compliance with the requirements of subsections
21-4.2 and 21-4.3 may be issued in those cases where an applicant has
§ 21-4.5 GENERAL § 21-4.6
1:377
§ 21-4.7. Threatened and Endangered Species. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 4]
When habitat for threatened and endangered species (see definition for
Environmental Critical Areas in Section 21-2) is present on a site,
stormwater management measures implemented shall avoid adverse
impacts caused by pollutant discharge, the creation of concentrated flow, or
the alteration of recharge.
§ 21-5. CALCULATION OF STORMWATER RUNOFF AND GROUND
WATER RECHARGE.
§ 21-5.1. Stormwater Runoff Calculation. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 5]
demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance, other
than projects addressed under subsection 21-4.6a with the stormwater
management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an adopted
regional stormwater management plan, or in a local ordinance which
is as strict as N.J.A.C. 7:8. Waivers from strict compliance cannot be
granted until such time that the Municipal Stormwater Management
Plan (MSWMP) is amended to incorporate a specific mitigation strategy.
Applicants requesting waivers from strict compliance must propose a
suitable mitigation method through submission of a mitigation plan.
a. In complying with the design and performance standards in Section
21-4, the design engineer shall calculate stormwater runoff using one
(1) of the following methods:
1. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation, NRCS
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, and appropriate NRCS 24-hour
design storm, as described in the current NRCS National
Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology, and the current
Technical Release 55 - Urban. Hydrology for Small Watersheds or
superseding document; or
2. The Rational Method for peak stormwater runoff rate calculations
and the Modified Rational Method for stormwater runoff
hydrograph calculations. Use of the Rational Method and Modified
Rational Method are limited to drainage areas of twenty (20) acres
or less. Neither the Rational Method nor Modified Rational Method
shall be used to calculate runoff volumes for ground water
recharge or stormwater runoff infiltration purposes.
b. When selecting or calculating runoff coefficients for preconstruction
project site conditions using any of the above methods, the project site's
land cover shall be assumed to be woods. However, another land cover
may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if: 1) such land cover has
existed at the site or portion thereof without interruption for at least
five (5) years immediately prior to the time of application; and 2) the
design engineer can document the character and extent of such land
cover through the use of photographs, affidavits, and/or other
§ 21-4.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-5.1
1:378
§ 21-5.2. Ground Water Recharge Calculations. [Ord. No. 2006-1
§ 5]
acceptable land use records. If more than one (1) land cover other than
woods has existed on the site during the five (5) years immediately
prior to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential (including woods) shall be used for the computations. All
preconstruction land covers shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic
condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have applied
appropriate conservation practices.
c. In calculating preconstruction site stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall include the effects of all land features and structures,
such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows and culverts, that
reduce preconstruction site stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes.
d. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall use appropriate 24-hour rainfall depths as
developed for the project site by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.
e. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the runoff
volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious surfaces
within a drainage area.
f. Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the Two-Step methodology
as described in the Department's current Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology described in
the current Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds.
a. In complying with the design and performance standards in subsection
21-4.2a2(a)(1), the design engineer may calculate ground water
recharge in accordance with the New Jersey Ground Water Recharge
Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer program as described in the
Department's current Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
b. In complying with the design and performance standards in subsection
21-4.2a,2(a)(2), the design engineer shall calculate stormwater runoff
infiltration volumes in accordance with the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff
Equation, as described in the current NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and the current Technical Release 55 -
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds. In addition, the design
engineer shall use appropriate 2-year, 24-hour rainfall depths as
developed for the project site by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.
§ 21-5.1 GENERAL § 21-5.2
1:379
§ 21-6. STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURAL STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT MEASURES.
§ 21-6.1. Structural Management Measures. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 6]
Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows:
c. When selecting or calculating runoff coefficients for preconstruction
project site conditions for ground water recharge or stormwater runoff
infiltration calculations, the project site's land cover shall be assumed
to be woods. However, another land cover may be used to calculate
runoff coefficients if: 1) such land cover has existed at the site or
portion thereof without interruption for at least five (5) years
immediately prior to the time of application; and 2) the design engineer
can document the character and extent of such land cover through the
use of photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use
records. If more than one (1) land cover other than woods has existed
on the site during the five (5) years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential (including
woods) shall be used for the computations. All preconstruction land
covers shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic condition and, if
cultivated, shall be assumed to have conservation treatment.
a. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
factor into the design the existing site conditions including for example,
environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes;
depth to seasonal high water table; soil type, permeability and texture;
drainage area and drainage patterns; existing or former mines;
significant land filling; and the presence of solution-prone carbonate
rocks (limestone) and related karst topography.
b. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure
proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the
outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one (1)
inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water quality
design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality design
storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no
greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the diameter of the orifice or
one-third (1/3) the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between
bars of one (1) and a maximum spacing between bars of six (6) inches.
In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of subsection 21-8.2.
c. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and
7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement. The measures are to be
sequenced in the site development process so that erosion control
§ 21-5.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-6.1
1:380
§ 21-6.2. Guidelines for Management Measures. [Ord. No. 2006-1
§ 6]
Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual and other
documents as described in Section 21-7. Other stormwater management
measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the review agency that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, ground water recharge
and water quality design and performance standards established by Section
21-4 of this chapter.
§ 21-6.3. Manufactured Treatment Devices. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 6]
§ 21-7. SOURCES FOR TECHNICAL GUIDANCE.
§ 21-7.1. Primary Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 7]
Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found
in the documents listed at paragraphs a and b below, which are available
from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625;
telephone (609) 777-1038.
standards are met and so the measure is not compromised or impaired
by construction runoff.
d. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the
orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in
diameter.
e. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Section 21-8.
f. Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a stormwater
management measure, the design engineer shall include such effects in
the measure's design.
a. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Section 21-4 of this chapter provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
b. Manufactured treatment devices may be used only where the
maintenance plan required by Section 21-10 ensures that the
manufactured device will be properly maintained for its functional
lifespan and will be replaced as needed with management measures
that are at least as effective as the original manufactured treatment
device working in accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
§ 21-6.1 GENERAL § 21-7.1
1:381
§ 21-7.2. Additional Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 7]
Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
obtained from the following:
§ 21-8. SAFETY STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
BASINS.
§ 21-8.1. General Scope. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 8]
This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the
proper design and operation of stormwater management basins. This
section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
a. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as
amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds. This document is also available
at www.njstormwater.org.
b. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater
Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, (NJDEP Ocean County
Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance
Manual, dated June 1989) as amended.
a. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey"
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box
330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; (609) 292-5540, or the Hunterdon
County Soil Conservation District, 687 Pittstown Road, Suite 1,
Frenchtown, New Jersey, 08825, (908) 788-1397.
b. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306.
c. The Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District, 687 Pittstown Road,
Suite 1, Frenchtown, NJ, 08825, (908) 788-1397.
d. The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including the
National Management Measures to Control Nonpoint Source Pollution
from Urban Areas, available at the Web site: http://www.epa.gov/owow/
nps/urbanmm/index.html.
e. Field guides of the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, where supplemental to and not
conflicting with a source of Primary Guidance in subsection 21-7.1.
f. Other similarly authoritative governmental or trade association sources
acceptable to the reviewing agency.
§ 21-7.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-8.2
1:382
§ 21-8.2. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and
Escape Provisions. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 8]
a. A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash and
debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in the outlet
structure of a structural stormwater management measure. Trash racks
shall be installed upstream of such outlet structure openings to ensure
proper functioning of the structural stormwater management measure
in accordance with the following:
1. The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six (6)
inch spacing between the bars.
2. The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic performance
of either the outlet structure opening it is protecting or the overall
outlet structure.
3. The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to a
maximum of two and one-half (2.5) feet per second.
4. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
lbs./ft. sq.
b. An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in the top
of a stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an outlet
structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following
requirements:
1. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
2. The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two (2) inches
across the smallest dimension.
3. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
lbs./ft. sq.
c. Structural stormwater management measures shall include escape
provisions as follows:
1. If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. Escape provisions means the permanent installation of
ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet structure.
2. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a permanent
§ 21-8.2 GENERAL § 21-8.2
1:383
§ 21-8.3. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards. [Ord. No.
2006-1 § 8]
A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, County or Department) that the
variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
§ 21-8.4. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater
Management Basin. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 8]
§ 21-9. REQUIREMENTS FOR A SITE DEVELOPMENT
STORMWATER PLAN.
pool of water deeper than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two (2) steps. Each step shall be
four (4) to six (6) feet in width. One (1) step shall be located
approximately two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the permanent
water surface, and the second step shall be located one (1) to
one and one-half (1 1/2) feet above the permanent water surface.
See subsection 21-8.4 for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
3. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum slope of the
interior and exterior of an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:8-6(c)3.
4. An emergency drawdown method for detention basins is required
where the permanent pool will be more than two and one-half (2 1/
2) feet deep. This drawdown method must consider downstream or
offsite stability at the outfall in accordance with the Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey.
§ 21-8.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-9.1
1:384
§ 21-9.1. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan. [Ord.
No. 2006-1 § 9]
§ 21-9.2. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. [Ord. No.
2006-1 § 9]
The applicant's site development project shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or official
from which municipal approval is sought (the review agency). That review
agency shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning
Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have
been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this chapter.
§ 21-9.3. Submission Requirements.26 [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 9]
The information in subsection 21-9.3a through g below shall be provided
unless a waiver is approved through subsection 21-9.3h below:
a. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the submission
requirements for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at subsection
21-9.3 below as part of the submission of the applicant's application for
subdivision or site plan approval.
b. The applicant shall demonstrate through the submission requirements
that the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
c. The applicant shall submit to the approving municipal authority the
required number of copies of the materials listed in the submission
requirements for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with subsection 21-9.3 of this chapter.
a. Existing Site Conditions Base Map, Including Topography, Streams,
Roads and Current Built Environment. The reviewing engineer may
require upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of two hundred (200) feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development, at a scale appropriate to show
site details, showing 2-foot contour intervals. The following additional
elements should be considered and presented as appropriate and in
combinations sufficient to adequately indicate the existing site
conditions and that of the surrounding environs.
1. Hydrology.
(a) Perennial or intermittent streams as shown on the USGS 7.5
Minute Quadrangle Maps and as indicated in the Soil Survey of
Hunterdon County, New Jersey.
26.Editor's Note: See also Site Development Stormwater Plan, Existing Site Conditions
Checklist as an attachment at the end of this chapter.
§ 21-9.1 GENERAL § 21-9.3
1:385
(b) Special water resource protection areas along all waters
designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps
or in the County Soil Surveys.
(c) Wetlands, transition areas, NJDEP linear nontidal wetlands,
marshlands and NJDEP Letter of Interpretation findings.
(d) FEMA Q3 Flood Data 100 Year-Floodplains and Floodways.
(e) Geometry of on-site drainage areas.
2. Boundaries and Buffers.
(a) Appropriate buffers to streams, rivers, wetlands, marshlands,
ponds, lakes and other water bodies as specified in pertinent
"ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes or other provisions of
law imposed by local, County, State or Federal agencies."
(b) Existing and proposed bearing and distances of property lines.
(c) Existing and proposed conservation, maintenance,
construction, reconstruction, sight, utility, drainage and rightof-
way easements and dedications.
3. Vegetation and Landscaping.
(a) Pervious and vegetated surfaces, i.e. woodlands, grasslands
and other significant natural features not listed if being utilized
for LID credit.
(b) Native and invasive stands of vegetation.
(c) Vegetated habitat for Threatened and Endangered Species.
4. Geology and Soils (as indicated in the Soil Survey of Hunterdon
County, New Jersey).
(a) Steep slopes, 10% or > slopes.
(b) Soil types.
(c) Highly erodible soils, with an erodibility factor (K) of .40 or <.
(d) Drainage Class and recharge potential.
(e) Colloidal soils.
(f) Depth to bedrock.
(g) Seasonal high water table.
(h) Soils subject to dynamic compaction and compacted soils.
(i) Soil pH.
§ 21-9.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-9.3
1:386
(j) Shrink swell potential.
(k) Deeply fractured bedrock.
(l) Limestone and karst topography.
(m) Hardpans and plough pans.
5. Existing Man Made Structures and Activities.
(a) Existing buildings and significant permanent manmade
features.
(b) Roads by classification, parking areas and other impervious
surfaces.
(c) Bridges and culverts.
(d) Utilities, sub-surface and above ground.
(e) Mining/quarry operations and blasting areas.
(f) Acid or other hazardous runoff.
(g) Areas of fill and buried debris.
(h) Wellheads and associated ground water withdrawals pipes,
discharges and BMP's of existing stormwater utilities.
(i) Ground water mounding.
(j) Septic systems and wells of adjacent lots.
(k) Sanitary lines.
(l) Previous land use (agricultural, industrial, commercial).
b. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of the
natural and manmade features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention
should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally critical areas
and to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints for
development
c. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at a scale
appropriate for the site indicating the location of existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for
stormwater management and sediment control, and other permanent
structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where alterations
occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns and other
landscaping, and seasonal high ground water elevations. A written
description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in
natural conditions may also be provided.
§ 21-9.3 GENERAL § 21-9.3
1:387
d. Stormwater Site Planning and Design Summary. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections 21-3
through 21-6 are being met, including both nonstructural and
structural approaches. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how
the site is being managed or developed to meet the objective of
controlling ground water recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater
quantity problems at the source by land management and source
controls whenever possible. Refer to the Municipal Stormwater
Management Plan and/or the Municipal Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan for additional requirements. It should explain in full the
information required by subsection 21-9.3.
e. Stormwater Management Facilities Map(s). The following information,
illustrated on a map at a scale appropriate for the site, shall be
included:
1. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours,
land area to be occupied by the stormwater management facilities
and the type of vegetation thereon, land area to remain in natural
vegetation, and details of the proposed plan to infiltrate, manage,
control and dispose of stormwater.
2. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and
after construction, including discharge provisions, discharge
capacity for each outlet at different levels of detention, and
emergency spillway provisions with maximum discharge capacity
of each spillway.
f. Calculations.
1. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design and discharge
stability calculations for the predevelopment and post-development
conditions for the design storms specified in Section 21-4 of this
chapter.
2. When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties of
soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall
be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined
based on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure.
The municipality shall be notified of site investigation activities and
given the opportunity to have a witness, either prior to approval or
as a condition of approval, as appropriate for the specific type of
measure. Subsequent to approval of the major development, postconstruction
bulk soil density and infiltration testing shall be
required for all infiltration measures that were used as justification
for meeting the recharge standard, to ensure that they were
properly constructed.
§ 21-9.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-9.3
1:388
§ 21-10. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
§ 21-10.1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 10]
Projects subject to review pursuant to subsection 21-1.3 of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of subsections 21-10.2 and 21-10.3.
§ 21-10.2. General Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 10]
3. The standards in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4 through 7.9A-6.7 for on-site
infiltration testing shall be adhered to.
g. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Section 21-10.
h. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The review agency may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any of
the requirements in subsections 21-9.3a through f of this chapter when
it can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a significant economic hardship on the
applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
a. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development. This plan shall be separate from all other
documents, in a format suitable for recording in the County Clerk's
office and designed for ongoing use by the site owners or operators in
performing and documenting maintenance and repair, and by the
municipality in ensuring implementation of the maintenance plan. The
final maintenance plan shall be updated and provided to the
municipality post-construction to include an evaluation based on the
specifications of the initial maintenance plan and as-built conditions.
b. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventive maintenance
tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of
sediment, debris, or trash removal and disposal; safety needs;
identification of methods and disposal sites for materials removed
during maintenance; maintenance requirements for created wetlands
and other ecological systems; safety devices and systems; warranty and
operational standards from the manufacturers of any manufactured
treatment devices (see subsection 21-6.3); and the name, address, and
telephone number of the person or persons responsible for preventive
and corrective maintenance (including replacement). Maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures are available from
sources listed in Section 21-7, the Municipal Stormwater Management
Plan, Municipal Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan and any relevant
regional stormwater management plan. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
§ 21-9.3 GENERAL § 21-10.2
1:389
continuing maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the developer's
obligation to dedicate a stormwater management facility to such person
under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
c. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to
the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the
entire residential development or project.
d. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
21-10.2b above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any
future revisions based on subsection 21-10.2g below shall be recorded
upon the deed of record for each property on which the maintenance
described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
e. Preventive and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain
the function of the stormwater management measures, including
repairs or replacement to the structures; removal of sediment, debris,
or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence
repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or
replacement of nonvegetated linings.
f. The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
21-10.2b above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventive and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development, including a
record of all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work
orders.
g. The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
21-10.2b above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan
at least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
h. The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
21-10.2b above shall retain, submit annually to the municipality and
make available, upon request by any public entity with administrative,
health, environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by subsections
21-10.2f and g above.
i. The requirements of subsection 21-10.2c and d do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted
by the municipality or another governmental agency of competent
jurisdiction.
j. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health or is in need of maintenance or
repair, the municipality shall so notify the responsible person in writing.
Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have fourteen
(14) days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner
that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or his designee. The
§ 21-10.2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 21-10.2
1:390
§ 21-10.3. Maintenance Guarantee. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 10]
Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the major
development is located from requiring the posting of a performance or
maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 21-10.4. Right of Access. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 10]
The maintenance plan shall specifically provide a specific municipal right of
access for inspection of measures, and for maintenance if required under
subsection 21-10.2j.
§ 21-11. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 11]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties established by chapter.
§ 21-12. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 12]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
review agency, or sixty (60) days from the receipt of the chapter by the
Hunterdon County Planning Board if the Hunterdon County Planning Board,
as County review agency, should fail to act.
§ 21-13. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 2006-1 § 13]
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this chapter.
Chapter 22
CABLE TELEVISION AND CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
§ 22-1. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 1]
A public hearing regarding the company's consent application was held on
September 29, 2003, after proper public notice, according to the terms and
conditions of the Cable Television Act. The hearing was fully open to the
public and the Borough received at the hearing all comments regarding
the qualifications of the Company to receive municipal consent and the
municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails
or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or
County may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof
to the responsible person.
§ 21-10.2 GENERAL § 22-1
1:391
community's present and future cable related needs and interests. Pursuant
to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the Company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications to
support this renewed grant of municipal consent, and the Company's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 22-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 2]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions given by the Federal
Communication Commission, FCC rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R. Section
76.1 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. Section
521 et seq., as amended, and the New Jersey Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with Federal or State definitions:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean Chapter 186 of the General
Laws of New Jersey and subsequent amendments thereto, Section 48:5A-1
et seq.
BOARD — Shall mean the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
BOROUGH OR FLEMINGTON — Shall mean the Borough of Flemington,
County of Hunterdon, State of New Jersey.
FEDERAL ACT — Shall mean the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996,
47 U.S.C. 521 et seq.
OCTV — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities' Office of Cable Television.
PATRIOT MEDIA OR THE COMPANY, THE GRANTEE OF RIGHTS UNDER
THIS CHAPTER — Shall mean Patriot Media & Communications CNJ, LLC,
and its permitted successors or assigns.
§ 22-3. CONSENT TO RENEWAL. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 3]
The Borough hereby grants a nonexclusive consent of renewal, franchise,
right and privilege for Patriot to construct, own, extend, erect, operate,
modify and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid
out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the
Borough, such poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and
other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Borough of a cable television system and cable communications
system for the purpose of distributing television and radio signals and other
impulses in order to furnish television and radio programs and data to the
public and for other lawful purposes. The rights of grant include the right
to use and occupy said highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and
public places and all manner of easement for the purposes herein set forth
and as provided by the Federal and State Acts.
§ 22-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 22-4
1:392
§ 22-4. FRANCHISE TERM. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 4]
The consent herein granted shall be nonexclusive and shall expire fifteen
(15) years from the date of issuance of a Renewal Certificate of Approval by
the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities. The Borough's consent is subject
to, and expressly contingent upon, the Company commitments, which shall
be expressed by acceptance of this ordinance as required under the Cable
Television Act.
§ 22-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 5]
The Company shall, during each year of operation under the consent
granted herein, pay to the Borough a franchise fee equal to the greater
of two (2%) percent of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in
the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the Borough or the maximum amount permitted under
applicable law. The Borough acknowledges that two (2%) percent is the
maximum currently permitted under the Cable Television Act.
§ 22-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No.. 2004-6 § 6]
The consent granted under this ordinance to the Company shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 22-7. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 7]
The primary service area shall consist of all public residential streets within
the Borough existing as of the date of this ordinance as set forth in a
map supplied by Patriot to the Borough with its application. Patriot's line
extension policy shall apply to new residential public streets and to
unserved commercial areas along public streets and rights-of-way.
§ 22-8. PROVISION OF SERVICES. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 8]
Patriot shall be required to provide service to any person's residence or
business located in the Borough in accordance with Patriot's stated
installation charges and line extension policy as set forth in its application
and tariff or as the same may hereafter be amended. As new streets and
roads are constructed within the Borough, Patriot will extend its system
onto such roads in a timely fashion in accordance with its line extension
policy. For purposes of the line extension policy, the minimum homes per
mile density shall be twenty-five (25).
§ 22-9. SIGNAL QUALITY. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 9]
a. In the event that the applicable law hereafter permits a larger franchise
fee to be collected, the Borough reserves the right to charge the
maximum allowance by law.
a. Patriot Media agrees to maintain, at a minimum, the same mix, quality
and level of video/audio programming as is now provided to applicable
§ 22-4 GENERAL § 22-9
1:393
§ 22-10. MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 10]
The Company shall maintain its system in good and reasonable operating
condition at all times during the term of the franchise.
§ 22-11. SYSTEM REBUILD. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 11]
Flemington Borough subscribers and which appears in the Company's
application for renewal. The Company shall provide all applicable
Borough subscribers with the broad categories of programming which
appear in the Company's application for renewal, including but not
limited to community programming; sports programming (national,
regional and local professional, collegiate and interscholastic); news
and public affairs, including weather; minority programming; local
broadcast television stations; children's and educational programming;
and a broad selection of general entertainment programming, including
cultural films and entertainment, music, religious programming and
other special interest programming. Patriot Media will comply with
Federal and State law before deleting entirely any broad category of
video programming or making any change in the broad categories of
programming or making any change in the mix, level and/or quality of
programming services required by the franchise.
b. There shall be no material degradation in signal quality of
programming delivered to subscribers from that which is received by
the Company.
a. The Company shall rebuild the cable system as specified in the
application and in this ordinance. The distribution system shall be
rebuilt with both fiber optic and coaxial cable and is anticipated to
employ what is customarily known as "fiber to the service area"
architecture. The fiber to the service area architecture consists of fiber
optic cable from the system head-end to a node in the service area.
Upon completion of the rebuild, the planned capacity shall be no less
than 750 MHz of bandwidth.
b. The rebuilt system shall be capable of providing two-way interactive
services to residential and commercial subscribers. Such services,
when commercially viable, may include video on demand and highspeed
data transfer. Upon completion of the upgrade, the system may
include all necessary distribution electronic equipment required to
make two-way operations available to the home. At the time that
interactive services are offered by Patriot, converter will be made
available to subscribers to enable them to use such two-way technology
in accordance with Patriot's tariff on file with the Borough.
c. The Company agrees to design the cable television system in the
Borough so that it will meet the design specifications contained in the
application in all material respects.
§ 22-9 FLEMINGTON CODE § 22-12
1:394
§ 22-12. CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 12]
The Company shall complete and fully activate the system rebuild as
described in the application and in this ordinance no later than July 31,
2004.
§ 22-13. COMMITMENTS BY PATRIOT MEDIA. [Ord. No. 2004-6
§ 13]
The Borough's consent to the renewal of the franchise is subject to, and
expressly contingent upon, Patriot Media, Inc.'s written undertaking (which
may be expressed by means of an amendment to the application, or by the
Company's written statement that accepts the provisions of this ordinance)
as to the following, as well as other provisions of this ordinance:
§ 22-14. INTERACTIVE SERVICES. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 14]
To the extent Patriot offers advanced information or interactive services,
such services shall be available to all Borough customers to the extent that
such services are technically feasible and commercially viable.
§ 22-15. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 15]
a. The Company shall cause any and all construction plans relating to
work on any extensions of plant work which could have a significant
impact on public works within the Borough to be filed with the
Borough's Engineer. Nothing herein shall create any rights or
obligations with respect to construction work which are inconsistent
with any regulations or regulatory authority of the OCTV.
a. The Company shall comply with all Federal and State regulations
pertaining to customer service, including, but not limited to, those
pertaining to office hours and telephone availability, installations,
outages, service interruptions, service calls, billing, billing disputes,
service related complaints, notices of changes in rates, programming,
repairs, disconnections and channel positions.
b. As a supplement to and clarification of, and not as a limitation of
paragraph a above, Patriot agrees to the following:
1. During the term of this renewal, Patriot shall maintain a local
business office for the purpose of receiving, investigating and
resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment
malfunctions and similar matters. This office will allow subscribers
to drop off or pick up converter equipment and pay or question
their bills. The office shall be open during normal business hours,
and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday. The local business office shall maintain a local or toll-free
telephone number and will be equipped to receive all complaints
regarding quality of service, billing, equipment malfunctions,
installations and similar matters. Patriot shall maintain adequate
§ 22-12 GENERAL § 22-15
1:395
§ 22-16. SERVICE TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS. [Ord. No. 2004-6
§ 16]
staff and telephone equipment to keep telephone call response time
(time customer is on hold) in conformance with Board regulations.
2. The Flemington Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the
Municipal Complaint officer for the Borough pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:5A-26.b. All complaints shall be received and processed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
3. Patriot shall utilize commercially reasonable efforts to repair
service outages within twenty-four (24) hours of their being
reported and, if such repair is not made, Patriot shall credit
subscribers for service outages in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.5.
4. Patriot shall provide notice to subscribers and Borough officials of
changes in rates as required by Federal law and the Cable
Television Act.
5. Patriot shall give due consideration to programming preferences
expressed by customers.
6. Patriot shall provide periodic notice to its subscribers in the
Borough, informing subscribers and potential subscribers of the
procedures and telephone numbers for deletion of services,
addressing billing problems, reporting comments or complaints,
and advising subscribers of their legal rights with respect to
service outages.
7. Patriot shall maintain a record of service-related complaints
concerning its plant and operation as required by N.J.A.C.
14:18-6.2, or as said rules may be amended.
8. Patriot will perform repair services, installations, disconnections
and relocations on weekdays, and, when appropriate, on evenings
and weekends. The Company will use reasonable efforts to provide
customers with "appointment window alternatives" for all service
calls, including repair, installation, disconnection and relocation
activities, which appointment windows will be, at maximum, four
(4) hour time blocks. If Patriot fails to keep a scheduled
appointment, the Company will offer the customer priority in
rescheduling the appointment.
9. The Company shall be available to respond appropriately to
outages and service interruptions twenty-four (24) hours a day.
a. Patriot Media shall continue to provide one (1) standard cable television
installation and expanded basic cable service and internet each in the
public library and in all public and private schools, as hereinafter
defined, in the Borough for educational purposes as required under the
§ 22-15 FLEMINGTON CODE § 22-16
1:396
§ 22-17. DROP-LINE POLICY. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 17]
§ 22-18. RATES. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 18]
The Borough acknowledges that New Jersey municipalities do not currently
have authority to regulate the rates the Company charges subscribers for its
service. In the event that Federal Law, the Cable Television Act, and/or other
applicable law is amended to permit the municipality to exercise regulatory
power over rates, the Borough reserves the right to exercise such power to
the extent permitted by such law(s).
franchise agreement. "Public" and "private schools" shall be defined as
all schools within the Borough except for:
1. All day-care schools/centers.
2. All preschools, except Head Start programs.
3. All private school kindergartens.
b. Patriot Media shall also provide, where applicable, one (1) standard
free installation each and the applicable service to the following
Borough locations:
1. Flemington Borough Municipal Building.
2. Flemington Borough Rescue Squad Building.
3. Flemington Borough Fire Department.
4. Flemington Borough Police Department.
5. Any other Borough-owned facility/building as requested by the
Mayor and Borough Council or their designee.
c. Upon request of any public school and/or library in the municipality, the
Company agrees to install additional outlets and provide addressable
converter boxes on a materials plus labor basis. Monthly service
charges shall be charged at the regular tariff rates on file with the BPU
for additional outlets.
a. Patriot's nonstandard installation policy shall be set forth in Patriot's
tariff and in accordance with the requirements of the OCTV.
b. Patriot shall set out the cost per linear foot to the consumer depending
upon whether the subscriber drop line will be installed below ground or
above ground. The Company's estimate will also set forth each and
every type of equipment that is necessary for the drop-line and what the
cost is for the same, as well as the cost of labor.
c. Nothing herein shall prevent Patriot from offering incentives or other
promotional programs that would waive all or any portion of a
subscriber's non-standard installation costs.
§ 22-16 GENERAL § 22-19
1:397
§ 22-19. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS, RELOCATION OF
POLES, TREE TRIMMING AND RESTORATION. [Ord. No. 2004-6
§ 19]
§ 22-20. PROGRAMMING. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 20]
a. In the event Patriot or its agents shall disturb any pavement, street,
surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces in the natural
topography, Patriot shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such
places or things so disturbed in as good condition as existed prior to
commencement of said work.
b. In the event that, at any time during the term of this ordinance, the
Borough shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street,
alley or other public way, Patriot, upon reasonable notice by the
Borough, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at Patriot's own
expense.
c. The Company shall, upon request of the Borough, temporarily raise,
lower or remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances. Where the Borough had made
such a request, the cost shall be borne by the Company. Where such
request is made by private parties, the cost shall be borne by those
same private parties.
d. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise, the
Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places of the Borough so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cable of the Company. Such trimming shall be performed only
after approval by the appropriate Borough official(s) and only to the
extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for the Company's wires
and cables.
a. Although nothing herein shall require the Company to carry or transmit
any particular programming source, the Company shall provide
subscribers in the Borough with the same mix, and, at a minimum, the
same level of video programming as is now provided to the Company's
subscribers in the Borough, including the same broad categories of
programming, in approximately the same quality as is now provided.
b. The Company will advise the Borough and its subscribers within the
Borough of any changes in programming as required by the regulations
of the Board.
c. The Company will impose no charge to Flemington Borough public
access users for use of the Company's studio, equipment or personnel
for production of noncommercial public access programming except in
the event of damage to the Company's equipment. The Company will
§ 22-19 FLEMINGTON CODE § 22-20
1:398
§ 22-21. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 21]
Patriot shall be required to have the capability to override the audio portion
of the system at the head-end in order to permit the cablecasting of
emergency messages by municipal officials, the Police Department or the
designee or the Governing Body, as required by the Federal
Communications Commission and consistent with the Emergency Alert
System established by the State of New Jersey.
§ 22-22. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 22]
§ 22-23. LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION. [Ord.
No. 2004-6 § 23]
Patriot shall at all times maintain (I) comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of one million ($1,000,000.00)
dollars covering liability for any death, personal injury, property damage
or other liability arising out of the construction and operation of the cable
television system; and (II) an excess liability (umbrella) policy in the amount
of three million ($3,000,000.00) dollars. The Borough shall be named an
additional insured under the policy.
§ 22-24. INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 24]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application and
any amendment thereto, except as modified herein, are binding upon the
Company as terms and conditions of this consent. The application and
other relevant writings submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto
and made a part hereof by reference provided same do not conflict with
applicable State or Federal law.
§ 22-25. COMPLIANCE WITH LAW. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 25]
Notwithstanding any specific mention of applicable Federal or State
statutes or regulations, the Company shall comply with all of the
requirements of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Federal
regulations, the Cable Television Act and/or any regulations promulgated
thereunder, and any other valid statute, regulation, rule or promulgation.
impose no charge for airing or replaying public access programming on
the public access channel(s).
a. As required by the Cable Television Act, the Company shall provide a
surety bond to the Borough, which shall be in the amount of twenty-five
thousand ($25,000.00) dollars. Such bond shall be to insure Patriot's
faithful performance under this ordinance.
b. The bond required by this ordinance shall require thirty (30) days
written notice to the Borough prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal or
alteration of the bond.
§ 22-20 GENERAL § 22-26
1:399
§ 22-26. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 26]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid, pre-empted or unconstitutional by
any court or Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 22-27. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 27]
The Flemington Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough of Flemington pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All
complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ 22-28. FAILURE TO COMPLY. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 28]
§ 22-29. INDEMNIFICATION. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 29]
Pursuant to law, Patriot Media agrees to indemnify, defend and save the
Borough, its officials, officers, employees, assigns and/or designees from
any claims as to cable television services provided by Patriot Media, in
Flemington and to hold the Borough, its officials, officers, employees,
a. In the event that the Borough has reason to believe that Patriot Media
has failed to comply with a material term of this ordinance, i.e., an
alleged breach, the Borough shall provide written notice to the
Company of the provision(s) in question and the nature of the alleged
breach and shall provide the Company with an opportunity to cure such
breach within a reasonable time after the Company's receipt of such
written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested.
b. After receipt of such notice from the Borough, Patriot Media may
request, and the Borough may agree, to meet with the appropriate
municipal body, as designated by the Mayor, in order to attempt to
resolve the alleged breach on an amicable basis.
c. If, after receipt of such written notice from the Borough (and after
completion of any meeting contemplated by the provisions above,
where applicable) Patriot Media desires the opportunity to appear and
be heard before the Mayor and Borough Council, it shall so advise the
Borough Clerk in writing and the Borough shall thereupon schedule an
opportunity for the Company to be heard at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Mayor and Borough Council as practicable.
d. If the Borough is either not satisfied with the remedy of Patriot Media,
Inc., to the breach or Patriot Media fails to correct said breach within
one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the notice of breach, the
franchise granted hereunder may be terminated pursuant to BPU rules
and regulations and applicable Federal/State law.
§ 22-26 FLEMINGTON CODE § 22-29
1:400
assigns and/or designees harmless from any liability arising out of the
operation and/or construction of this cable television system.
§ 22-30. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2004-6 § 30]
This ordinance shall take effect as of the date of final passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 23
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 23-1. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate conditions which lead to an
unnecessary drain on the manpower, time, space, facilities and finances
of the Borough of Flemington and its police and fire departments and the
deterioration of the quality of services to persons subscribing to alarm
services.
§ 23-2. SCOPE.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person, other than the
Borough of Flemington, who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device
designed to summon the police or fire departments to any location in
response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall also
apply to alarm companies providing services to other companies within or
without the borough if the purpose of the furnishing of such services is to
summon the police or fire departments to any location in response to any
type of alarm signal.
§ 23-3. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Shall mean any type of alarm-actuating equipment
which provides warning of fire, burglary, intrusion, flood or like peril.
ALARM PANEL — Shall mean that component installed in the console
in police or fire station headquarters containing alarm indications and
designation.
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean the installation in one or more buildings
of one or more alarm devices for the express purpose of giving visual or
audible warning, or both, of an emergency such as fire, burglary, intrusion,
flood or like perils.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean the activation of an alarm system by causes
other than those to which the alarm system was designed or intended
to respond. False alarms will not include activations caused by power or
§ 22-29 GENERAL § 23-3
1:401
phone line interruptions, where such interruptions have been reported to
the police.
§ 23-4. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ALARMS.
§ 23-4.1. Responsibilities of owners and users.
a. All components of alarm systems, alarm devices, dial alarms and local
alarms shall be maintained by the owners or users thereof in good
repair. When evidence exists that there has been a failure by such
owners or users to properly maintain the alarm devices, the police chief
is authorized to demand that such devices be disconnected until such
time as appropriate repairs and/or modifications are made.
b. When evidence exists that an alarm company, and not the user, is
responsible for the maintenance of an alarm system, alarm device, dial
alarm or local alarm and said alarm company has failed to properly
maintain such system, device or alarm after reasonable requests by the
user, such alarm company shall be subject to provisions of subsection
23-5.2, paragraph a, b and d.
c. When evidence exists that an independent contractor, sub-contractor or
employee of the user, and not the user, is responsible for false alarms by
reason of negligent disregard of warnings indicating an alarmed area,
such independent contractor, sub-contractor or employee shall be
subject to the provisions of subsection 23-5.2, paragraph a, b and d.
d. All local alarms shall be equipped with a time relay or battery to limit
the sounding of alarms to 30 minutes or less.
e. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a number, which shall be provided
by the chief of police.
f. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the police switchboard in the event that a false alarm
occurs.
g. The contents of any recorded message from a dial alarm must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the chief of police. No such
message shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a
single stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15
seconds and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately ten
seconds.
h. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noise,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
i. A dial alarm must provide an automatic line seizure feature in the event
that this line is busy with an incoming or outgoing call.
§ 23-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 23-5
1:402
§ 23-5. FALSE ALARMS; INVESTIGATION; PENALTY.
§ 23-5.1. Investigations.
In the case of false alarms which summon the police department to
investigate, the police chief shall cause an investigation to be made and
shall keep a record of such false alarms on file.
§ 23-5.2. Penalties for False Alarms.
In any six month period the following penalties shall apply:
§ 23-5.3. Penalties for Intentional False Alarms.
Any individual intentionally, willfully or maliciously destroying or injuring
any of the posts, alarm boxes or other alarm apparatus owned by the
Borough of Flemington or intentionally, willfully or maliciously interfering
with the operation of same or any part thereof or who hinders or impedes
any of the operations intended to be accomplished thereby shall, upon
conviction thereof, be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding
a. For the first false alarm, a warning shall be issued.
b. For the second and subsequent false alarm, a fine of not less than
$50.00 and not more than $100.00 shall be imposed.
c. In the event of a third or subsequent false alarm, an investigation shall
be conducted by the police department. Where the investigation of the
police department discloses continued abusive or negligent operation
or maintenance of an alarm device and a disregard for the taking of
remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the police chief may require
disconnection of the device for a limited or permanent period; provided,
however, that the owner or the user of the device shall be given
adequate notice of the intended disconnection and shall have an
opportunity within 14 days of said notice to show cause before the
police chief of the Borough of Flemington why such action should not be
taken. The determination of the police chief in such matters shall be
based upon the effect on the general public health, safety and welfare of
the continued use of the alarm device in question.
d. In the event that an alarm company, independent contractor,
subcontractor or employee of the user is responsible for the third or
subsequent false alarm, a fine not to exceed $100.00 may be imposed
for every such false alarm.
e. In the event that any person subject to the provisions of this chapter is
directed by the chief of police to disconnect an alarm system or correct
defects in an alarm system and fails to comply with such directive
within seven days of same, such person shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $100.00 for each false alarm received after the expiration of the
seven-day period and until such time as the system is disconnected or
the defects are corrected.
§ 23-5 GENERAL § 23-5.3
1:403
90 days or shall forfeit and pay a fine not exceeding $500.00, or both. In
default of any fine imposed hereunder, any person convicted of a violation
of this chapter may, in the discretion of the municipal judge, be imprisoned
in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 24
RECYCLING
§ 24-1. GENERAL.
§ 24-1.1. Rules and Regulations.
The rules and regulations of this chapter are mandatory for all entities
(including but not limited to: persons, families, businesses and commercial
establishments) living, working or conducting business in the Borough of
Flemington.
§ 24-1.2. Unauthorized Collection Prohibited.
Any recyclable placed at the curbside for pickup or deposited at a
residential complex depot shall be and become the property of the Borough
of Flemington or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person or company unauthorized by the Borough of Flemington to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable.
Each such collection or pick up in violation hereof is an offense subject to a
fine of up to $1000.00. Multiple collections or pickups are deemed multiple
separate and distinct offenses.
§ 24-1.3. Donations or Sale of Recyclable Material.
No recyclable may be donated or sold to any person, partnership or
corporation (whether operating for profit or not for profit) unless said
person, partnership or corporation has first received written authorization
from the recycling coordinator of the Borough of Flemington.
§ 24-1.4. Enforcement.
The property maintenance inspector and the police department of the
Borough of Flemington are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this
chapter.
§ 24-1.5. Establishment of Recycling Plan.
The recycling coordinator of the Borough of Flemington is hereby
authorized and directed to establish and promulgate rules and regulations
as to the recycling plan for the Borough of Flemington. The recycling plan
shall include sections 24-2 through 24-5 of this chapter. Such rules and
regulations shall be effective no earlier than 30 days nor later than 90 days
from the date of promulgation and publication of said rules and regulations.
§ 23-5.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 24-1.5
1:404
The mayor and common council of the Borough of Flemington may, by
majority vote, change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules and
regulations.
§ 24-1.6. Severability.
If any section, sentence or other part of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its effect to
the section, sentence or other part of this chapter directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 24-1.7. Inconsistencies.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 24-1.8. Effective Date.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication according
to law.
§ 24-1.9. Recycling Coordinator.
This chapter creates the position of recycling coordinator and APPENDIX A
attached to and made a part of this chapter contains the job description for
this position.
§ 24-2. DESIGNATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
The items set forth on Appendix B shall be recycled in the manner therein
set forth.
§ 24-3. RECYCLING IN RESIDENCES.
§ 24-3.1. Residence Defined.
Residences are defined as single dwellings designed for occupancy by from
one to four families, including dwellings in qualified private communities as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2.
§ 24-3.2. Recycling Requirements.
Each family within a residence is required to recycle all materials
designated by APPENDIX B as "residential."
§ 24-3.3. (Reserved)
§ 24-1.5 GENERAL § 24-3.4
1:405
§ 24-3.4. Hours of Collection.
Recycling shall be made from residents every other Friday during the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time. When a collection day falls on
New Year's Day, Independence Day or December 25, collections will be the
next day. In case of an emergency such as a hurricane, snowstorm or other
act of God, which prevents the collection on a collection day, collections will
be made on the following day:
§ 24-3.5. Collection Days.
Collection days will be the second and fourth Friday of each month. If
collection day falls on New Year's Day, Declaration Day or Christmas Day,
or, if collections cannot be made due to disaster or weather conditions,
recyclables should be held to the next regular collection day. EXCEPTION:
Refer to APPENDIX B regarding the collection day(s) for leaves.
§ 24-3.6. Recyclables Not Slated for Curbside Collection.
Recyclables not slated for curbside collection will be handled as directed by
APPENDIX B.
§ 24-3.7. Noncompliance.
Failure of a family within a residence to abide by the rules and regulations
of this chapter may be fined up to $100.00 for each calendar month of
noncompliance.
§ 24-3.8. Uniform Residential Collection Containers.
In order to facilitate the collection of recyclable material from residences,
reduce costs of collection and prevent inappropriate containers from
littering and creating hazards and nuisances in and about public streets,
uniform containers shall be used for collection from residences of certain
recyclable materials shown on APPENDIX B. The uniform containers,
hereafter referred to as "uniform residential collection containers" shall be
purchased by the occupants of each residence from the borough clerk on
and after September 1, 1989 between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on regular
business days. On and after October 1, 1989, no category of recyclable
material shown on APPENDIX B required to be contained in uniform
residential collection containers shall be placed at curbside for collection
unless contained therein. Failure to use uniform residential collection
containers as required by APPENDIX B shall be a violation making the
offender liable for the payment of the fine and penalty set forth in
subsection 24-3.7 titled "Noncompliance."
a. Residents shall not place recycling curbside any earlier than Thursday
evening after 5:00 p.m.
b. Residents shall remove recycling bins from the curb no later than noon
of the day after collection.
§ 24-3.4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 24-3.9
1:406
§ 24-3.9. Penalty.
For violation of any provision, section or subsection of this chapter the
following shall be enforced by the property maintenance inspector or police
for the following offense:
§ 24-4. RECYCLING IN RESIDENTIAL COMPLEXES.
§ 24-4.1. Residential Complexes Defined.
Residential complexes are defined as single or multiple dwellings designed
for occupancy by more than four families, excluding single dwellings in
qualified private communities as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2.
§ 24-4.2. Recycling Requirements.
Each family within a residential complex is required to recycle all materials
designated by APPENDIX B as "residential."
§ 24-4.3. (Reserved)
§ 24-4.4. Recycling Depots.
The owner of each residential complex is responsible for providing a
recycling depot for the entire complex. The depot shall be equipped with
owner-supplied receptacles for each category of recyclable material. Access
to the depot shall be controlled by the owner or his agent(s); however,
access to the depot for the families of the residential complex must be
scheduled at least once a week for at least a two hour period and access to
the depot must be made available to the recyclables collector between 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on collection days.
§ 24-4.5. Collection Days.
Collection days will be the second and fourth Fridays of each month. If
collection day falls on New Year's Day, Declaration Day or Christmas Day
or if collections cannot be made due to disaster or weather conditions,
recyclables should be held to the next regular collection day. Collections
will only be made from the recycling depot of each residential complex.
EXCEPTION: Refer to APPENDIX B regarding the collection day(s) for
leaves.
a. $50.00 penalty for placing recycling curbside before 5:00 p.m. on
Thursday.
b. $25.00 penalty for not removing recycling bins from curb by noon of the
day after collection.
§ 24-3.9 GENERAL § 24-4.6
1:407
§ 24-4.6. Recyclables Not Slated for Curbside Collection.
The recyclables collector will only collect those items slated for curbside
collection. The owner (or his agent) will be responsible for the handling of
recyclables not slated for curbside collection as directed by APPENDIX B.
§ 24-4.7. Noncompliance.
Failure of a family within a residential complex to abide by the rules and
regulations of this chapter may be fined up to $100.00 for each calendar
month of noncompliance. Failure of an owner (or his agent) to abide by the
rules and regulations of this chapter may be fined up to $1,000.00 for each
calendar month of noncompliance.
§ 24-5. RECYCLING BY COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 24-5.1. Commercial and Industrial Establishments Defined.
Commercial and industrial establishments are defined as all entities which
operate or conduct any business whatsoever which cannot be included
within definitions of a residence or residential complex.
§ 24-5.2. Recycling Requirements.
Each commercial or industrial establishment is required to recycle all
materials designated by APPENDIX B as "commercial."
§ 24-5.3. (Reserved)
§ 24-5.4. Exemptions.
Commercial and industrial establishments may be exempted from recycling
all materials designated by APPENDIX B as "commercial." This exemption
must be applied for in writing to the recycling coordinator. Included with
the request must be evidence showing that the material(s) recycled
represent 25 percent of the total solid waste stream. Temporary (one-time
only) three month exemptions may be granted without supporting evidence
at the discretion of the recycling coordinator; however, at the end of the
three month period the establishment must reapply for an exemption with
evidence collected during the three month period. All regular exemptions
will expire on December 31st of each year.
§ 24-5.5. Delivery or Sale of Designated Recyclables.
Designated recyclables must be delivered to the Hunterdon County
Transfer Station in Annandale, New Jersey at least once a month.
Alternatively, designated recyclables may be sold to a State approved
recycler to whom the recyclables are delivered or who pick them up
themselves. In any case, weight slips detailing the date, type of recyclable
§ 24-4.6 FLEMINGTON CODE § 24-5.5
1:408
and the weight (in pounds or tons) must be delivered to the borough clerk
no later than the 15th of the month for the preceding month.
§ 24-5.6. Noncompliance.
Failure of a commercial or industrial establishment to abide by the rules and
regulations of this chapter may be fined up to $1,000.00 for each calendar
month of noncompliance.
Chapter 25
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
§ 25-1. INTENT AND PURPOSE.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: (a) to promote the
orderly collection and disposal of solid waste, (b) to regulate the collection
and disposal of solid waste, and (c) to establish standards for the collection
and disposal of solid waste.
The intent of this chapter is (a) to decrease solid waste flow and increase
recycling flow from current volumes by requiring those generating solid
waste to pay for its collection and disposal under certain circumstances and
(b) to more fairly distribute the cost of solid waste collection and disposal
among those generating such waste.
§ 25-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following words shall have the following meanings:
a. The words "resident" or "residents" shall mean and include people
occupying all dwelling units in the borough except people occupying
dwelling units in Flemington Arms, Herman E. Kapp, Hunter Hills,
Hunterdon Mews, Madison Arms, Prospect Hills, Regional Court
Apartments; [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
b. The word waste as used herein shall mean and include garbage, ashes,
trash and rubbish;
c. The word garbage as used herein shall mean refuse from animal or
vegetable food stuffs, and all material incident to the ordinary conduct
of a household;
d. The word ashes shall mean all residue from stoves, furnaces and
fireplaces for domestic heating purposes;
e. The words trash and rubbish shall mean all cans (except aluminum cans
and tin cans), paper (except newspaper, magazines, junk mail, catalogs,
envelopes, school paper, office paper, composition paper, construction
paper, soft covered books, hard covered books with covers removed,
photocopy paper, computer paper, corrugated cardboard and brown
§ 24-5.5 GENERAL § 25-2
1:409
paper bags), glass (except clear, brown and green glass bottles and
jars), plastic (except types #1 and #2 plastic containers other than
types #1 and #2 motor oil containers), clothing, small toys and other
refuse usually accumulated in and about a household; [Amended
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
f. The words garbage, ashes, trash and rubbish do not mean or include
newspapers, magazines, junk mail, catalogs, envelopes, school paper,
office paper, composition paper, construction paper, soft covered books,
hard covered books with covers removed, photocopy paper, computer
paper, corrugated cardboard, brown paper bags, aluminum cans, tin
cans, clear, brown and green glass bottles and jars, plastic containers
types #1 and #2 except those used for motor oil, Christmas trees, grass
clippings, yard waste, leaves, trees, tree stumps, stones, earth, refuse
from building operations or repairs, construction materials, scrap auto
parts or vehicles, garbage in liquid form, flammable or hazardous
chemicals, tires, bulky items, including, but not limited to, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, television sets, beds, springs, mattresses,
furniture, lawnmowers, rugs and large toys or waste generated from
any business, commercial or industrial activity;
g. (Reserved)27
h. The words "occupant" or "occupants" shall mean and include people
living in multi-family complexes known Flemington Arms, Herman E.
Kapp, Hunter Hills, Hunterdon Mews, Madison Arms, Prospect Hills,
Regional Court Apartments; [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-2]
i. The word "owners" shall mean and include for Flemington Arms.
Herman E. Kapp, Hunter Hills, Hunterdon Mews, Madison Arms.
Prospect Hills, Regional Court Apartments, the persons, firms,
corporations, partnerships or entities vested with legal title to the land
upon which such multifamily complexes are located; [Amended
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
j. The words residential contractor shall mean and include the person,
firm, corporation, partnership or entity that has been awarded and is
under contract with the Borough to collect waste from residents;
k. The words multi-family complex contractor shall mean and include the
person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity that has been awarded
and is under contract with the Borough to collect waste from owners
and occupants;
l. The words contractor and contractors shall mean and include
"residential contractor" and "multi-family complex contractor;"
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection g, which defined "multi-family complexes," was repealed
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2.
§ 25-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 25-2
1:410
§ 25-3. COLLECTION DAYS ESTABLISHED. [Ord. No. 2013-3]
§ 25-4. WASTE RECEPTACLES.
m. The words dwelling or dwelling unit shall mean and include a building
or part thereof used as the residence of and providing complete living
facilities for a family, but shall not mean or include buildings or parts
thereof located in Flemington Gardens Apartments, Regional Court
Apartments, Flemington Arms Apartments, Elwood Avenue
Apartments, Hunter Hills Apartments, Prospect Hills Apartments and
Madison Arms Apartments;
n. The word "family" shall mean and include one or more persons living as
a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit as distinguished from individuals
or groups occupying a hotel, fraternity house, sorority house or
boarding house. The family shall be deemed to include necessary
household employees when employees share the common
housekeeping facilities and services, but shall not include boarders,
roomers, or paying guests; [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-2]
o. The word Borough shall mean and include the Borough of Flemington.
a. Waste collection shall be made from residents on Thursday of each
week during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time.
When a collection day falls on a federal holiday, collections will be made
on the following day. In case of an emergency such as a hurricane,
snowstorm or other act of God which prevents the collection on a
collection day, collections will be made on the following day. [Amended
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
b. Residents shall not place garbage curbside any earlier than 3:00 p.m.
the day preceding the scheduled collection. [Amended 2-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-2]
c. Can(s) and bags have to be taken off the street no later than noon of the
day after collection.
a. Residents and occupants shall place all waste to be collected in
receptacles.
b. Residents and owners shall furnish the receptacles for the
transportation of waste from dwelling units to the contractor's vehicles.
c. Receptacles for residents shall be (i) of metal or plastic, sufficiently
strong for the intended purpose, equipped with close-fitting lids and
have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons, or (ii) plastic bags designed
for use in the collection and disposal of waste with a capacity of not
more than 30 gallons. A receptacle used by a resident when filled shall
not weigh in excess of 25 pounds and be capable of being handled by
one person;
§ 25-2 GENERAL § 25-4
1:411
§ 25-5. PLACEMENT OF WASTE FOR COLLECTION.
§ 25-6. ALL WASTE TO BE COLLECTED BY CONTRACTORS.
d. Receptacles for occupants shall be dumpsters which shall be
watertight, constructed of metal or plastic and equipped for handling
by motorized equipment. The number of receptacles, size and
placement for Flemington Arms, Herman E. Kapp, Hunter Hills,
Hunterdon Mews, Madison Arms. Prospect Hills and Regional Court
Apartments shall be based on annual tonnage reports, needs of the
occupants, limitations set forth by the owners of each individual
complex and maximum allowable collection per the Borough of
Flemington. [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
a. Waste to be collected from a resident shall be placed by such resident
on his property within three feet of the curb or street line thereof, from
3:00 p.m. the day preceding collection. A resident shall remove their
waste receptacles and any other trash left behind no later than 12:00
noon the day following collection.
b. Owners shall place receptacles for the collection of waste from
occupants at such accessible locations within the multi-family
complexes as directed by the sanitation commissioner of the Borough.
c. Residents shall place no more than ten cans and/or bags of garbage
curbside for collection.
d. Residents shall place no more than two bulk items curbside for
collection of acceptable materials which are the following: bicycles,
nonmetal furniture [dressers, chairs, tables, sofas, beds (except steel
frame beds)]; carpeting and matting (must be rolled and tied), lawn
furniture, nonmetal toys, old doors, windows, screens, tools and
mattresses (mattresses must be wrapped in plastic), glass tables and
mirrors (must be covered in newspaper and taped to avoid breakage,
single items from home repair (for example, a small vanity or single
plumbing fixture). Items from construction renovations will not be
collected. [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
e. Tenants vacating a property and/or property owners with an excess of
10 bags and two bulk items for curbside collection must make
arrangements with an outside contractors to have the additional items
removed and they shall not place these additional items curbside for
regular waste collection. [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
a. The Borough awards contracts to contractors for the collection of waste
from residents and occupants.
b. Residents shall dispose of all waste generated by them by placing same
for collection by the residential contractor in the manner and at the
time herein set forth. Residents shall not dispose of waste through any
other waste collector except the residential contractor.
§ 25-4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 25-6
1:412
§ 25-7. (RESERVED)
§ 25-8. (RESERVED)
§ 25-9. PROHIBITIONS.
c. Owners and occupants shall dispose of all waste generated by
occupants by placing same for collection by the multi-family complex
contractor in the manner and at the times herein set forth. Owners and
occupants shall not dispose of waste through any waste collector except
the multi-family complex contractor, provided, however, an owner of a
multi-family complex may, upon ten days prior written notice to the
Borough Clerk terminate collections by the multi-family complex
collector.
d. Tenants vacating a property and/or property owners with an excess of
10 bags and two bulk items for curbside collection must make
arrangements with an outside contractor to have the additional items
removed and they shall not place these additional items curbside for
regular waste collection. [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
a. No person shall overturn, spill, scatter, root through, pull apart or
scavenge any waste set out for collection hereunder, nor shall any
person remove any waste from any receptacle or bundle set out by
residents or occupants for collection.
b. No resident shall dispose of waste except by placing same for collection
by the residential contractor in the manner and at the times herein set
forth.
c. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, no owner or occupant
shall dispose of occupants' waste except by placing the same for
collection by the multi-family complex contractor in the manner and at
the times herein set forth.
d. No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity other than
residential contractor shall collect waste from residents.
e. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, no person, firm,
corporation, partnership or other entity other than the multi-family
complex contractor shall collect waste from owners or occupants.
f. (Reserved)
g. No waste collection shall occur within the Borough of Flemington
except as provided by § 25-3, or for nonresidential or other waste
collection which is not covered by § 25-3 at any time except within the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. prevailing time Monday through
Friday, or between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays.
§ 25-6 GENERAL § 25-10
1:413
§ 25-10. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection or paragraph shall, to the
extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full
force and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate
the remaining sections, subsections or paragraphs of this chapter.
§ 25-11. PENALTY.
For violation of any provision, section or subsection of this chapter, the
following shall be enforced by the property maintenance inspector or police
for the following offense:
§ 25-12. SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision, section or subsection of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 25-13. RECYCLING AND SOLID WASTE.
§ 25-13.1. Definitions.
COUNTY — Shall mean the implementing agency for the Hunterdon County
Solid Waste Management Plan, the Hunterdon County Utilities Authority.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those materials
designated within the Hunterdon County District Solid Waste Management
a. $50.00 penalty for placing garbage curbside before 3:00 p.m. on the
day preceding scheduled pickup. [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-2]
b. $25.00 penalty per can/bag over the ten allowed.
c. $30.00 penalty per bulk item over two allowed.
d. $25.00 penalty for not taking cans and bags off the street by noon of the
day after collection.
e. When a tenant/occupant and/or property owner violates the maximum
allowance of 10 bags and two bulk items placed curbside for collection,
the property owner will be fined per the above penalties; a placard will
be placed on the door of the dwelling and a letter will be sent overnight
delivery instructing the property owner they have 24 hours from receipt
of the notice to remove all of the remaining debris. Failure to remove
within the twenty-four-hour period will result in a contractor selected
by the Borough of Flemington to remove the debris and all costs will
become a lien on the property. [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-2]
§ 25-10 FLEMINGTON CODE § 25-13.1
1:414
Plan to be source separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials
include:
Generators of residential, commercial, industrial and
institutional waste:
County
Plan
No. Definition
01 Corrugated - Containers and similar paper items usually
used to transport supplies, equipment parts or other
merchandise.
02 Mixed office and computer paper - Any and all types of
"office-type" paper including, but not limited to: computer
paper, hi-grade white paper, typing paper, copier paper,
onion-skin, tissue paper, notepad, envelopes, manila folders
and colored paper, or any mix thereof.
03 Newspaper - All paper marketed as newsprint or newspaper
and containing at least 70% newsprint or newspaper
(American Forest and Paper Association grades #6, #7 and
#8 news).
04 Other paper/magazines/junk mail - All paper, which is not
defined as corrugated, mixed office paper, computer paper
or newspaper.
05 Glass containers - All glass containers used for packaging
food or beverages.
06 Aluminum cans - Food and beverage containers made
entirely of aluminum.
07 Steel cans - Rigid containers made exclusively or primarily
of steel or tin-plated steel and steel and aluminum cans used
to store food, beverages, and a variety of other household
and consumer products.
08 PETE — containers - Containers including polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE - #1) soda bottles, high-density
polyethylene and (HDPE - #2) milk, water or detergent.
a.
b. Generators of commercial, industrial and institutional waste:
§ 25-13.1 GENERAL § 25-13.1
1:415
County
Plan
No. Definition
11 White goods and light iron - All appliances such as washers,
dryers, refrigerators, etc. as well as products made from
sheet iron, such as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks,
recycled or reconditioned steel drums and other nonstructural
ferrous scrap.
12 Anti-freeze - All automotive engine coolant consisting of a
mixture of ethylene glycol and water or propylene glycol and
water.
13 Batteries, lead-acid - Batteries from automobiles, trucks,
other vehicles and machinery and equipment. THIS DOES
NOT INCLUDE CONSUMER BATTERIES.
15 Tires - Rubber-based scrap automotive, truck or specialty
(e.g. forklift) tires. The tires must be recycled at a facility
approved by the New Jersey, Department of Environmental
Protection.
16 Used motor oil - petroleum-based or synthetic oil which,
through use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for
its original purpose due to the presence of impurities or loss
of original properties.
Generators of residential waste that are collected by Hunterdon
County:
County
Plan
No. Definition
12 Anti-freeze - All automotive engine coolant consisting of a
mixture of ethylene glycol and water or propylene glycol
and water.
13 Batteries, lead-acid - Batteries from automobiles, trucks,
other vehicles and machinery and equipment. THIS DOES
NOT INCLUDE CONSUMER BATTERIES. (See #21.
Batteries, household).
16 Used motor oil - petroleum-based or synthetic oil which,
through use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable
for its original purpose due to the presence of impurities or
loss of original properties.
c.
§ 25-13.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 25-13.1
1:416
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person or
persons appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be
authorized to, among other things, enforce the provisions of this section,
and any rules and regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — Shall mean all solid waste
generated at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments
within the boundaries of the municipality of Borough of Flemington.
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — (Codified per ordinance)
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean those materials which would
otherwise become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure, or
complex of buildings in which less than three dwelling units are owneroccupied
or rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential
purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.).
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING COMPLEX — Shall mean any building or
structure, or complex of buildings in which three or more dwelling units
are owner-occupied or rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for
residential purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.) and shall include hotels,
motels, or other guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those
terms are defined under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the "Hotel and
Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76 (C.55: 13A-1 et seq.).
County
Plan
No. Definition
21 Batteries, household - Any type of button, coin, cylindrical
rectangular or other shaped enclosed device or sealed
container which was utilized as an energy source for
commercial, industrial, medical, institutional or household
use. THIS DOES NOT INCLUDE LEAD ACID BATTERIES
FROM VEHICLES.
24 Mercury containing devices - Fluorescent and compact
florescent tubes (CFT's), high intensity discharge (HID) and
neon lamps, electrical switches, thermostats and any
batteries containing mercury.
27 Petroleum contaminated soil - Nonhazardous, soils
containing petroleum hydrocarbons resulting from spills,
leaks or leaking underground storage tanks used for
gasoline or any other commercial fuel and which are
recycled in accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C.
7:26A-1.1 et seq. NOTE: This material can be recycled at
"Class B" facilities (for example, authorized asphalt
manufacturers).
§ 25-13.1 GENERAL § 25-13.1
1:417
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean recyclable
materials which are separated at the point of generation by the generator
thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Shall mean the process by which recyclable
materials are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 25-13.2. Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 25-13.3. Source Separation.
a. In order to carry out the requirements of the New Jersey Mandatory
Source Separation and Recycling Act ("Act") and the Hunterdon County
Recycling Plan ("Plan"), the position of Municipal Recycling
Coordinator is hereby established, who shall be responsible for
compliance with said Act, Plan and applicable Borough regulations.
b. The municipal recycling coordinator will be annually appointed by the
Borough Council and will serve a term of one year.
c. The recycling coordinator will report to the governing body at least
once annually on the status of the Municipal Recycling Program, and
shall from time to time advise and make recommendations as to how
the requirements set forth in this ordinance may be effectuated.
d. The municipal recycling coordinator will attend all municipal recycling
coordinator meetings that the governing body deems to be important.
This includes meetings that may be conducted by the State, the County
or other appropriate organizations.
e. The municipal recycling coordinator shall promote the Municipal
Recycling Program by educating citizens, businesses, institutions, and
organizations of the need to participate in the Municipal Recycling
Program and shall explain to citizens, businesses, institutions and
organizations the provisions of the mandatory recycling ordinance and
assist in the enforcement thereof.
a. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, tenants, or
occupants of residential and nonresidential premises, which shall
include but not be limited to retail and other commercial locations, as
well as government, schools and other institutional locations within the
municipality of Borough of Flemington, to separate designated
recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable
materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other solid waste
generated by the owners or occupants of such premises and shall be
placed separately at the curb in a manner and on such days and times
as may be hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by the
Borough of Flemington.
b. Unless otherwise the municipality provides for the collection of
designated recyclable materials, every owner and/or occupant of
§ 25-13.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 25-13.3
1:418
§ 25-13.4. Residential Dwelling Compliance Requirement.
§ 25-13.5. Residential Dwelling Complexes Compliance
Requirement.
residential or nonresidential premises must contract for the removal
and disposition of recyclable materials as set forth in this section a
private contractor. Residential recycling contracts must comply with
the provisions of this section and must further provide for not less than
monthly pick-up.
c. In the event that a municipal, County or State facility, accepts
mandatory recyclable material as set forth in this section, then the
residential and/or nonresidential owner or occupant may utilize such
facility, to the extent permitted by the owner or operator of such facility.
a. The occupant(s) and owner(s) of any residential property shall be
responsible for compliance with this section. For multifamily units, the
management or owner is responsible for setting up and maintaining a
recycling system, including collection of recyclable materials, in
accordance with guidelines or regulations established by the
appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty notices will be
directed to the occupant. In instances where the violator is not easily
identifiable, violations and penalty notices will be directed to the
owner/management. The owner/management shall issue notification
and collection rules to occupants when they arrive and at least twice
annually during their occupancy.
b. Failure of occupant(s) and/or owner(s) of any residential property to
abide by the rules and regulations of this section may be fined not less
than $50.00 nor more than $250.00 for each month of noncompliance.
Prior to taking enforcement action pursuant to this section, the
recycling coordinator or other enforcement officer shall issue one
warning to any occupant which is in violation of this section, which
warning shall include educational information regarding proper
procedures for recycling.
a. The occupant(s) and owner(s) of any residential property shall be
responsible for compliance with this section. Unless the municipality
provides for the collection of designated recyclable materials, the
owner of each residential complex is responsible for providing a
recycling depot for the entire complex. The depot shall be equipped
with owner or contractor supplied receptacles for each category of
designated recyclable material.
b. Failure of an occupant within a residential complex to comply with the
requirements of this section may be fined not less than $50.00 nor more
than two hundred $250.00 for each month of noncompliance.
§ 25-13.3 GENERAL § 25-13.5
1:419
§ 25-13.6. Nonresidential Establishment Compliance Requirements.
c. The owner/management shall issue notification and collection rules to
new tenants when they arrive and at least twice annually during their
occupancy.
d. Unless the municipality provides for the collection of designated
recyclable materials, the owner of each residential complex shall report
to the municipal recycling coordinator by February 15th of each year,
the recycling activity of the prior year. The report shall include the
amount of recycled material by material type and the vendor or vendors
providing recycling service. The information must be supplied to the
municipal recycling coordinator and directed to the attention of the
municipal recycling coordinator by name and address. The county must
also be copied on this information.
e. Failure of an owner (or his/her agent) to abide by the rules and
regulations of this section may be fined up to $250.00 for each month of
noncompliance. Prior to taking enforcement action pursuant to this
section, the municipal recycling coordinator or other enforcement
officer shall issue one warning to the owner which is in violation of this
section. The warning shall include educational information regarding
proper procedures for recycling including instruction as to how the
owner can reasonably provide adequate recycling facilities to ensure
compliance with this section.
a. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments are defined as
all entities which operate or conduct any business whatsoever which
cannot be included within the definitions of a residential dwelling or
complex.
b. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this section.
c. Unless the property owner or municipality provides for the collection of
designated recyclable materials arrangement for collection of
designated recyclables shall be the responsibility of the commercial,
institutional or industrial occupant. All commercial, institutional or
industrial property owners which provide outdoor litter receptacles and
disposal service for their contents shall also provide receptacles for
designated recyclable materials, for those materials commonly
deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall provide for
separate recycling service for their contents.
d. Unless the property owner or municipality provides for the collection of
designated recyclable materials, every occupant of a commercial,
industrial or institutional facility or their designee (including solid
waste and recycling transporters) shall cooperate in communicating
recycling activity. Such communication shall include reporting to the
municipal recycling coordinator by February 15th of each year, the
occupants recycling activity of the prior year. The report shall include
§ 25-13.5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 25-13.6
1:420
§ 25-13.7. New Developments of Multi-Family Residential Units and
Commercial, Institutional, or Industrial Properties.
the amount of recycled material by material type and the vendor or
vendors providing recycling service. The information must be supplied
to the municipal recycling coordinator and directed to the attention of
the municipal recycling coordinator by name and address. The county
must also be copied on this information.
e. If the property owner provides recycling collection services for the
occupants of the property, the owner or their designee (including solid
waste and recycling transporters) shall cooperate in communicating
recycling activity. Such communication shall include reporting to the
municipal recycling coordinator by February 15th of each year, the
recycling activity on the property in the prior year. The report shall
include the amount of recycled material by material type, and the
vendor or vendors providing recycling service. The information must be
supplied to the municipal recycling coordinator and directed to the
attention of the municipal recycling coordinator by name and address.
The county must also be copied on this information.
f. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
g. Failure of a commercial, industrial or institutional occupant or owner to
abide by the rules and regulations of this section may be fined not less
than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each month of noncompliance.
Prior to taking enforcement action pursuant to this section, the
municipal recycling coordinator or other enforcement officer shall issue
one warning to any commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment which is in violation of this section, which warning shall
include educational information regarding proper procedures for
recycling.
a. Any application to the planning board of the municipality of Borough of
Flemington, for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multi-family dwellings of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional, or
industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development and
2. Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
§ 25-13.6 GENERAL § 25-13.7
1:421
§ 25-13.8. Prohibition of the Collection of Solid Waste Mixed with
Recyclable Materials.
§ 25-13.9. Solid Waste Transporter Requirements.
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the municipal recycling coordinator.
b. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the municipality of
Borough of Flemington, the owner of any new multi-family housing or
commercial, institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy
of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of
collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in
those instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
c. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the municipal engineer.
a. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
c. Once placed in the location for collection, no person, other than those
authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove, or
otherwise handle solid waste or designated recyclable materials.
d. Failure of a solid waste collector to abide by the rules and regulations of
this section may be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00.
Prior to taking enforcement action pursuant to this section, the
municipal recycling coordinator or other enforcement officer shall issue
one warning to any commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment which is in violation of this section, which warning shall
include educational information regarding proper procedures for
recycling.
a. A minimum of once a year or when necessary to reflect program or
regulatory modifications, notify all customers —
1. What materials are designated to be source separated from solid
waste and must be recycled in Hunterdon County and that these
items are prohibited in solid waste.
§ 25-13.7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 25-13.9
1:422
§ 25-13.10. Proof of Provision of Solid Waste and Recycling
Collection Services.
Unless the solid waste and recycling collection services have otherwise
provided for by the municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:66-5.1 all
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional generators of solid
waste must, upon request by the municipality supply proof that solid waste
and recycling collection services have been contracted by the generator.
The information requested for proof of service may include provision of
weight receipts or billing statements. The procedure by which the
2. That discovery of designated recyclable items in solid waste may
result in the waste not being collected and that the generator is
subject to a monetary fine.
3. Solid waste transporters are prohibited by law to collect solid
waste containing mandated recyclable materials.
4. That documentation of proof of solid waste and recycling collection
service must be maintained and that this documentation must be
made available to the property owner, municipality or county upon
request.
b. No later than February 15 of each year, all solid waste companies will
provide a detailed report of all recycling activities to all commercial and
institutional solid waste customers. The report will include a
breakdown of the materials collected for recycling, the total weight of
each material collected for recycling and the recycling market for each
of the materials collected. The information must be supplied to the
municipal recycling coordinator and directed to the attention of the
municipal recycling coordinator by name and address. The county must
also be copied on this information.
c. No later than February 15 of each year, all solid waste transporters will
provide each municipality and the county with a summarization of
recycling activity in that municipality including totals of all residential,
commercial and institutional recycling. The report will include a
breakdown of the materials collected for recycling, the total weight of
each material collected for recycling and the recycling market for each
of the materials collected. The information must be supplied to the
municipal recycling coordinator and directed to the attention of the
municipal recycling coordinator by name and address. The county must
also be copied on this information.
d. Failure of the solid waste transporter to comply with the provisions of
this amendment to the Solid Waste Management Plan and pertinent
municipal recycling ordinance shall constitute a violation and subject
the solid waste transporters to those penalties as prescribed in the
pertinent municipal recycling ordinance and State recycling
regulations.
§ 25-13.9 GENERAL § 25-13.10
1:423
municipality may request receipts or other documentation must be detailed
in a process approved by the governing body of the municipality.
§ 25-13.11. Enforcement.
The municipal recycling coordinator or other person(s) so designated by the
governing body are hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce
the provisions of this section. An inspection may consist of sorting through
containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the
presence of any recyclable material.
Each day for which a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or
equivalent). Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used
solely for the expenses of the municipal recycling program.
Chapter 27
TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ABATEMENTS
§ 27-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No. 2010-7]
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABATEMENT — Shall mean that portion of the assessed value of a property
as it existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building
or structure thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this
chapter.
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — Shall mean a portion or all of the
Borough which has been determined to be an area in need of rehabilitation
or redevelopment pursuant to the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law",
P.L. 1992, c. 79 (C. 40A:12A-1 et al), by the Resolution adopted November
13, 1995 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A: 12A-14, or by subsequent resolutions.
ASSESSOR — Shall mean the officer of the Borough of Flemington charged
with the duty of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure
or part thereof used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of
material or manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial,
commercial, retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing
purposes, or for any combination thereof, which the governing body
determines will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within
the borough, assist in the economic development of the borough, maintain
or increase the tax base of the Borough and maintain or diversify and
expand commerce within the Borough. It shall not include any structure
§ 25-13.10 FLEMINGTON CODE § 27-1
1:424
or part thereof used or to be used by any business relocated from another
qualifying Borough.
COMPLETION — Shall mean substantially ready for the intended use for
which a building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONDOMINIUM — Shall mean a property created or recorded as a
condominium pursuant to the 'Condominium Act,' P.L.1969, c. 257 (C.
46:8B-1 et seq.).
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the provision of a new dwelling, multiple
dwelling or commercial or industrial structure, or the enlargement of the
volume of an existing multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial
structure by more than thirty (30%) percent, but shall not mean the
conversion of an existing building or structure to another use.
CONVERSION OR CONVERSION ALTERATION — Shall mean the alteration
or renovation of a nonresidential building or structure, or hotel, motel,
motor hotel or guesthouse, in such manner as to convert the building or
structure from its previous use to use as a dwelling or multiple dwelling.
COOPERATIVE — Shall mean a housing corporation or association, wherein
the holder of a share or membership interest thereof is entitled to possess
and occupy for dwelling purposes a house, apartment, or other unit of
housing owned by the corporation or association, or to purchase a unit of
housing owned by the corporation or association.
COST — Shall mean, when used with respect to abatements for dwellings
or multiple dwellings, only the cost or fair market value of direct labor and
materials used in improving a multiple dwelling, or of converting another
building or structure to a multiple dwelling, or of constructing a dwelling,
or of converting another building or structure to a dwelling, including any
architectural, engineering, and contractor's fees associated therewith, as
the owner of the property shall cause to be certified to the governing body
by an independent and qualified architect, following the completion of the
project.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a building or a part of a
building used, to be used or held for use as a home or residence, including
accessory buildings located on the same premises, together with the land
upon which such building or buildings are erected and which may be
necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof, but shall not mean any building
or part of a building, defined as a "multiple dwelling" pursuant to the
"Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76 (C. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
A dwelling shall include, as they are separately conveyed to individual
owners, individual residences within a cooperative, if purchased separately
by the occupants thereof, and individual residences within a horizontal
property regime or a condominium, but shall not include "general common
elements" or "common elements" of such horizontal property regime or
condominium as defined pursuant to the "Horizontal Property Act,"
P.L.1963, c. 168 (C. 46:8A-1 et seq.), or the "Condominium Act," P.L.1969
c. 257 (C. 46:8B-1 et seq.), or of a cooperative, if the residential units are
owned separately.
§ 27-1 GENERAL § 27-1
1:425
EXEMPTION — Shall mean that portion of the assessor's full and true value
of any improvement, conversion alteration, or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to this chapter.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — Shall mean a property submitted to
a horizontal property regime pursuant to the "Horizontal Property Act,"
P.L.1963, c. 168 (C. 46:8A-1 et seq.).
IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean a modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration or repair which produces a physical change in an existing
building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or
attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for human habitation
or work, and which does not change its permitted use. In the case of
a multiple dwelling, it includes only improvements which affect common
areas or elements, or three or more dwelling units within the multiple
dwelling. In the case of a multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial
structure, it shall not include ordinary painting, repairs and replacement
of maintenance items, or an enlargement of the volume of an existing
structure by more than thirty (30%) percent. In no case shall it include the
repair of fire or other damage to a property for which payment of a claim
was received by any person from an insurance company at any time during
the three (3) year period immediately preceding the filing of an application
pursuant to this ordinance.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Shall mean a building or structure meeting the
definition of "multiple dwelling" set forth in the "Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law," P.L.1967, c. 76 (C. 55: 13A-1 et seq.), and means for the
purpose of rehabilitation, improvement or construction the "general
common elements" and "common elements" of a condominium, a
cooperative, or a horizontal property regime.
§ 27-2. TAX EXEMPTION PROGRAM. [Ord. No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No.
5-2000, § 1; Ord. No. 2005-20, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-7; Ord. No.
2013-17]
a. There is hereby adopted and provided in the Borough of Flemington a
five-year tax exemption program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq.,
as amended. This program shall apply to dwellings in areas in need of
rehabilitation in the Borough and provide for the exemption from real
property taxation of the aggregate first twenty-five thousand
($25,000.00) dollars in Assessor's full and true value of improvements
for each dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by an
improvement in any dwelling as defined in this chapter more than
twenty (20) years old, as not increasing the value of such property for a
period of five (5) years, notwithstanding that value of the dwelling to
which such improvements are made is increased thereby. Provided,
however, that during the exemption period, the assessment on said
dwelling shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing
immediately prior to such improvements, unless there is damage to a
dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction. Provided further, however, that the aggregate amount for
§ 27-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 27-2
1:426
§ 27-3. APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
any claims for any dwelling unit shall not be in excess of the maximum
sum of twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollars. Notwithstanding
Section 27-4, the twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollar exemption
shall remain in full force and effect for the full twenty-five thousand
($25,000.00) dollar amount for the entire five-year period.
b. The program shall also include exemptions for a portion of the assessed
valuation of construction of new dwellings or of conversions of other
buildings and structures, including underutilized public buildings to
dwelling use, or both. In determining the value of real property covered
by such an exemption, the Borough shall regard thirty (30%) percent of
the Assessor's full and true value of the dwelling constructed, or
conversion alterations made, as not increasing the value of the property
for five (5) years, notwithstanding that the value of the property upon
which the construction or conversion occurs is increased thereby.
c. This program shall also include an exemption for improvements to
commercial or industrial structures, in areas in need of rehabilitation
on an individual basis after review, evaluation and approval by the
Mayor and Council. In the case of approved exemptions for
improvements to commercial or industrial structures, the Assessor shall
regard the full and true value of the improvements as not increasing the
value of the property for a period of five (5) years, notwithstanding that
the value of the property to which the improvements are made is
increased thereby. However, during this exemption period the
assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements unless there is
damage to the structure through action of the elements sufficient to
warrant an exemption.
d. The program shall also provide for an exemption for improvements to
multiple dwellings, or of conversions of other buildings and structures,
including underutilized public buildings, to multiple dwelling use, or
both in areas in need of rehabilitation, upon approval by the Mayor and
Council after review and evaluation on an individual basis. It shall be
required that, in determining the value of real property, the Borough
shall regard up to the Assessor's full and true value of the
improvements or conversion alterations as not increasing the value of
the property for a period of five (5) years, notwithstanding that the
value of the property to which the improvements or conversion
alterations are made is increased thereby. During the exemption period,
the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements or conversion
alterations, unless there is damage to the multiple dwelling through
action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
e. This program shall also include exemptions or abatements for new
construction for structures other than dwellings pursuant to tax
agreements as provided by subsection 27-3.2.
§ 27-2 GENERAL § 27-3.1
1:427
§ 27-3.1. Applications for Tax Exemptions for Improvements. [Ord.
No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No. 2010-7; Ord. No. 2013-17]
Applicants for tax exemptions for improvements to commercial or industrial
structures or to multiple dwellings, or conversion of other buildings to
multiple dwelling use, shall provide the municipal governing body with a
completed application setting forth the following:
§ 27-3.2. Applications for Tax Exemption and Abatement for New
Construction. [Ord. No. 96-7, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-7; Ord. No.
2013-17]
There is hereby adopted a tax exemption and abatement program pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., as amended, for construction of commercial
or industrial structures and/or multiple dwellings. Such exemptions and
abatements shall only be granted after the filing of an application
containing all of the information below and the approval of such application
by the governing body. All applications pursuant to this subsection 27-3.2
shall be subject to an agreement to be approved and executed by the
governing body. All tax agreements shall be applied for and granted on an
a. A general description of the project for which exemption is sought;
b. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
c. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
d. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the project,
and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if a tax
exemption is granted;
e. Estimates of the cost of completing such project, which shall include, at
a minimum, all items required to accompany an application for a
construction permit under the Uniform Construction Code, pursuant to
Paragraph 4 of N.J.A.C. 5:23-2;
f. A statement showing (1) the real property taxes currently being
assessed at the project site; (2) estimated tax payments that would be
made annually by the applicant on the project during the period of the
exemption, and (3) estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following the
termination of the tax exemption;
g. A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
users' businesses; and
h. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require, or
as may be required by the assessor pursuant to Section 27-9.
i. Such exemptions shall be reviewed, evaluated and approved on an
individual basis by the governing body.
§ 27-3.1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 27-3.2
1:428
individual or project basis, after review, evaluation and approval of each
application by the governing body.
Applicants for tax exemption and abatement for new construction of
commercial or industrial structures or multiple dwellings shall provide the
municipal governing body with a completed application setting forth:
§ 27-4. PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES: DURATION OF TAX
EXEMPTION AND ABATEMENT AGREEMENTS; APPLICATION OF
OTHER LAWS TO PROJECTS; VALUATION OF TAX-ABATED
PROPERTY FOR COUNTY TAX APPORTIONMENT; COPY OF
AGREEMENT FORWARDED TO DIRECTOR OF DIVISION OF LOCAL
a. A general description of a project for which exemption and abatement is
sought;
b. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
c. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
d. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two (2) years of completion of the
project;
e. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and abatement on
the project, and a description of the benefits to be realized by the
applicant if a tax agreement is granted;
f. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
g. A statement showing (1) the real property taxes currently being
assessed at the project site; (2) estimated tax payments that would be
made annually by the applicant on the project during the period of the
agreement, and (3) estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following the
termination of the tax agreement;
h. If the project is a commercial or industrial structure, a description of
any lease agreements between the applicant and proposed users of the
project, and a history and description of the users' businesses;
i. If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the number and
types of dwelling units to be provided, a description of the common
elements or general common elements, and a statement of the
proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the dwelling units according
to type and of any rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to any
dwellings' units to be restricted for occupancy of low or moderate
income housing; and
j. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require, or
as may be required by the assessor pursuant to Section 27-9.
§ 27-3.2 GENERAL § 27-4
1:429
GOVERNMENT SERVICES. [Ord. No. 96-7, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-7; Ord.
No. 2013-17]
a. During the term of the exemption and abatement granted pursuant to a
tax agreement entered under subsection 27-3.2 hereof, the applicant
shall pay the municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an
amount equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due, according to the
following schedule:
1. In the first full year after completion, no payment in lieu of taxes
otherwise due;
2. In the second full year after completion, twenty (20%) percent of
taxes otherwise due;
3. In the third full year after completion, forty (40%) percent of taxes
otherwise due;
4. In the fourth full year after completion, sixty (60%) percent of taxes
otherwise due;
5. In the fifth full year after completion, eighty (80%) percent of taxes
otherwise due.
b. All tax exemptions and abatements approved by the Borough of
Flemington shall be in effect for no more than the five (5) full tax years
next following the date of completion of the project. No tax exemption
or abatement shall be granted to become effective after for the tax year
2021, unless this chapter is readopted by the governing body.
c. All projects subject to tax exemption and/or abatement as provided
herein shall be subject to all applicable Federal, State and local laws
and regulations on pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in
employment, housing provision, zoning, planning and building code
requirements.
d. That percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes for a property bears
to the property tax which would have been paid had an exemption and/
or abatement not been granted for the property shall be applied to the
valuation of the property to determine the reduced valuation of the
property to be included in the valuation of the Borough for determining
equalization for County tax apportionment and school aid during the
term of the tax agreements covering the properties, and at the
termination of an agreement for a property the reduced valuation
procedure required under this section shall no longer apply.
e. Within thirty (30) days after the execution of a tax agreement, the
Borough of Flemington shall forward a copy of the agreement to the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 27-4 FLEMINGTON CODE § 27-5
1:430
§ 27-5. TAX PAYMENTS DUE UPON DISQUALIFICATION OF
PROPERTY OWNER PRIOR TO TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT;
TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT. [Ord. No. 96-7, § 1; Ord. No.
2010-7]
§ 27-6. DETERMINATION OF TAX DUE UPON COMPLETION OF
IMPROVEMENT, CON-VERSION OR CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. No.
96-7, § I; Ord. No. 2010-7]
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, conversion or construction, the true
taxable value thereof. Except for projects subject to tax agreement,
pursuant to sections 9 through 12 of P.L. 1991, c. 441, the amount of tax
to be paid for the first full tax year following completion shall be based
on the assessed valuation of the property for the previous year, minus the
amount of the abatement, if any, allowed pursuant to this chapter, plus
any portion of the assessed valuation of the improvement, conversion or
construction not allowed as an exemption under this chapter. Subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the property shall continue to be treated in the
appropriate manner for each of the five full tax years subsequent to the
original determination by the Assessor.
§ 27-7. ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENT, CONVERSION OR
CONSTRUCTION; ELIGIBILITY FOR EXEMPTION AND
ABATEMENT. [Ord. No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No. 2010-7]
Any additional improvement, conversion or construction, completed on a
property granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to this
chapter during the period in which such previous exemption or abatement is
a. If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from the property owner as if no exemption and abatement had been
granted. The governing body of the Borough of Flemington shall notify
the property owner and Tax Collector forthwith and the Tax Collector
shall within fifteen (15) days thereof notify the owner of the property of
the amount of taxes due.
However, with respect to the disposal of the property, where it is
determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use the
property pursuant to the conditions which qualified the property, no tax
shall be due, the exemption and the abatement shall continue, and the
agreement shall remain in effect.
b. At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be subject to all
applicable real property taxes as provided by State law and regulation
and local ordinance; but nothing herein shall prohibit a project, at the
termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 27-5 GENERAL § 27-7
1:431
in effect, shall be qualified for an exemption, or exemption and abatement,
just as if such property had not received a previous exemption or
abatement. In such case, the additional improvement, conversion or
construction shall be considered as separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements pursuant to this chapter, except that the
assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion or construction
shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that improvement,
conversion alteration or construction for the purpose of determining the
assessed valuation of the property from which any additional abatement is
to be subtracted. Unless provided by ordinance, no additional exemption
or abatement shall be allowed unless a new application is submitted to the
governing body and a new agreement has been executed.
§ 27-8. INELIGIBILITY OF PROPERTY FOR WHICH PROPERTY
TAXES OR PENALTIES ARE DUE. [Ord. No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No.
2010-7]
No exemption or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into, pursuant to this chapter with respect to any property for which
property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for
nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 27-9. APPLICATION; APPROVAL; RECORDING AS PART OF TAX
RECORDS. [Ord. No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No. 2010-7]
No exemption or abatement shall be granted pursuant to this chapter
except upon written application therefor filed with and approved by the
Assessor of the Borough of Flemington. Every application shall be on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of
the Treasury, and provided for the use of claimants by the governing body
of the Borough of Flemington, and shall be filed with the Assessor within
thirty (30) days, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, following the
completion of the improvement, conversion alteration or construction.
Every application for exemption, or exemption and abatement, within the
Borough of Flemington which is filed within the time specified, shall be
approved and allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the application is
consistent with the provision of this chapter or the tax agreement, provided
that the improvement, conversion, alteration or construction for which the
application is made qualifies as an improvement, a conversion, alteration
or construction pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such approval of
an abatement is subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council where
required by this chapter, and also subject to approval by them of a tax
agreement where required. The granting of an exemption, or exemption and
abatement, or tax agreement shall be recorded and made a permanent part
of the official tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a
notice of the termination date thereof.
§ 27-7 FLEMINGTON CODE § 27-10
1:432
§ 27-10. PROPERTY TAXES SUBJECT TO EXEMPTION AND
ABATEMENT PROVISIONS. [Ord. No. 96-7, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-7]
The exemption and abatement of real property taxes provided by the
Borough of Flemington pursuant to this chapter shall apply to property
taxes levied for municipal purposes, school purposes, County government
purposes and for the purposes of funding any other property tax exemptions
or abatements.
§ 27-11. NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS OF ADOPTION OF CHAPTER
ESTABLISHING EXEMPTIONS AND ABATEMENTS INCLUDED
WITH PROPERTY TAX BILLS. [Ord. No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No. 2010-7]
The Tax Collector or other responsible officer designated by the Mayor and
Council shall include a notice in the mailing of annual property tax bills
to each owner of a dwelling located in an area in which exemptions, or
exemptions and abatements; may be allowed pursuant to the chapter during
the first year following adoption of the chapter.
§ 27-12. ANNUAL REPORT; TOTAL AMOUNTS OF TAX EXEMPTED
AND ABATED. [Ord. No. 96-7, § I; Ord. No. 2010-7]
The Mayor and Council shall report, on or before October 1 of each year,
to the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs and to the Director of the Division of
Taxation in the Department of the Treasury the total amount of real
property taxes exempted and the total amount abated within the
municipality in the current tax year for each of the following:
Chapter 29
WILDLIFE FEEDING
a. Improvements of dwellings;
b. Construction of dwellings;
c. Improvements and conversions of multiple dwellings;
d. Improvements of commercial or industrial structures;
e. Construction of multiple dwellings under tax agreements; and
f. Construction of commercial or industrial structures under tax
agreements.
In the case of paragraphs e and f above, the report shall state instead
the total amount of payments made in lieu of taxes according to each
formula utilized by the municipality, and the difference between that
total amount and the total amount of real property taxes which would
have been paid on the project had the tax agreement not been in effect,
for the current tax year.
§ 27-10 GENERAL § 29-1
1:433
§ 29-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2007-4 § II]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish. Feeding does
not include baiting by governmental officials who are acting in their official
capacity for public safety purposes.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 29-2. PROHIBITED CONDUCT. [Ord. No. 2007-4 § II]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Flemington, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 29-3. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2007-4 § II]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough
of Flemington. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be
ordered to cease the feeding immediately.
§ 29-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2007-4 § II]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars for
each violation.
Chapter 30
IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE
§ 30-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2007-6 § II]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
§ 29-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § 30-1
1:434
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Flemington or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 30-2. PROHIBITED CONDUCT. [Ord. No. 2007-6 § II]
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Flemington is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 30-3. EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION. [Ord. No. 2007-6 § II]
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
c. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
h. Flows from firefighting activities.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior to
§ 30-1 GENERAL § 30-3
1:435
§ 30-4. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2007-6 § II]
This chapter shall be enforced by the police department of the Borough of
Flemington, the zoning officer, the Borough engineer and/or the board of
health.
§ 30-5. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2007-6 § II]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars for
each violation.
Chapter 31
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 31-1. ENABLING LEGISLATION.
§ 31-1.1. Commission; Appointment; Term; Vacancies. [N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1; Ord. No. 2008-2; Ord. No. 2011-3]
The governing body of the municipality may by ordinance establish an
Environmental Commission for the protection, development or use of
natural resources, including water resources, located within its territorial
limits. The commission shall consist of not less than five nor more than
seven members, appointed by the mayor, one of whom shall also be a
member of the municipal planning board and all of whom shall be residents
of the municipality; the members shall serve without compensation except
as hereafter provided.
The mayor of the municipality shall designate one of the members to serve
as chairman and presiding officer of the commission. The terms of office for
the first commissioners shall be for 1, 2 or 3 years, to be designated by the
mayor in making his appointments so that the terms of approximately 1/3 of
the members will expire each year, and their successors shall be appointed
for terms of 3 years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors.
The mayor or governing body of the municipality may remove any member
of the commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member
and after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the commission occurring
rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials must
be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is
limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 30-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 31-1.1
1:436
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as an original appointment.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the law to the contrary, the powers
of appointment and removal hereby accorded to the mayor of a municipality
shall be vested in the elected official so designated or, where there is a
vacancy in the office of mayor, on the duly designated acting mayor.
The governing body may, by ordinance, provide for the appointment of not
more than two alternate members. Notwithstanding the provisions of any
other law or charter heretofore adopted, the ordinance shall provide the
methods of appointment of alternate members. Alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment by the authority appointing them as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except the terms
of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate
No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not more than
one alternate member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing
authority for the unexpired term only.
An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which
he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An
alternate may be removed by the governing body for cause. An alternate
member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall
not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
§ 31-1.2. Powers of Commission. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-2; Ord. No.
2008-2]
An environmental commission organized under this act shall have power to
conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the
municipality and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized
for similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly
or privately owned, including open marshland, swamps and other wetlands,
in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may
from time to time recommend to the planning board or, if none, to the mayor
and governing body of the municipality plans and programs for inclusion in
a municipal master plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 31-1.3. Acquisitions by Commission. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-3; Ord. No.
2008-2]]
An environmental commission may, subject to the approval of the governing
body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the
§ 31-1.1 GENERAL § 31-1.3
1:437
municipality by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of
its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of,
or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the municipality.
§ 31-1.4. Records and Annual Report. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-4; Ord. No.
2008-2]
An environmental commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the governing body of the
municipality.
§ 31-1.5. Appropriation. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-5; Ord. No. 2008-2]
The governing body of a municipality may appropriate funds for the
expenses incurred by the environmental commission. The commission may
appoint such clerks and other employees as it may from time to time require
and as shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it.
§ 31-1.6. Studies and Recommendations. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-6; Ord.
No. 2008-2]
An environmental commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resource
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
§ 31-1.7. Conservation Commission as Environmental Commission.
[N.J.S.A. 40:56A-7; Ord. No. 2008-2]
Any conservation commission established pursuant to this act shall be an
environmental commission.
§ 31-1.8. Joint Environmental Commission; Creation by Ordinance;
Members; Compensation. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-8; Ord. No. 2008-2]
a. The governing bodies of two or more municipalities may, by adoption of
substantially similar ordinances, create a joint environmental
commission for the protection, development or use of natural
resources, including water resources located within their combined
territorial limits.
b. The number and qualifications of the members of such joint
environmental commission, and their terms and methods of
appointment or removal shall be such as may be determined and agreed
§ 31-1.3 FLEMINGTON CODE § 31-1.8
1:438
§ 31-1.9. Chairman; Qualifications; Term in Office. [N.J.S.A.
40:56A-9; Ord. No. 2008-2]
A joint environmental commission shall elect its chairman, who shall hold
no other public office or position, except that he may be a member of
a municipal or other planning board. The term of the chairman shall be
one year, and he shall be eligible to succeed himself unless the ordinance
creating the commission shall otherwise provide. The chairmanship of the
commission be rotated annually so that over each period of years
corresponding to the number of participating municipalities it shall be
held in each year by a member appointed from a different participating
municipality.
§ 31-1.10. Expenses; Apportionment; Appropriation. [N.J.S.A.
40:56A-10; Ord. No. 2008-2]
The proportion of the expense of the joint environmental commission to be
home by each participating municipality shall be such as may be determined
and agreed upon by the participating municipalities, and said municipalities
are hereby authorized to appropriate their respective shares of such
expenses. Within the limits thus agreed upon and duly appropriated the
commission may employ such clerical and technical or other assistants and
may incur such other expenses as it may deem necessary to carry out its
functions.
§ 31-1.11. Functions, Duties and Powers. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-11; Ord.
No. 2008-2]
A commission created pursuant to this supplementary act shall have, with
respect to all the participating municipalities, and to each of them, all the
functions, duties and powers of an environmental commission established in
upon by said governing bodies and set forth in the ordinance creating
such joint commission, except that:
1. When such joint commission is created by two municipalities only,
there shall be at least three members from each municipality;
2. When such joint commission is created by three or more
municipalities, there shall be at least two members from each
municipality;
3. At least one member from each municipality shall be a member of
the planning board (if any) of the municipality, and
4. A majority of the members of the joint commission shall hold no
other public office, except membership on a municipal or other
planning board.
c. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but may
receive reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the
performance of their duties as members of the commission.
§ 31-1.8 GENERAL § 31-1.11
1:439
a single municipality under section 2 and 3 of PL. 1968, c. 245 (C.40:56A-2
and 40:56A-3) and section 7 of PL. 1972, c. 35 (C.40:56A-6).
§ 31-1.12. Succession of Established Commission by Joint
Commission; Transfers. [N.J.S.A. 40:56A-12; Ord. No. 2008-2]
If any municipality which has heretofore established an environmental
commission under the act to which this act is a supplement shall enter
into participation in a joint environmental commission, such environmental
commission heretofore established shall be abolished upon the taking effect
of the ordinance establishing the joint environmental commission, and the
terms of the members of such abolished environmental commission shall
immediately cease and terminate. Except as may otherwise be provided in
the ordinance establishing such joint commission, all employees of such
abolished environmental commission, and all the records, property and
funds in its possession or under its control shall be transferred to the joint
environmental commission, and its debts and other financial obligations
shall be assumed by the joint environmental commission.
Chapter 32
COLLECTION OF CERTAIN YARD WASTE
§ 32-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No. 2011-27]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
THE WORDS RESIDENT OR RESIDENTS — Shall mean and include people
occupying all dwelling units in the Borough of Flemington except people
occupying dwelling units in Flemington Gardens Apartments, Regional
Court Apartments, Flemington Arms Apartments, Elwood Avenue
Apartments, Hunter Hills Apartments, Prospect Hills Apartments, Madison
Arms Apartments and Coppermine Village.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
THE WORDS YARD WASTE COLLECTOR OR COLLECTOR — Shall mean
and include the road department of the Borough of Flemington.
THE WORD BOROUGH — Shall mean and include the Borough of
Flemington.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
§ 31-1.11 FLEMINGTON CODE § 32-1
1:440
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
§ 32-2. COLLECTION DAY ESTABLISHED. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord.
No. 2011-27]
Yard waste shall be collected from residents on the second Friday of each
month during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., prevailing time. When
the collection day falls on New Year's Day, Independence Day or December
25, collections will be made on the following Friday. In case of an emergency
such as a hurricane, snowstorm or other act of God which prevents the
collection on a collection day, collections will be made on the following day.
§ 32-3. YARD WASTE RECEPTACLES. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No.
2011-27]
§ 32-4. YARD WASTE COLLECTION. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No.
2011-27]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven (7) days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall
not be placed closer than ten feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of
such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any
other manner is a violation of this section. If such placement of yard waste
occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this section.
a. Residents shall place all yard waste to be collected in receptacles,
provided, however, residents need not place items such as dead
branches in receptacles, provided they are securely tied in a bundle not
longer than four feet which weighs not more than 25 pounds.
b. Residents shall furnish the receptacles for the transportation of waste
to the collector's vehicles.
c. Receptacles shall be: (1) of metal or plastic, sufficiently strong for the
intended purpose, equipped with close-fitting lids and have a capacity
of not more than 30 gallons; or (2) plastic bags designed for use in the
collection and disposal of yard waste with a capacity of not more than
30 gallons. A receptacle used by a resident when filled shall not weigh
in excess of 25 pounds and be capable of being handled by one person.
§ 32-1 GENERAL § 32-5
1:441
§ 32-5. PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No. 2011-27]
§ 32-6. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No. 2011-27]
If any section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection or paragraph shall, to the
extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full
force and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate
the remaining sections, subsections or paragraphs of this chapter.
§ 32-7. PENALTY. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No. 2011-27]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation.
§ 32-7A. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No. 2011-27]
This chapter shall be enforced by the police department of the Borough of
Flemington, the zoning officer and/or the board of health.
§ 32-8. SEPARATE VIOLATION. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No.
2011-27]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision, section or subsection of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 32-9. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord. No. 2011-27]
This chapter shall take effect immediately after final passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 33
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
a. No person shall overturn, spill, scatter, root through, pull apart or
scavenge any yard waste set out for collection hereunder, nor shall any
person remove any yard waste from any receptacle or bundle set out by
residents for collection.
b. No person shall place any yard waste for collection that is not
generated within the territorial limits of the borough.
c. No person shall place any yard waste for collection except in conformity
with the regulation herein set forth.
§ 32-5 FLEMINGTON CODE § 33-1
1:442
§ 33-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2003-34 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-27]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a schedule of miscellaneous
fees for a variety of duties, services and materials that are performed
or provided by the borough officials to the public and not otherwise
established in this Code.
§ 33-2. ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES. [Ord. No. 2003-34 § 2; Ord. No.
2004-20 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-4, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1; Ord. No.
2010-9; Ord. No. 2011-27]
The following fees are established and shall be paid by the applicant for
such service or materials:
a. Notices—Agenda (by Mail).
1. Annual notice of regular meetings (or revisions thereto): one
($1.00) dollar.
2. Forty-eight (48) hour advance written notice of nonregular
meetings: ten ($10.00) dollars.
3. Notice of special, rescheduled or emergency meetings: ten
($10.00) dollars.
4. Agendas: per meeting, two ($2.00) dollars, annual fee, forty
($40.00) dollars.
b. Copies (In Person and by Mail).
1. Official minutes of regular and special open meetings (or revisions
thereto): $.05 cents per page for letter size and $.07 per page for
legal size paper.
2. All other copies (except oversized documents requiring outside
copying or special handling): $.05 per page for letter size and $.07
per page for legal size paper.
Copies in Person:
$.05 per page for letter size
$.07 per page for legal size
Copies by Mail:
$.05 per page for letter size plus postage
$.07 per page for legal size plus postage
3. The fee for any oversized documents or documents requiring
outside copying or special handling shall be the actual cost of
copying, plus applicable postage and handling not to exceed ten
(10%) percent of the actual copying charge or ten ($10.00) dollars,
whichever is greater.
§ 33-1 GENERAL § 33-2
1:443
4. Map Copies:
(a) Eight (8) inches by eleven (11) inches: $.05 cents per page plus
the cost of postage and handling.
(b) Eight (8) inches by fourteen (14) inches: $.07 cents per page
plus the cost of postage and handling.
(c) Eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches: $.10 cents per
page plus the cost of postage and handling.
5. The fee for computer disk copies of recordings of Borough
Meetings shall be two ($2.00) dollars per disk.
c. Searches.
1. Assessment Search (per block and lot): ten ($10.00) dollars.
2. Tax Search (per block and lot): ten ($10.00) dollars.
3. Continuation Search (per year up to three (3) years from the date of
the original search: two ($2.00) dollars per year.
d. Police Reports.
1. Motor vehicle accident reports:
(a) In person: $.05 cents per page for letter size
$.07 cents per page for legal size
(b) By mail: $.05 cents per page plus postage.
(c) $.07 cents per page plus postage.
2. Investigations/incident reports subject to and in accordance with
Flemington Borough Police policy for release of information.
(a) Victims: $.05 cents per page for letter size.
(b) Discovery/civil/insurance requests: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
plus two ($2.00) dollars per photo duplicated.
3. Noncurrent information: general research of public of subpoenaed
information or noncurrent information and comments and/or
information to be reviewed and copied (applicant to be advised in
advance and deposit will be required based on estimated time and
cost): Twenty ($20.00) dollars per hour (with a one (1) hour
minimum), plus actual copy costs.
4. Duplicates.
(a) Audio duplicate of tape (per tape): Twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars.
§ 33-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 33-2
1:444
(b) Video duplicate of video recorded proceedings: one hundred
($100.00) dollars.
e. Certification of Documents.
1. Certification of Documents: the charge shall be five ($5.00) dollars.
2. Certified copies (raised seal): a fee of ten ($10.00) dollars per copy
will be charged for Registrar of Vital Statistics.
f. Duplicates.
1. Tax Bills.
(a) First duplicate copy: five ($5.00) dollars.
(b) Each additional duplicate copy, which may be requested in the
same tax year: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
The above set forth fees to be charged may, at the discretion
of the Tax Collector, be assessed to a mortgagee, servicing
organization or property tax processing organization as such
terms are defined in P.L. 1990, Chapter 69, N.J.S.A. 54:4-dd,
and upon such request for said duplicate tax bill made in
writing to the Tax Collector.
g. Certified Property Owners List. Within two hundred (200) feet of a
single block and lot: ten ($10.00) dollars.
h. Miscellaneous Documents and Research.
1. Zoning map: five ($5.00) dollars.
2. Development Ordinance: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
3. Master Plan or Master Plan Draft: thirty ($30.00) dollars.
4. Historic District Design Guidelines: fifteen ($15.00) dollars.
i. Returned Checks.
1. There is established a service charge of thirty ($30.00) dollars per
check or other written instrument returned for insufficient funds.
(a) The service charge shall be paid in cash immediately;
(b) The service charge shall be added to any account owing to the
borough if payment tendered on the account was by a check or
other written instrument which was returned for insufficient
funds; or
(c) Whenever an account owing to the borough is for a tax or
special assessment, the service charge shall be included on any
list of delinquent accounts prepared for the enforcement of the
lien.
§ 33-2 GENERAL § 33-2
1:445
2. The service charge authorized by this subsection shall be collected
in the same manner prescribed by law for the collection of the
account for which the check or other written instrument was
tendered. The borough, through the Chief Financial Officer, may
require future payments to be tendered in cash or by certified or
cashier's check.
j. Subpoena of Borough Employees. (Where borough or employee is not
party to the suit):
1. All payments required hereunder shall be made in advance of the
actual date of the appearance. Payments shall be made for an
entire day's appearance without any prorating for the actual hours
spent in traveling to or from the place of appearance or the actual
time spent in depositions, court appearances, etc.
2. Any subpoena which is issued and places an employee on call shall
be billed and paid in advance at the same rate as though an actual
appearance was required.
3. In the event that advance payment has not been made for an actual
or on call appearance, the employee shall not be scheduled nor be
available for the appearance noticed, and a copy of the
requirements of this provision shall be provided to any party
making an inquiry or issuing a subpoena.
(a) Police officers: (appearances shall be subject to availability of
sufficient back-up officers so as to insure borough police
coverage to protect public health, safety and welfare), the
party issuing the subpoena shall pay the borough a sum equal
to one and one-half (1 1/2) times the police officer's total daily
compensation for each day, or part thereof, of the officer's
appearance.
(b) All other borough employees: the party issuing the subpoena
shall pay to the borough a sum equal to the borough
employee's total daily compensation for each day, or part
thereof, of the borough employee's appearance.
k. Facsimiles. A charge of one ($1.00) dollar per page shall be paid in
advance or by invoice to the requesting party, in addition to any other
charges established in this section.
l. Transcripts. Transcript fees: five ($5.00) dollars per page of original
transcript document; copies of original transcript shall be in
accordance with paragraph b, 2 of this subsection.
m. Noncurrent Information. General research of public or subpoenaed
information and documents, and/or information to be reviewed and
copies (applicant to be advised in advance and deposit will be required
based on estimated time): twenty ($20.00) dollars per hour (with a one
(1) hour minimum), plus actual copy costs of this subsection.
§ 33-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 33-2
1:446
§ 33-3. STATUTORY FEES TO PREVAIL. [Ord. No. 2003-34 § 3; Ord.
No. 2011-27]
When any fees herein described are at anytime at variance with fees for said
services or materials as prescribed by the Revised Statutes of New Jersey,
the fees prescribed by the statute shall govern.
n. Registrar Fees.
1. Death Certificates are $10.00 each.
2. Birth and Marriage Certificates are $25.00 each.
§ 33-2 GENERAL § 33-3
1:447

Chapter BH1
GENERAL
§ BH1-1. DEFINITIONS, CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of Chapter I of the "Revised General Ordinances of the
Borough of Flemington in the County of Hunterdon, 1975" concerning short
title, definitions, construction and severability shall apply to all chapters
adopted by the board of health.
§ BH1-2. PENALTY.
§ BH1-2.1. Maximum Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
board of health of the Borough of Flemington shall, upon conviction thereof,
pay a penalty of not less than $5.00, nor more than $500.00 for each
offense. Complaint shall be made in the municipal court of the borough or
before such other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the
State of New Jersey. In addition, the court shall have the power to impose
other penalties provided by R.S. 26:3-77 and R.S. 26:3-78.
§ BH1-2.2. Separate Violation.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the board of health exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ BH1-2.3. Collection of Fees and Penalties.
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the board of health shall be paid to the borough clerk.
Chapter BH2
PLUMBING CODE
§ BH2-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE.
A code regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of the
plumbing of buildings, and the connection thereof with outside sewers,
regulating the practice of plumbing and the issuance of licenses to practice
plumbing, is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 26:3-69.
§ BH2-2. TITLE OF CODE.
The code adopted by this chapter is described and commonly known as the
Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964) as amended April 29, 1966.
BH1:1
§ BH2-3. PUBLIC RECORD.
Three copies of the Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964), and
amendment thereto dated April 29, 1966, shall be on file in the office of the
borough clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH2-4. DELETIONS FROM CODE.
The following parts of the plumbing code are hereby excepted from the
provisions of this chapter: Section E-1400, subsection 14.6, Title - Board
of Plumber Examiners. Section E-900, subsection 9-1.3(a) and (b). Section
300, subsection 3.4(c).
§ BH2-5. FEES.
In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the code hereby
established, the following fees shall be charged and received:
For the examination of any applicant for license as master plumber, $50.00.
For the issuance and renewal of a license as a master plumber, $25.00. For
the filing of plans for a proposed plumbing work, $2.00.
For the issuance of a permit for a proposed plumbing construction or
alteration, $3.00 per fixture.
In addition to the $2.00 filing fee set forth in the third paragraph of this
section, a fee of $10.00 shall be charged for the issuance of a permit for the
installation of a sewer connection.
In addition to the $2.00 filing fee set forth in the third paragraph of this
section, a fee of $10.00 shall be charged for the issuance of a permit for the
installation of a water connection to the public water system.
For each reinspection of plumbing work caused by failure of licensee to
provide the provisions of the code or permit issued, $10.00.
For reinspection not covered in the preceding paragraph, a fee of $2.00 for
each reinspection.
§ BH2-6. BUILDING SEWERS.
Building sewers and laterals shall be of cast iron, joint shall be tight and
root proof, joints shall be calked and poured with lead.
Cast iron soil pipe may be of the following:
Weight in Pounds per 5-ft. Length
Size in inches Single Hub Pipe Double Hub Pipe
2 21 22
3 30 32
§ BH2-3 FLEMINGTON CODE § BH2-6
BH1:2
Size in inches Single Hub Pipe Double Hub Pipe
4 45 47
5 57 59
6 72 75
8 110 115
10 160 165
12 200 210
15 275 290
Drainage and venting may be 3 inches M copper inside of house for main
stack and vent.
Chapter BH3
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINE CODE
§ BH3-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby
established pursuant to 26:3-69.1 - 69.6. A copy of the code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of text herein.
§ BH3-2. TITLE OF CODE.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961)".
§ BH3-3. PUBLIC RECORD.
Three copies of the "Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961)" have been placed on file in the office of the borough clerk and
will remain on file in such office for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter BH4
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT CODE
§ BH4-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties is hereby
established pursuant to R.S. 26:3-69.1-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ BH2-6 GENERAL § BH4-2
BH1:3
§ BH4-2. TITLE OF CODE.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965)".
§ BH4-3. PUBLIC RECORD.
Three copies of the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)"
have been placed on file in the office of the borough clerk and will remain
on file in such office for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter 12
LAND DEVELOPMENT DEFINITIONS
§ 1200. INTENT
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms and words listed in this section
shall have the meanings herein given. Terms and words not defined herein
but defined in other articles of the Code shall have, for the purposes of this
ordinance, the meanings given them in the respective chapters as the same
now reads or may be amended. Terms and words not defined herein, nor
defined in any other chapter of this ordinance, but defined in the Municipal
Land Use Law shall have, for the purposes of this ordinance, the meanings
given them in the Municipal Land Use Law, its amendments or supplements
thereto. Terms and words not defined in any of the foregoing sources shall
have the meanings established by common usage of the words unless the
context herein clearly indicates the contrary.
In the interpretation of this ordinance, the provisions and rules set forth
below shall be observed and applied, except when the context or the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., clearly requires
otherwise.
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
B. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural
shall include the singular.
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the feminine
gender shall include the masculine.
D. The word "shall" is mandatory.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this ordinance and any caption, the text shall control.
§ BH4-2 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:4
§ 1201. WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED
Part 1 – Words and Terms For purposes of this ordinance, phrases and
words are defined as follows:
AADT — (Average annualized daily traffic): the total yearly traffic volume in
both directions of travel divided by 365.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide vehicular entrance to a
property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or
use which:
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as part of an existing
improvement when such new improvement changes the exterior
appearance of the improvement.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Flemington to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
to only low- and moderate-income households.[Ord. No. 2017-9 § 1]
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER —
AFFORDABLE RENTAL RESIDENCE — A dwelling in a building containing
one, or more, dwelling units, to be available for rent at prices affordable to
low and moderate income households under Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) regulations.
A. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use.
Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or
a principal use.
B.
Is ordinarily and customarily associated within the principal use and
contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants,
business or industry of the principal building or principal use served.
C.
Is located on the same lot as the building or principal use served, except
as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this ordinance.
D.
For the purpose of the determination of completeness of development
applications, it shall be the Borough Engineer.
A.
For the purpose of certification of conformity of a lot to development
regulations, it shall be the Zoning Officer.
B.
For the purpose of maintaining maps and documents for public
inspection, it shall be the Planning Board.
C.
For the Historic Preservation Commission, it shall be the Planning
Board Secretary.
D.
E. For all other purposes it shall be the Borough Clerk.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:5
ALLEY — An alley shall mean any public or private way less than 40 feet in
width unless such way was dedicated or ordained prior to October 16, 1972,
in which case any public or private way which is less than 30 feet in width.
ALTERATION, NONSTRUCTURAL — Any work done on any existing
improvement which is not an addition to that improvement, or which
changes the appearance of the exterior surface of any improvement (other
than for repainting or other work which restores the original exterior
surface).
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in supporting
members of the structure or additions to a structure requiring walls,
foundations, columns, beams, girders, posts or piers, or the moving of a
structure.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where one or more animals or pets are
given medical or surgical treatment including an accessory use as an animal
kennel limited to short-term boarding. (See definition for "Kennel")
ANIMAL PEN — A structure and/or fenced area designed to contain or
provide shelter for domestic pets which are the property of the resident.
APARTMENT — (See definition for "Dwelling, Accessory Apartment")
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — An application form provided by the
Borough and completed by the applicant together with all accompanying
documents required by this ordinance for approval of the application for
development, including where applicable, but not limited to, a site plan,
subdivision plat, planned development, conditional use, zoning variance or
direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or
40:55D-36.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board unless a different agency
is designated in this ordinance pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
ARTISAN MANUFACTURING — Establishments which include the on-site
production of handmade arts and crafts, such as but not limited to clothing,
jewelry, pottery, photography and sculpture, from clay, fiber, wood, metal,
glass and other typically-used materials.[Ord. No. 2012-15]
ARTISAN STUDIO — Establishments used for the purpose of display, sale
and/or instruction of handmade arts and crafts.[Ord. No. 2012-15]
ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Borough Engineer or the
Planning Board Attorney, who may act in conjunction with the
Administrative Officer in determining the completeness of an application.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for 4 or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished room,
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:6
a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.[Ord. No. 2011-25]
ASSISTED LIVING SERVICES — A coordinated array of supportive personal
and health services, available 24 hours per day. Assisted living promotes
resident self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize
independence, individuality, privacy and dignity in a homelike
surrounding.[Ord. No. 2011-25]
ATTIC — An uninhabited area directly below the roof of a house.
AUTOMATIC TIMING DEVICE — A switching device which includes a clock
that controls the time period of illumination.
AUTOMOBILE — (See definition for "Motor Vehicle")
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Land and building providing for the
sale of fuel, lubricants and automotive accessories and for maintenance and
minor repairs for motor vehicles, excluding body repairs or the storage of
inoperable or wrecked vehicles.
BANK AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — A financial institution as defined
by Division H, subsections 60 and 61 within the Standard Industrial
Classification system (SIC).
BARN — Any building, accessory to an agricultural use, and used for the
housing, storage or preparation for marketing of plants or animals, storage
of agricultural equipment, machinery, vehicles and tools.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building partly below and partly above
finished grade, where the ceiling averages 4 feet or more above the finished
grade where such grade meets the outside walls of the building. A basement
shall be considered a "story" above grade when the distance from grade to
the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than 6 feet for
more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or more than 12 feet at any
point.
BED AND BREAKFAST — A single dwelling structure licensed by the State
of New Jersey occupied by the resident owner and family or occupied by a
resident manager in which bedrooms are rented to transient and temporary
lodgers on a daily basis.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made.
BILLBOARD — A sign or advertising structure which directs attention to a
business, commodity, product, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere other than on the premises where the sign is located.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT — A subdivision where the lot line
between lots is moved, but no new lot is created.
BREWERY — A use where beer, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverage
is manufactured, packaged and distributed for sale and consumption. A
tasting room and/or restaurant shall be included in the use.[Ord. No.
2015-19 § 1]
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:7
BUFFER — A transitional portion of a lot devoted to lessening adverse
impacts such as visual and noise conditions from one area to another usually
by providing a strip of land maintained with a combination of trees or
other natural woodland growth, and/or graded, and/or planted with trees,
evergreens, hedges, or shrubbery of sufficient height to protect an area
from noise, dust, glare, or other possible nuisances generated by nearby
activities.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a structure adapted to
permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING, COMMUNITY — A public building for one or more of the
following uses: social, educational, cultural or recreational activities of a
neighborhood or community.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The primary or main building on a lot as
contrasted to an accessory building which is of secondary importance.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The portion of a lot which is covered by principal
and accessory buildings.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be built on a lot and that is defined by maximum
height regulations and minimum yard setbacks.
BUILDING HEIGHT — (See definition for "Height, Building")
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Subcode Official of the Borough of
Flemington.
BUILDING LINE — The line beyond which neither a principal building nor
accessory building extends, except that coves, cornices, gutters, chimneys,
steps or other minor projections from a building wall may extend over the
building line for a distance of no more than 2 feet.
BUILDING PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Construction Code Official
authorizing the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or
repair of a building or other structure upon approval of the submitted
application and plans, and as required pursuant to the Uniform State
Construction Code Act.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising, credit reporting, collection of claims, mailing, reproduction,
stenographic, news syndicates, computer programming, photo copying,
duplicating, data processing, services to buildings, and help supply
services.
BUS SHELTER — A small, roofed structure, usually having 3 walls, located
near a street and designed primarily for the protection and convenience of
bus passengers.
BUS STOP — Any premises for the loading and unloading of passengers for
a public or private bus company. A bus shelter may be constructed in a bus
stop.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:8
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY — A cable television company as defined
pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1972, c. 186 (C. 48:5A-3).
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM — A proposed schedule of all future
capital improvements listed in order of construction priority including cost
estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.
CAR — (See definition for "Motor Vehicle")
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of a street customarily
used by vehicles in the regular course of travel. Where there are curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the curbs. Where there are no curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the edges of the paved or graded width.
CELLAR — The portion of a building partly or wholly below grade, where
the ceiling averages less than 4 feet above the finished grade where such
grade meets the outside walls of the building.
CEMETERY — Land for the burial and internment of the dead.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Construction
Code Official upon completion of construction, alteration or change in
occupancy or use of a building certifying that all requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code and all requirements of the zoning ordinance,
except as modified by the approving authority, have been satisfied and that
the approval of the building is in conformance with the permitted uses in
the zone in which it is located.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE — Land used for cultivation and harvesting
of herbs, fruits, flowers, vegetables, and soil in which plants are raised
outdoors in planters, in green houses, in buildings or on rooftops. Plants
may be grown hydroponically or in soil, for sale either as food, use in
landscaping, or ornamental purposes. Cultivation and harvesting of illegal
and controlled substances shall not be permitted.[Ord. No. 2012-01]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Vehicles used in the conduct of business,
retail, service or industrial purposes. Such vehicles are more than 22 feet
long, greater than 8 feet in height, wider than 7 feet long, greater than 8
feet in height, wider than 7 feet and have any advertising on the vehicle.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — An antenna and any supporting structure,
together with any accessory facilities, which is intended to provide point
to point or broadcast communications, including cellular telephone cells,
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:9
paging systems, fleet dispatch, aircraft communication, radio or TV
broadcasting facilities, microwave transmitters, and other similar facilities.
COMMUNITY GARDENING — Land that is held publicly or privately and
is used collectively or cooperatively for the cultivation and harvesting of
herbs, fruit, flowers, and vegetables, including the cultivation and tillage
of soil. Cultivation can be done in outdoor raised planters or greenhouses,
hydroponically or in soil. Cultivation and harvesting of illegal and controlled
substances shall not be permitted.[Ord. No. 2012-01]
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Submission of an application form provided
by the Borough and completed by the applicant together with all
accompanying documents required by this ordinance for approval of the
application for development, the payment of required fees, escrow fees,
taxes, and including requests for waivers from one or more of the
application requirements.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this ordinance, and upon the issuance of an authorization
therefore by the approving authority.
CONTIGUOUS LAND — Land which is physically connected to other land
so as to permit the land to be developed and used as a functional unit;
provided that separation by lot lines, streams, dedicated municipal roads,
rights-of-way, and easements shall not affect the contiguity of land unless
such condition(s) prevents the land from being developed and used as a
functional unit.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store which sells a limited variety of
prepackaged sundries, dry goods and food, with hours of operation
generally from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. or longer and usually not larger than
4,000 square feet.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the master plan for the physical
development of Hunterdon County, with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the Hunterdon
County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and N.J.S.A. 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Hunterdon County Planning Board as
defined in Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (C. 40:27-6.1).
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street, with a turn-around area at the end.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DAY CARE OR CHILD CARE CENTER — A commercial facility duly licensed
by the State of New Jersey for the accommodation of children.
DEMOLITION — The full or partial razing of any building or improvement
to land.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:10
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water collection facility,
designed to collect surface and sub-surface water in order to impede its flow
into natural or man-made outlets.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — (See this § 1201, Part 2, Words and Terms: Flood Control
for "Development")
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto
adopted and filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree trunk
measured approximately 4 feet above the average ground level at the base
of the tree.
DISTRICT — An area located within the municipal boundaries of the
Borough, which is designated on the accompanying Zoning Map and to
which certain uniform regulations and requirements of the chapter apply
(see Zoning District).
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DWELLING, ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential
dwelling unit with a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters, and a
private entrance, which is created to be occupied by a low or moderate
income household pursuant to the criteria of COAH. The accessory
apartment shall be created within an existing home, or through the
conversion of an existing attached accessory structure on the same site.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof used or
designed as a residence for 3 or more apartment houses, apartment hotels,
and flats, but not including automobile courts, or former single-family
dwellings converted for occupancy by not more than 3 three families as
permitted herein.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building containing 1 dwelling
unit.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY — A building containing 3 dwelling units.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:11
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semi-detached building where
not more than 2 individual dwelling units are entirely separated by vertical
walls or horizontal floors, unpierced, unconnected by common halls or
stairways, with each having access to the outside or to a common cellar.
DWELLING UNIT OR DWELLING — A room or series of connected rooms
containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for 1 family. The
dwelling unit shall be self-contained and shall not require the use of outside
stairs, common hallways, passing through another dwelling unit or other
indirect route(s) to get to any portion of the dwelling unit, nor shall there
be shared facilities with another housekeeping unit.
ECHO (ELDER COTTAGE HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES) HOUSING — A
small, removable modular cottage placed on a concrete slab or treated
wood foundation in the rear yard of a single family detached house lot
specifically designed to meet the needs of older or disabled people,
connected to the utilities of the primary dwelling, and designed to be
removed when it is vacated by the approved occupant. The approved
occupants shall be restricted to one or 2 persons who are relatives (by
blood, marriage or legal adoption) of the owner/occupant of the primary
dwelling on the lot and at least one shall be either a senior citizen 60 years
of age or older or a disabled person.
ENTERTAINMENT CENTER — Any business that offers the use of modern
or retro video games, pinball machines, modern video consoles, boardwalk
style games, active virtual reality gaming, skill-based attractions or
electronic amusements.[Added 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-8]
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
EXCAVATION — The result of any act by which soil or rock is cut into,
excavated, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
EXEMPT SUBDIVISION — (See definition for "Subdivision")
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to cutting or filling.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a
single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
FAMILY CHILD CARE CENTER — A child care facility provided by a
homeowner for 6 to 15 children, exclusive of family members, within the
homeowner's residence and licensed by the State Department of Human
Services, Division of Youth and Family Services.
FENCES — Artificially constructed barriers of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other natural or synthetic combination of materials erected for
the enclosure or screening of land or structures.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the approving authority taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:12
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guarantees.
FINISHED GRADE — The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the proposed design.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings
or structures compared to the total area of the site. The gross floor area as
defined below shall be used in the calculation of the floor area ratio.
FOOT CANDLE — The illuminance on a surface of 1 foot in area in which
there is uniformly distributed a light flux of 1 lumen.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building for the storage of not more than 3 motor
vehicles, with no provision for repairing, servicing, or storing such vehicles
for profit. A private garage is also called a residential garage.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage not included within the definition of a
private garage.
GARAGE SALE — Any casual sale of tangible personal property, including
a "garage sale", "lawn sale", "attic sale", "rummage sale", or "flea market
sale" which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can
be made aware of the sale, or at which the public may purchase tangible
personal property.
GAZEBO — An accessory structure detached from the principal building
used for outdoor leisure activities or a landscape element.
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS) — A computer-generated
mapping system including environmental maps and other municipal
resource information.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that
is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to
cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and acuity.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Flemington.
GOVERNMENTAL USE — A use undertaken by any municipal, County, State
or Federal agency.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature
and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-ofseason
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GREEN ROOF — A vegetated roof system used in place of a conventional
roof and made of a waterproof membrane, drainage material, a lightweight
layer of soil, and a cover of plants.[Ord. No. 2012-01]
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the area of full stories of a building
or structure measured by using the outside dimension of the structure at
each story. The gross floor area of units sharing a common wall shall be
measured from the center of interior walls and the outside of exterior walls.
In nonresidential uses, the gross floor area shall exclude areas used for
utility and heating, cooling and other mechanical equipment, non-enclosed
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:13
but covered exterior walkways, garages and parking decks including the
pedestrian entrance areas associated with underbuilding parking garages,
but shall include all other areas regardless of ceiling height, including, but
not limited to, cellar, warehouse and storage areas.
GROUND COVER — Low-growing (18 inches in height or less) woody
plants.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance measured between the highest
point of the building and the mean elevation of the finished grade as
measured around the foundation. The finished grade of berms and other
mounding techniques that might be added around building foundations to
increase the height of the finished grade, and hence increase the allowable
height of the building, shall not be used for measuring building height.
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of stairways, elevators, tanks,
ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment or similar equipment required
to operate and maintain the building, may be erected above the height limit
onto all buildings, except detached dwellings (where these exceptions shall
not apply), provided that none of the same exceed the maximum applicable
building height limitation by more than 25 percent. Furthermore, any of the
foregoing which are located on a roof and project above it shall not cover
more than 5 percent of the roof area and shall be located as far from the
perimeter of the roof as practicable to minimize visibility.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of a historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
D.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:14
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity engaged in by a resident for financial
gain, conducted entirely within a dwelling unit.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION — A nonprofit corporation established in
accordance with standards contained in the Municipal Land Use Law
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 et seq. for the control and maintenance of common areas
and open space in conjunction with a development.
HORTICULTURE — The growing or raising of nursery plants for sale for
landscape purposes.
HOTEL — An establishment providing lodging and usually meals for the
general public, especially transient guests. It may include such uses
incidental to the operation as follows: rest rooms, offices, meeting rooms,
restaurants, cocktail lounges, beauty parlors, barbershops, apparel stores,
confectionery shops and the like. Such incidental uses shall be conducted
solely within the primary building.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or group of buildings, including
customary accessory buildings, designed or intended for public worship or
religious education.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a stable, rather than transient basis, where the occupants
share the ordinary tasks of living in a dwelling unit such as, but not
limited to, cooking and eating together, sharing inside and outside chores,
and performing other functional duties and otherwise exhibiting a kind of
stability, permanency and functional lifestyle which is equivalent to that of
the traditional family unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water,
including, but not limited to, such paved surface improvements as parking
and loading areas, driveways, sidewalks, decks, patios, brick walks, and
compacted stone.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the coverage of a piece of
land measured by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within
the site by the total lot area.
INDOOR RECREATION — Any use such as movie theaters, music halls,
bowling alleys, ice skating or roller skating rinks.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — The construction of new buildings on scattered
vacant sites in a built-up area.
JUNK — Means and includes rags, scrap iron, shavings, borings, old rope,
old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead and other used materials, more than
one automobile which is unfit for reconditioning for sale for highway
transportation, used parts of motor vehicles, old bottles, glass, lumber,
paper, discarded machinery, or parts thereof, and any other secondhand
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:15
articles or used materials and merchandise and such other articles or things
as commonly come within the classification of junk.
JUNK YARD — Any lot with or without buildings used for the outside
dismantling, deposit, collection or storage of waste, construction material,
used or discarded things or materials, whether or not such use is in
connection with a dismantling process, salvage or sale of structures,
automobiles or other vehicles, equipment appliances and machinery and or
parts thereof and similar products.
KENNEL — Any building, structure or premises in which one or more
animals are kept, boarded, bred or trained for commercial purposes.
Medical and surgical services, if any, shall be limited to incidental services
provided solely for animals being boarded, bred or trained on the premises.
Animal kennel does not include animal hospitals. (See definition for "Animal
Hospital")
KIOSK — A freestanding structure upon which temporary information, such
as retail sales, and/or posters, notices, and announcements are posted.
LAND, CONTIGUOUS — (See definition for "Contiguous Land")
LANDLOCKED — A lot or parcel of land without direct access to a public
road.
LANDMARK — A building, structure, site, or man-made object which
possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, or
association, and which is either located within a Historic District or has
been specifically identified as a historic site within the historic preservation
plan element of the Master Plan of the Borough pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28b.(6), and has been determined, pursuant to the terms of this
Appendix, to be:
LEARNING CENTER — Specialized instructional establishments that
provide on-site education assistance for students attending other
educational establishments.[Ord. No. 2012-15]
Of particular historic, cultural, scenic, or architectural significance
to the Borough and in which the broad cultural, political, economic
or social history of the nation, State, or community is reflected or
exemplified; or
A.
It is identified with historic personages or with important events in the
main current of national, State or local history; or
B.
Shows evidence of habitation, activity or the culture of prehistoric man;
or
C.
Embodies a distinguishing characteristic or an architectural type
valuable as representative of a period, style or method of construction;
or
D.
Represents a work of a builder, designer, artist, or architect whose
individual style significantly influenced the architectural history of the
Borough.
E.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:16
LIGHT EMISSION, DIRECT — Direct light emissions visible at a height of 3
feet or higher at the property line. A bulb, reflective device, refractive lens
device, globe, or diffuse panels, shall be considered a direct light emission
source.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Any form of artificial illumination emanating from a
light fixture or illuminated sign that penetrates other property.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street berth within a structure or in the open, but
on the same lot with a building or a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading between the
vehicle and the building.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land, which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet or acres.
Any portion of a lot included in a public street right-of-way or the access
or "flagstaff' of a flag lot, shall not be included in calculating the minimum
required "lot area".
LOT, CORNER — A lot having at least 2 adjacent sides fronting on
intersecting roads. A lot with frontage on 2 or more streets, including
corner lots, shall have building setback from each street not less than the
required front yard.
LOT COVERAGE — The area of a lot covered by impervious surfaces.
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines measured from the midpoint of the front line to the midpoint of the
rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured along a street line in a continuous unbroken line.
LOT, INTERNAL — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot and
is the same line as the street line for that portion of a lot abutting a street.
Lot lines extend vertically in both directions from ground level. On existing
streets whose widths are proposed to be increased, the lot line shall be such
as to provide for the widened street as shown on the Master Plan, Official
Map or Road Ordinance.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — (See definition for "Boundary Line Adjustment")
LOT WIDTH — The distance between side lot lines measured at the
minimum required building setback from the street line.
LOW INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards adopted
by New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (see N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3) for
home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy
by households with a gross household income equal to 50 percent or less
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:17
of the median gross household income of the same size within the housing
regions in which the housing is located, and which is subject to affordability
controls promulgated by the Council.
LUMEN — A unit of measure of the quantity of light which falls on an area
of 1 square foot every point of which is 1 foot from the source of 1 candela
(candle). A light source of one candela emits a total of 12.57 lumens.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough of Flemington for the maintenance of any improvements
required under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., including but not limited to surety
bonds, letters of credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5 and cash.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Development requiring major subdivision or
major site plan approval.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — All site plans not defined as minor or exempt.
MANUFACTURING — The production of articles or finished products from
previously refined raw materials by giving them new forms or qualities.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Borough of Flemington as set forth in and
adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MAUSOLEUM — A stone building for entombment of the dead above
ground.
MAYOR — The chief executive of the Governing Body of the Borough of
Flemington.
MERGER — The consolidation of 2 or more lots into a single lot by the
removal of the lot lines.
MINI-MART — See Convenience Store.
MINOR SITE PLAN — The development plan of one or more lots which does
not involve planned development, any new street or extension of any offtract
improvement and is one of the following:
A change in use involving no building construction, other than interior
modifications or interior structural alterations, and no need for
additional off-street parking, road or drainage improvements, or;
A.
Minor structural changes, such as entry enclosures, porticos and other
structural appurtenances, including roof appurtenances, or;
B.
Building additions not exceeding 100 square feet in ground coverage
and accessory buildings and structures not exceeding 500 square feet
in ground coverage, provided that the same do not invade upon any
required parking area, setback area or otherwise violate any
requirements of the Borough Development Regulations, or;
C.
All signs in the Downtown Business (DB), Downtown Business II (DB
II) and Transitional Commercial (TC) zones. § 1401, Subsection I (Sign
Review Committee) shall apply.
D.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:18
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any division of land meeting all of the following
criteria:
If the lot to be subdivided has been part of a minor subdivision under this ordinance
or any ordinance repealed hereby, a further division of the lot shall not be classified
as a minor subdivision if it would result in 3 or more lots being created within a
three-year period, including the remainder of the original lot.
MINOR SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN COMMITTEE — A committee of
the Planning Board established to review minor subdivision and site plan
applications and make recommendations for approval with any conditions,
or denial, with reasons, to the Planning Board for action. The Committee
may utilize professionals of the Board to assist in the reviews.
MIXED USE — A development which includes residential, public, quasipublic,
commercial, office and open space uses, and which has significant
functional and physical integration of project components, including
uninterrupted pedestrian connections, and which is in conformance with a
comprehensive design plan.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards
adopted by New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (see N.J.A.C.
5:93-1.3) for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved
for occupancy by households with a gross household income in excess of 50
percent but less than 80 percent of the median gross household income of
the same size within the housing regions in which the housing is located,
and which is subject to affordability controls promulgated by the Council.
MOTION SENSOR DEVICE — A device that senses motion and will switch
on lighting for a brief duration.
MOTORCYCLE — (See definition for "Motor Vehicle")
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automotive vehicle, including automobiles, buses,
cars, motorcycles, mopeds, tractors, self-propelled lawnmowers, and trucks.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any building, place or location,
whether in or upon any street or public place or on private property
designed to supply motor vehicles with gasoline, oils, greases, automotive
accessories or for the inspection, testing and examination of said motor
Any application for a sign variance, regardless of zone. § 1401,
Subsection I (Sign Review Committee) shall apply.
E.
Contains an aggregate of not more than 3 lots (2 new lots and the
remaining parcel);
A.
B. Does not involve a planned development.
C. Does not involve any new street.
Does not require the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of
which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
D.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:19
vehicles, or for the repair of said motor vehicles or replacement of parts
thereof.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
Borough Council of the Borough of Flemington when acting pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Borough of Flemington.[Ord. No.
2017-9 § 1]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building or structure the size,
dimension, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision
or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSERY — Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs and plants
for sale.
OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL — A building or portion thereof
used as the place of business of a person, corporation, firm or public
agency for professional services and administrative and executive purposes,
but where retail sales are permitted only if they are an accessory to the
principal office use.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions thereto,
adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of Hunterdon County pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or
other public way, used for the parking of motor vehicles and available for
use, whether for a fee or as a service or privilege, by clients, customers,
suppliers or residents.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements to accommodate conditions
generated by a proposed development, including, but not limited to, new
improvements and/or extensions and modifications of existing
improvements. "Off-site" means located outside the lot lines of the lot in
question, but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:20
subject of a development application or contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements to accommodate conditions
generated by a proposed development, including, but not limited to, new
improvements and/or extensions and modifications of existing
improvements. "Off-tract" means not located on the property which is the
subject of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street
or right-of-way.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — The area of the property that is landscaped or left in
a natural state after development expressed as a ratio of the total site area.
OUTDOOR DINING — The serving of food or drink outside a building to
patrons as an accessory use.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE — An illuminating device which is permanently
installed outdoors, including but not limited to, devices used to illuminate
any site, structure or sign.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — A paved open area, other than a street or other
public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public
whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE — An area for the parking of a motor vehicle that is
located on the same lot as the use it is serving. The area of a parking
space is intended to be sufficient to accommodate the exterior extremities
of the vehicle whether, in addition thereto, wheel blocks are installed within
this area to prevent the bumper from overhanging one end of the parking
space. The width and length of each space shall be as required by this
ordinance and shall be measured perpendicularly to each other regardless
of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle or driveway. In order for
a parking space to qualify as meeting the minimum parking requirements of
this ordinance, there must be unobstructed access to the parking space. No
parking space may block another.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:21
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Security accepted by the Borough under
this ordinance, at least 10 percent of the total of which shall be cash or
certified check and the balance either cash, certified check, or bond in
which the developer shall be principal and an acceptable surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey shall be surety.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land, building, or structure as permitted by
this ordinance.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or both and any
residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be
permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Unit development, planned unit residential
development, residential cluster, planned commercial development or
planned industrial development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Flemington,
Hunterdon County, New Jersey established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D.
PLANTS, INDIGENOUS — Plants that are native to the Eastern United
States and not imported stock from other areas of North America or other
continents.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — The plat of all or a portion of the development submitted for
final approval prepared in accordance with, New Jersey State Statutes Title
46, Chapters 26A, 26B and 26C.
PLAT, INFORMAL OR SKETCH — The plat submitted for purposes of
discussion.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The plat submitted as a part of the application for
preliminary approval.
PORCH — A roofed open structure projecting from the front, side and/or
rear wall of a building and having no enclosed features of glass, wood or
other material except screening and the necessary columns to support the
roof.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
sections 34, 36, and 37 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46; N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48; and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49) prior to final approval after specific
elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning
Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:22
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure within
which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said
building is situated.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which any lot is used.
PRIVATE RECREATION — A recreation facility operated by an organization
(for profit or nonprofit), and open only to bona fide members and guests of
such organization.
PROHIBITED USE — Any use not specifically defined as a permitted
accessory or conditional use in a zone.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DRAINAGE WAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or water course for preserving the biological as well
as drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water
to safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion
and to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Borough, Borough agency, Borough Board of Education,
State or County agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility regulated by the Board of Public
Utilities and defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is: (i) built on a single chassis;
(ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
another vehicle; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
REPAIR — Work done on any improvement which is not an addition to the
improvement, and does not change the appearance of the exterior surface
of the improvement (other than for repainting or other work which restores
the original exterior surface).
REPLACEMENT — Repair which requires a building permit.
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas;
B. Other public open spaces;
C. Public scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:23
RESEARCH FACILITIES — Buildings or structures for experimentation in
pure or applied research design, development and production of prototype
machines or devices or of new products and uses accessory thereto,
wherein products are not manufactured primarily for wholesale or retail
sale, wherein commercial servicing or repair of commercial products is not
performed and wherein there is no display of any materials or products.
RESERVATION —
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RESTAURANT — A public eating facility where patrons are first seated at
tables, booths or counters, after which food ordered by them is served to
the patrons by waiters or waitresses at such tables, booths or counters.
The term "restaurant" does not include drive-in restaurants or fast-food
restaurants as otherwise defined in this section.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where patrons are served
soft drinks, ice cream and other food products for consumption outside
the confines of the principal building or in automobiles parked upon the
premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other
accommodations are provided for the patrons.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any restaurant, including drive-in
restaurants, which may or may not have tables, which is essentially
designed to dispense quick, ready-made food of limited variety and at
which the patron obtains food directly from the dispensing counter for
consumption on or off such premises.
RETAIL USE — A commercial use as defined by Division G within the
Standard Industrial Classification system (SIC).
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or
erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin used for the storage of water
runoff, whether natural or man-made, designed to contain water
permanently.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS — Lots abutting a major street, with no access
to the major street, but having driveway access to a side street or to a minor
street running parallel to the major street.
A provision in a deed or other real estate conveyance that retains
a right for the existing owner even if other property rights are
transferred;
A.
A method of holding land for future public use in a deed or by
designating public areas on a plat, map, or site plan as a condition of
approval.
B.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:24
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width and length of the course of a street,
watercourse, utility alignment or other way and within which all
improvements and rights of access are confined.
SCHOOLS — Any use devoted to the instruction of students in grades K-12
and either operated by a local or regional school board as established by
law or operated by private individuals or entities in accordance with N.J.S.A.
18A:1.1 et seq.
SCHOOLS, OTHER — Any use devoted to the instruction of students not
in accordance with the provision of N.J.S.A. 18A:1.1 et seq. are deemed
commercial enterprises.
SCHOOLS, PRIVATE NONPROFIT — An institution of education whose
general course work is comparable to the public school system, and
operated by a not-for-profit religious or charitable institution.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC — Schools whose curriculum is approved by the N.J.
Department of Education or the N.J. Department of Higher Education as a
unit receiving State financing and administration.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, excavated pit, or dugout constructed
across a waterway or at other suitable locations to intercept and retain
sediment.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — A residential development including
accessory buildings and required or permitted social, cultural, medical and
recreational facilities limited to certain age groups conforming to 24 CFR
Part 100 Subpart E, Housing for Older Persons, of the Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988, as it may be amended or superseded.
SERVICE STATION — Lands and buildings providing for the sale of fuel,
lubricants and automotive accessories; maintenance and minor repairs for
motor vehicles may be provided, but not to include auto body work,
automobile painting, automobile wrecking, the sale or rental of passenger
vehicles and trucks, the long-term storage of inoperable vehicles, parking
for fee, or car wash facilities.
Fueling Island — A raised concrete island in a service station which
contains one or more fueling pumps to service one or more vehicles.
A.
Fueling Pump — A machine pump for dispensing of motor fuel, whether
gasoline or diesel. Each fueling pump can only dispense fuel to one
vehicle at a time, however, there may be more than one fueling pump
operated from one fueling island.
B.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:25
SERVICE USE — A commercial use as defined by Division I within the
Standard Industrial Classification system (SIC).
SETBACK — The minimum distance between a street line and a lot line,
said space to be unobstructed except by fences or by shrubbery or other
planting.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel to a street line or lot line and drawn
to the point of the building nearest to the street line or lot line beyond
which a building does not project. The minimum yard requirements shall be
the minimum required setbacks. All setbacks from public streets shall be
measured from the proposed right-of-way width as shown on the adopted
Master Plan, Official Map, or Road Ordinance, except that on flag lots the
minimum setback shall exclude the access strip.
SHED, STORAGE — An accessory structure which is used for storage
purposes and which does not maintain any heating or plumbing service. Any
structure which is large enough to store road licensed or farm vehicles, and
not housing animals, shall be considered a garage.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with a focused lens that
allows no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 80 degrees
through the light fixture's lowest light emitting part as certified by a
photometric test. Any structural part of the light fixture providing this cutoff
angle must be permanently affixed.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of 4 or more commercial establishments
built on one tract that is planned and developed as an operating unit;
providing on-site parking in a definitive relationship to the type and total
size of the stores. The commercial establishments may be located in one or
several buildings, attached or separated.
SIC CODE — Standard Industrial Classification Code as published by the
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
SIDEWALK (AREA) — A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually
located at the side of a road within the right-of-way.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area at each corner of intersecting
streets, or of streets and driveways, where the grading and landscaping
is maintained and structures are restricted so as to allow drivers an
unobstructed view along the intersecting street and driveway.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, mural, obstruction, announcement,
declaration, demonstration, billboard, illustration or insignia, or a part
thereof, used to promote or advertise the interests of any person, group
of persons, company, corporation, service or product when the same is
placed, erected, attached, painted or printed, situated indoors or outdoors
the building where it may be viewed from the outside of any structure on
the premises where placed.
Fueling Station — The building, premises, and land in which, or upon
which, automobile and truck fuels are dispensed, stored and sold.
C.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:26
SIGN AREA — The area of any sign as calculated in this ordinance shall
be computed as the product of the largest horizontal width and the largest
vertical height of the lettering, illustration, display or background. This
shall not be construed to include the supporting members of any sign which
are used solely for such purpose. If the lettering, illustration, display or
background is attached directly to the face of a building, the height or width
of the sign shall be the height or width of the largest letter, illustration,
display or background, whichever is the greater.
SIGN CANOPY — A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, an
awning, canopy or marquee.
SIGN DEMISING WALL — The leased facade area of a business or
commercial which constitutes the storefront, and is measured from between
the leased separating wall to the other leased separating wall.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Any sign which is designed and erected solely
for the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction which is placed on the
property to which or on which the public is directed.
SIGN, ERECTION OF — The erection of a sign shall mean to build,
construct, attach, place, suspend or affix a sign, including the painting of
wall or window signs and the painting of signs or displays on the exterior
surface of a building or structure. Any other material change in any existing
sign shall be considered as the erection of a new sign.
SIGN, FACADE — Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on a building
with the principal support of said sign being the building, including
specifically the painting of signs or displays on the exterior surface of a
building.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign, not attached to a building, which is
erected, constructed, supported or maintained on a post or pole or other
bracing or supporting device.
SIGN, GROUND-MOUNTED (MONUMENT SIGN) — Any freestanding sign
which is flush to or rests upon the ground rather than erected on a post or
pole.
SIGN HEIGHT — In the case of a freestanding sign, the height will be
computed from grade level to the greatest height at any one point in the
sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — Any sign which shall be used to advertise and
identify the business conducted on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign perpendicular to a wall or facade which is
attached to and extends more than 12 inches from the surface of a building.
SIGN, PUBLIC BUSINESS — A sign erected by the municipality to direct the
public to local merchants, retailers, business services and offices.
SIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee of the Planning Board
established to review applications for signs. The committee shall be
empowered to meet with applicants and make recommendations for
approval with any conditions, or denial, with reasons, to the Planning Board
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:27
for action. The committee may utilize professionals of the Board to assist
in the review of sign applications. The committee will report annually to
the Board regarding the number of applications, their disposal and any
recommendations for amending the sign ordinance.
SIGN, WALL — (See definition for "Sign, Facade")
SILTATION BASIN — A facility through which stormwater is directed and
which is designed to collect eroded soil from a designated area.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed as a percent or ratio of horizontal to vertical.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral or organic material, of whatever origin,
that overlies bedrock and which can be readily excavated.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — The map
indicating the proposed scheduling and construction details for soil erosion
and sediment control.
SOLAR FACILITY (SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITY OR
STRUCTURE) — A facility or structure, and all associated equipment, for
the purpose of producing electrical energy from solar, or photovoltaic
electric energy technologies.[Ord. No. 2012-01]
SOLAR PANELS — An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof,
or solar collector that captures and converts solar radiation to produce
power or hot water, and includes flat plate, or photovoltaic solar cells and
excludes solar reflective or concentrating technology.[Ord. No. 2012-01]
SPECIMEN TREE — A particularly impressive or unusual example of a
species due to its size, shape, age, historic significance or any other trait
that epitomizes the character of the species.
STORE, RETAIL — A building or part thereof in which retail uses are
conducted.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for stormwater quality
enhancement and for storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled
release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains,
marshes and waterways,
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices, and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this ordinance which
requires review and approval of site plans by the Planning Board
adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
C.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:28
STORY —
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way meeting any of the following:
STREET, ARTERIAL — A higher-order, interregional road in the street
hierarchy; conveys traffic between centers; should be excluded from
residential areas. (See definition for "Street Hierarchy")
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street that distributes traffic between residential
access and subcollector streets, and, arterial order streets in residential
subdivision design and between nonresidential uses and arterial roads.
Such streets are intended to carry up to 3,000 vehicles per day (AADT).
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street with a single means of ingress and egress
and having a turnaround, the design of which may vary. (See definition for
"Street Hierarchy")
STREET, DIVIDED — A street having an island or other barrier separating
moving lanes of traffic.
That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the next floor above it or, if there be no floor above it,
then the surface between the floor and the ceiling over that floor.
A.
The interior of the roof shall not be considered a ceiling; rather, the
underside of the highest horizontal surface separating the area above
from the remainder of the structure below shall be considered the
ceiling.
B.
Cellars and basements ordinarily shall not be considered stories when
considering the height of a building; provided, however, that finished
basements in nonresidential buildings shall be considered a story for
the purposes of height, floor area and parking computations in
accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
C.
A half-story is the area under a pitched roof at the top of a building, the
floor of which is at least 4 feet but no more than 6 feet below the plate;
and such half-story shall not be used for nonresidential uses.
D.
A. Is an existing State, County or municipal roadway;
B. Is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law;
C. Is approved pursuant to this ordinance.
Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street line.
D.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:29
STREET FURNITURE — Man-made, aboveground items that are usually
found in street rights-of-way, including benches, kiosks, bicycle racks,
canopies, decorative traffic control fixtures, shelters and phone booths.
STREET HARDWARE — The mechanical and utility systems within a street
right-of-way such as hydrants, manhole covers, traffic lights and signs,
utility poles and lines, parking meters, and the like.
STREET HIERARCHY — The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon
function. A hierarchical approach to street design classifies streets
according to function, from high-traffic arterial roads to streets whose
function is residential access.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between the street
and a lot.
STREET, LOOP — A street that has its only ingress and egress at 2 points
on the same subcollector or collector street.
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL — A street designed to move traffic from
municipality to municipality within a region and to provide connections
between higher and lower orders of streets, with an AADT between 10,000
and 25,000 vehicles typically, though not exclusively, under County
jurisdiction.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A service street that runs parallel to
a higher-order street which provides access to abutting properties and
separation from through traffic. It may be designed as a residential access
street or minor collector as anticipated daily traffic dictates.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL — A street which provides connections
between major arterials and residential or nonresidential collector streets,
and also functions as an intramunicipal travel path, typically under County
jurisdiction. Such streets are intended to handle an AADT between 3,000
and 10,000 vehicles.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL — A street intended to handle large
volumes of regional and through traffic, typically under the jurisdiction of
the State or Federal Government such as the Interstate Highway System,
with an AADT exceeding 25,000 vehicles.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL ACCESS — The lowest order, other than rural
street type, of residential street (see definition for "Street Hierarchy").
Provides frontage for access to private lots and carries traffic having
destination or origin on the street itself. Designed to carry traffic at slowest
speed.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL MAJOR COLLECTOR — The highest order of
residential street (see definition for "Street Hierarchy"). Conducts and
distributes traffic between lower-order residential streets and higher-order
streets (arterials and expressways).
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:30
STREET, RESIDENTIAL MINOR COLLECTOR — Middle order of residential
streets (see definition for "Street Hierarchy"). Provides frontage for access
to lots, and carries traffic to and from adjoining residential access streets.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD — A type of residential access
street conforming to traditional subdivision street design, which provides
access to building lots fronting on a street and provides parking on both
sides of street (see definition for "Street Hierarchy").
STREET, RURAL — As it pertains to streets, when density is one dwelling
unit per acre or lower, a road primarily serving as access to abutting
building lots, which has no on-street parking, and lot-to-street access is
designed so vehicles do not back out of lots onto the street (see definition
for "Street Hierarchy").
STREETSCAPE — All of the elements that constitute the physical makeup
of a street and that, as a group, define its character, including building
frontage, street paving, street furniture, landscaping, including trees and
other plantings, awnings and marquees, signs, and lighting.
STREET, STUB — A street which is to be extended when the adjacent
property is developed.
STREET TREE — A tree in a public place, street, special easement or rightof-
way adjoining a street typically large in size when mature.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into 2 or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The
term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision". The following
shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this ordinance,
if no new streets are created:
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or
portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are 5 acres or larger in size;
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
C.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
D.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land,
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of
the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated
as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map of the municipality.
E.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:31
surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than 30
inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit in a building of 3 or more attached
dwelling units connected by common vertical walls from the ground to the
roof so that no unit shall be above or under another.
TRACT — An area of land composed of one or more lots which are the
subject of the development application, as well as all contiguous property
in the same ownership of which such lot(s) are a part, plus all portions of a
street or right-of-way contiguous to such lot(s) or other property.
TRAILER — A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another
vehicle and used for short-term human occupancy, carrying animals and
goods or objects.
TRAILERS, TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION — A trailer for office or storage
for the period of construction beginning with the issuance of a construction
permit and concluding with the issuance of the final Certificate of
Occupancy.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
USABLE YARD AREA — The portion of a yard surrounding a structure which
is viable for any use permitted by this ordinance.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
UTILITY — Services limited to sewage treatment, water supply, gas,
electric, telephone and cable television.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
WAIVER — The granting of relief from one or more submission
requirements for an application or relief from design requirements as set
forth in this ordinance.
WETLANDS — A freshwater wetland as defined in the New Jersey
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
WETLAND BUFFER AREA — A transition area as defined in the Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1, et seq.). The buffer or transition
area shall have a width approved by the NJDEP (N.J. Dept. of Environmental
Protection) under such Act. It is an area where the permitted uses shall be
restricted to those approved under such Act and this ordinance.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the street line and the closest point of the principal
building on the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight street line or the tangent
lines of curved street lines. The minimum required front yard shall be the
same as the required setback. See exhibit below.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:32
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of the principal building
on the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured horizontally and at
right angles to either a straight rear lot line or the tangent of curved rear
lot lines. See exhibit above.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of the principal
building on the lot. The width of the required side yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight side line or the tangent
lines of curved side lot lines. See exhibit above.
ZERO LOT LINE DETACHED RESIDENCE — A single-family detached unit
which is located in such a manner that one of the building's sides rests
directly on a lot line.
ZONING OFFICER — The individual appointed by the Borough Governing
Body to enforce the Land Development Ordinance herein.
ZONING PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer:
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:33
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1 percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.[Ord. No. 2009-10 § 2]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the flood plain within the
Borough subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — For the purposes of flood damage prevention,
development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard. For all other purposes, the division of a parcel of land into 2 or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this ordinance.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building: (a) built in the case of a
building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor or in the case of a building in a Coastal High Hazard Area to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (b) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood
Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters.
Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building; and
A.
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by a municipal agency.
Part 2 – Words and Terms: Flood Control
B.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:34
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the flood hazard area outside of the
floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and the relatively flat area
adjoining the floodway which area can be expected to be inundated by rising
waters at least once in 100 years.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the National Flood Insurance Program has provided flood profiles, as well
as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD PLAIN — The same as the Flood Hazard Area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
feet.
IMPROVEMENT — A structure or part thereof constructed or installed upon
real property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the location of
such construction or installation for a period of not less than 60 continuous
days.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For purposes of flood damage prevention,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of a flood plain regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1201
BH1:35
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of a slab or footings, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings
or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration effects the external dimensions
of the building.
STREAM CORRIDOR — The stream channel and all of the land on either
side of the stream channel which is within the 100-year floodplain as
delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Flood
Hazard Area as delineated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, or is a sloping area of 15 percent or greater that is contiguous
to the stream channel or 100-year floodplain/Flood Hazard Area. Stream
channels include permanent or intermittent watercourses shown on
U.S.G.S. quadrangle maps, and/or the Hunterdon County Soil Survey.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having such location on
or in the ground, including buildings, fences, lights, tennis courts, tanks,
towers, signs, advertising devices and swimming pools. For flood
emergency management purposes, a walled and roofed building, a
manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT (FLOOD) — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic
structure".
B.
§ 1201 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1201
BH1:36
Chapter 14
PLANNING BOARD AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION
§ 1400. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PLANNING BOARD.
A. A Planning Board is hereby re-established consisting of 9 regular and 4
alternate members of the following four classes:
1. Class I - The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor.
2. Class II - One of the officials of the municipality, other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor,
provided that any member of the Environmental Commission who
is also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among the
Class IV regular or alternate members.
3. Class III - A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
4. Class IV - Regular Members. Six other resident citizens of the
Borough to be appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV
shall hold no other municipal office, position, or employment except
that one such member may be a member of the Historic
Preservation Commission. No member of the Board of Education
may be a Class IV member of the Planning Board, except that in the
case of a nine-member board, one Class IV member may be a
member of the Board of Education. If there be an Environmental
Commission, the member of the Environmental Commission who is
also a member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1, shall be a Class IV Planning Board member, unless there
be among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board
both a member of the Historic Preservation Commission and a
member of the Board of Education, in which case the member
common to the Planning Board and Environmental Commission
shall be deemed a Class II member of the Planning Board. For the
purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board or
committee whose function is advisory in nature, and the
establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute,
shall not be considered the holding of a municipal office.
5. Class IV - Alternate Members. Four other resident citizens of the
Borough to be appointed by the Mayor. Alternate members shall
meet the qualifications of Class IV regular members and shall be
designated by the governing body at the time of their appointment
as "Alternate No. 1", "Alternate No. 2", "Alternate No. 3", and
"Alternate No. 4".
§ 1201 GENERAL § 1400
BH1:37
6. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any
standing member of the Planning Board.
B. Terms of Membership.
1. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
his or her official tenure.
2. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be
for one year or shall terminate at the completion of their respective
terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term
of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for 3 years or terminate at the
completion of term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first.
3. The term of Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he or she is no longer a
member of such other body or at the completion of his or her Class
IV term, whichever comes first.
4. The term of each Class IV regular member shall be 4 years.
5. The terms of the Class IV alternate members shall be 2 years,
except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than 1 alternate member shall expire any 1
year.
C. Role of Alternate Members. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member of any Class. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
D. Vacancies. If a vacancy of any Class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of term, it shall be filled for the unexpired term, only.
E. Compensation. Members of the Planning Board shall serve without
compensation except that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the
execution of official duties may be made by the municipality.
F. Removal. Any member other than a Class I member may be removed by
the governing body for cause but only after public hearing and other
due process proceedings.
G. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the Planning Board shall
be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has either directly
or indirectly any personal or financial interest. No member who is so
disqualified may act on that particular matter, shall not continue to sit
with the Board on the hearing of such matter, nor shall participate in
any discussion or decision.
§ 1400 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1400
BH1:38
§ 1401. POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE PLANNING BOARD.
[Ord. No. 2011-8]
The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below as well as any other
powers established by law:
H. Reorganization. Yearly, the Planning Board shall organize by selecting
from among its Class IV regular members a chairman and a vice
chairman. The Board shall also select a secretary who may or may not
be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
I. Funding. The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
J. Board Attorney. The position of Planning Board Attorney is hereby
created. The Planning Board may annually appoint to such office and fix
compensation or rate of compensation of an attorney-at-law of New
Jersey other than the Municipal Attorney. The adoption of this
Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any existing appointment.
K. Staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures
which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amounts appropriated by
the Borough Council for its use.
A. Make, adopt, and from time to time after public hearing, amend a
master plan for the physical development of the municipality, including
any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear
essential relation to the planning of the municipality;
B. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by State or Federal law or regulation;
C. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process;
D. Annually, prepare a program of municipal capital improvements
projects projected over a term of 6 years and amendments thereto and
recommend same to the Borough Council;
E. Consider and make report to the Borough Council within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation revision, or
amendment thereto, submitted to it and also pass upon other matters
specifically referred to the Planning Board by the Borough Council;
F. Prepare, at least every 6 years, a periodic reexamination of the Master
Plan;
G. The Planning Board shall have such other powers as prescribed by law,
including, but not limited to those in Chapter 14.
H. Technical Review Committee
§ 1400 GENERAL § 1401
BH1:39
1. The Chairman of the Planning Board may appoint a Technical
Review Committee (TRC) which shall be advisory in nature.
a. Only the Administrative Officer shall make a determination of
completeness of an application, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
b. The TRC shall advise and assist the Planning Board in
reviewing site plans, subdivision applications and variance
applications as to the following:
(1) The sketch plan/subdivision classification.
(2) Proposed meeting dates for processing each application.
(3) The appropriateness of simultaneous review of the
preliminary and final subdivision and site plan.
(4) Potential ordinance violations, necessary variances and
specific site plan and subdivision considerations.
(5) The technical aspect of the proposed plan, including but
not limited to parking and circulation, lighting, signs,
landscaping, drainage, building location and design.
c. An applicant for development shall have the option of
appearing before the TRC in order to hear comments
regarding the application or to discuss the technical aspects of
the application. The applicant may elect, if it so chooses, to
bring its professional consultants to the TRC meeting at which
its application is agendized for discussion. The TRC, in its
exclusive discretion, may allot specific time allocations to the
discussion of any application.
d. The TRC may promulgate such rules and regulations as it may
deem necessary for proper internal administration. A copy of
such rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be kept on file
with the Borough Clerk.
e. The TRC shall consist of 4 members of the Planning Board; any
3 of the 4 Board members are selected to act as regular
Committee members when Review Committee meetings are
convened. Committee members are appointed on an
application basis. TRC may be assisted by the Planning Board's
professionals in the review of applications.
All professional fees for TRC members shall be paid from the
applicant's escrow account which shall be established prior to
an application being placed on an agenda for discussion.
I. Sign Review Committee (SRC). [Amended 6-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
§ 1401 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1401
BH1:40
1. SRC establishment.
a. A Sign Review Committee (SRC) may be established at the
discretion of the Planning Board. When established, the Sign
Review Committee shall consist of five members as follows:
(1) Planning Board Chair or designee;
(2) Two members of the Planning Board, appointed by the
Planning Board Chair;
(3) One member of the Historic Preservation Commission,
appointed by the Historic Preservation Commission Chair;
and
(4) One member of the Flemington Community Partnership
(FCP) or its equivalent, appointed by the FCP Chair.
(5) The Chair of the SRC shall be the Planning Board Chair or
designee.
b. Term. The term of each SRC member shall be one year or the
expiration of their respective office, whichever occurs first.
c. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of term, it shall be filled for the unexpired term,
only.
d. Compensation. Members of the SRC shall serve without
compensation.
e. Removal. Any member may be removed by the SRC Chair for
cause, such as but not limited to conflicts, lack of meeting
attendance and/or other behavior unbecoming of a member of
the SRC.
f. Conflict. No member of the SRC shall be permitted to act on
any matter in which he or she has either directly or indirectly
any personal or financial interest. No member who is so
disqualified may act on that particular matter, shall not
continue to sit with the SRC on the hearing of such matter, nor
shall participate in any discussion or decision.
2. Duties and powers.
a. The SRC shall review and provide recommendations for all
applications for signs in the Downtown Business (DB).
Downtown Business II (DB II), Village Artisan Shopping (VAS),
Transition Residential (TR), Professional Office (PO),
Transition Commercial (TC) zones, and all redevelopment
areas, unless otherwise exempted below.
(1) Any tract with sign guidelines or regulations subject to
approval by the Planning Board. This shall not include
§ 1401 GENERAL § 1401
BH1:41
typical site plan approvals or variance approvals. The sign
guidelines or regulations shall include sign standards
developed specifically for one or more buildings on a tract
and shall indicate the range of permitted sign sizes,
materials, illumination, and/or locations.
b. The SRC shall be advisory in nature to the Planning Board and
Zoning Officer. The SRC shall not grant any relief.
c. The SRC shall review all sign applications identified in
Subsection B1 above and shall provide a recommendation
regarding said application to the approving authority, the
Zoning Officer or Planning Board, as may be appropriate in
light of the approval requested.
d. The SRC is not required to hold regular scheduled meetings.
SRC meetings may be scheduled as necessary.
e. Recommendations shall be based upon majority agreement of
the members.
f. Recommendations from the SRC shall address, at a minimum,
aesthetic design considerations, construction materials,
illumination, impact on the zoning ordinance and master plan,
impact on neighboring properties and the public good.
g. The SRC shall provide a recommendation within five business
days of a complete sign application submittal. Failure to
provide a recommendation within five business days shall
entitle the applicant to proceed with the requested approval
via the Zoning Officer or Planning Board, as may be
appropriate. Notwithstanding this time requirement, the
applicant may in their discretion, and in writing, grant the SRC
additional time to review the application in increments of five
business days.
h. The SRC may promulgate such rules and regulations as it may
deem necessary for proper internal administration. A copy of
such rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be kept on file
with the Borough Clerk.
i. The Sign Review Committee may be assisted by the Planning
Board's professionals in the review of applications. Where
Planning Board approval is necessary, any associated
professional fees shall be paid from the applicant's escrow
account established for the purpose of seeking Planning Board
approval.
3. SRC applications.
a. All applicants requesting approval for one or more signs
addressed in Subsection B1 above, including zoning permits,
§ 1401 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1401
BH1:42
§ 1402. ADDITIONAL POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF THE
PLANNING BOARD AS THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
site plan applications, etc., shall submit an application to the
SRC for review and recommendation.
b. An applicant shall be informed of any SRC meeting date. The
applicant may elect, if it so chooses, to bring its professional
consultants to the SRC meeting at which its application will be
discussed. The SRC, in its exclusive discretion, may allot
specific time allocations to the discussion of any application.
c. Applicants are encouraged to submit the application
electronically to the Zoning Officer and Planning Board
Secretary.
d. The determination of completeness for a sign application to the
SRC, as described below, shall be determined by the SRC Chair
or designee of the SRC Chair.
e. The following information shall be submitted for an application
to be deemed complete, unless upon written request by the
applicant the SRC Chair or designee of the SRC Chair finds one
or more documents unnecessary to evaluate the application
and waives the requirement for its submission in order for the
application to be deemed complete.
(1) Completion of the SRC application form. Said form shall be
available in the Borough Clerk's office.
(2) Where a facade, blade or awning sign is proposed,
photograph(s) and/or drawings of the entire facade which
is proposed for sign placement.
(3) Survey or aerial photograph of the site.
(4) Where a freestanding sign is proposed, a survey, site plan,
or aerial photograph identifying the location of the
proposed freestanding sign as well as the setback(s) of
said sign to lot line or curb.
(5) Rendering or photograph of each proposed sign, as well as
each dimension of the sign (height, length, width, wall
projection), as may be necessary to determine compliance
with Borough sign regulations.
(6) Construction materials of the proposed sign.
(7) Illumination details of the proposed sign (light location,
illumination levels, lighting type), if applicable.
A. The powers and authority formerly exercised by the Borough of
Flemington Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hereafter be exercised by
§ 1401 GENERAL § 1402
BH1:43
§ 1403. ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE PLANNING BOARD
(ACTING AS THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT).
The Planning Board shall have the power to:
the Borough of Flemington Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55d-25.
B. The Class I and Class III members of said Planning Board will not
participate in this consideration of applications for development which
involve relief pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 57 of the Public
Laws 1975, c. 291 N.J.S.A. 40:55d-70d.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision, or refusal made by the
Administrative Officer based on or made in enforcement of this
Ordinance.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or Land
Development Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the Zoning Board is authorized to pass on any Zoning
Ordinance;
C. Grant a variance from the strict application of a regulation, upon an
application or an appeal, so as to relieve difficulties or hardships:
1. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape
of a specific piece of property; or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property; or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any zoning regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon
the developer of such property; or
2. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this Ordinance set forth in § 2601 would
be advanced by deviation from these Ordinance requirements and
the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow the departure from zoning
regulations; provided, however, that no variance from those
departures enumerated in § 2601 shall be granted under this
section; and provided, further, that the proposed development does
not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site
plan, or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning
Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
40:55D-70.
D. Grant a variance to allow a deviation from the requirements of this
Ordinance, in particular cases and for special reasons to permit:
§ 1402 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1403
BH1:44
§ 1404. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION.
1. A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use
or principal structure;
2. An expansion of a nonconforming use;
3. Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a
conditional use;
4. An increase in the permitted floor area ratio;
5. An increase in the permitted density except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one-or two-dwelling
unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot
or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or
6. A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10
percent the maximum height permitted in the district for a
principal structure.
7. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently
beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief
can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and will not substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the
zone plan and zoning ordinance.
A variance under this Subsection D shall be granted only by the
affirmative vote of at least 5 members.
E. Report on Variances. The Planning Board shall, at least once a year,
review its decisions on applications and appeals for variances and
prepare and adopt by resolution a report of its findings on the
provisions of this Ordinance which were the subject of variance
requests and its recommendations for Land Development Ordinance
amendment or revision, if any. The Planning Board shall send copies of
the report and resolution to the Borough Council.
A. A Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) is hereby established
consisting of 5 regular members and 2 alternate members, each of
whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, of the following 3 classes:
1. Class A - Persons who are knowledgeable in building design and
construction or in architectural history;
2. Class B - Persons who are knowledgeable or have a demonstrated
interest in local history;
3. Class C - Persons who are residents of the municipality and who
hold no other municipal office, position or employment except for
membership on the Planning Board.
§ 1403 GENERAL § 1404
BH1:45
4. There shall be at least one regular member from each class.
5. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C
members and shall be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2" at the time of appointment.
B. Terms of Membership.
1. The term of each regular member shall be 4 years and the term of
each alternate member shall be 2 years.
2. Alternate Members. Alternate members shall be designated at the
time of their appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2."
3. The term of any member in common with the Planning Board shall
be for the term of membership on such Board.
C. Role of Alternate Members. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member of any Class. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
D. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term, only.
E. Compensation. Members of the HPC shall serve without compensation
except that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of
official duties may be made by the municipality.
F. Removal. Any member may be removed by the governing body for cause
but only after public hearing and other due process proceedings.
G. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the HPC shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has either directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. No member who is so
disqualified may act on that particular matter, shall not continue to sit
with the Commission on the hearing of such matter, nor shall
participate in any discussion or decision.
H. Organization. The HPC shall elect from its members a chairman and
vice-chairman and select a secretary who may or may not be a member
of the HPC or a municipal employee.
I. Funding. The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Historic Preservation
Commission.
J. Rules and Procedures. The HPC shall adopt and may amend internal
rules and procedures for the transaction of its business subject to the
following:
§ 1404 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1404
BH1:46
1. A quorum for any action by the HPC shall be 3 members.
2. All HPC minutes and records shall be public records.
3. All HPC meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act
(N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.).
4. HPC meetings shall be scheduled at least once every month or as
often as required to fulfill its obligations to advise the Planning
Board, governing body, or construction official.
K. Role of the HPC. [Amended 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12]
1. For applications that would otherwise not require Planning Board
review, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the HPC for
a written report on the application and its compliance with the
Borough's Historic District regulations. This report shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer, who shall issue a written approval
or denial based on the HPC report, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-111. The report of the HPC shall also be provided to the
applicant and the Planning Board. The report shall be sent to the
Zoning Officer within 45 days of the referral to the HPC. Failure of
HPC to report within the forty-five-day period shall constitute a
determination that the application is consistent with the Historic
District regulations and that no condition on the issuance of the
permit shall be imposed.
2. For applications that require Planning Board review based on
provisions of the Borough Land Development Ordinance, the
application shall be referred to the HPC for a written report on the
application and its compliance with the Borough's Historic District
regulations. This report shall be submitted to the Planning Board
which shall make a final decision on the matter. The report of the
HPC shall be sent to Planning Board and applicant within 45 days
of the referral to the HPC or prior to the scheduled public hearing
before the Board on the matter, whichever is sooner. Failure of the
HPC to report shall constitute a determination that the application
is consistent with the Historic District regulations and that no
condition shall be imposed on the issuance of any approval.
3. An applicant may appeal any determination of the Zoning Officer to
the Borough Planning Board. Said appeal shall occur within 45
days of the final determination by the Zoning Officer.
L. The HPC shall advise the Planning Board from time to time through the
process of amending the Historic Preservation Element of the Master
Plan.
M. The HPC shall recommend to the Planning Board guidelines for review
to be utilized in determinations of historic landmark status and for
review of development applications or permits affecting historic
§ 1404 GENERAL § 1404
BH1:47
§ 1405. POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HISTORIC
PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
§ 1406. DIVISION OF JURISDICTION IN DEVELOPMENT
APPLICATIONS.
§ 1407. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PLANNING BOARD.
landmarks or improvements within historic districts. The Planning
Board may recommend modifications of the guidelines.
A. To prepare a survey or surveys of historic sites and districts pursuant to
criteria established in such survey;
B. To make recommendations to the Planning Board on the Historic
Preservation Element of the Master Plan and on the implications of any
other Element on the preservation of historic sites and districts;
C. To advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program;
D. To advise the Planning Board on applications for development;
E. Provide written reports on the application of the zoning provisions of
this Ordinance or other land development regulations on historic sites
and districts;
F. Provide technical assistance upon request to property owners on the
preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of historic structures;
G. To carry out such other advisory, educational, and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the municipality.
A. Planning Board. The following provisions set forth the jurisdiction of
the Planning Board in the review of development applications:
1. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant subdivision or
conditional use approval simultaneously with site plan approval.
A. Meetings.
1. Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled at least once a
month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
2. Special meetings may be scheduled for at the call of the chairman
or on the request of any 2 Board members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with the Open
Public Meetings Act.
§ 1404 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1407
BH1:48
3. Actions at Meetings; Quorum. All agenda items requiring action by
the Board, except adjournments, shall be taken with a quorum
present.
4. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present
at such meeting, except as otherwise provided in this Article or
N.J.S.A. 40:55D. Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes
required to approve an application for development pursuant to the
exceptional vote requirements of § 1400 shall be deemed an action
denying the application. A member of the Board who was absent for
1 or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence from one or more of
the meetings: provided, however, that such a Board member has
available to him or her the transcript or recording of all the
hearings from which he or she was absent, and certifies in writing
to the Board that he or she has read such transcript or listened to
such recording.
5. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meetings Act. An executive session for the purpose of
discussing and studying any matters to come before the agency
shall not be deemed a regular meeting within the meaning of this
Ordinance.
B. Records of the Board.
1. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board, and of the persons appearing by attorney, the
action taken by the Planning Board, the findings, if any, made by it
and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during the normal business hours at
the office of the Administrative Officer. Any interested party shall
have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as
evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of
such minutes. Such interested party shall be charged a reasonable
fee for the reproduction of the minutes, as indicated in § 2800 of
this Ordinance.
2. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made by either stenographer,
mechanical or electronic means. The municipality shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any
interested party at his or her expense, provided that the charge for
a transcript shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted in
N.J.S.A. 2B:7-1 et seq. as indicated in § 2800 of this Ordinance.
Each transcript shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be
accurate.
§ 1407 GENERAL § 1408
BH1:49
§ 1408. PUBLIC HEARINGS.
§ 1409. DECISIONS.
A. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on each application for
development, except for application where no public hearing is
required. The Board shall make the rules governing such hearings.
Public hearings shall be scheduled by the Board or its designee.
B. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file in the office of the Administrative Officer and available
for public inspection during normal business hours at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing. If maps or related material are to be
revised as a result of any approving authority, the applicant shall file
copies of all revised maps and related material as required in Chapter
15, with revision date noted on same, at least 10 days prior to the
meeting of the approving authority at which discussion and /or hearing
is scheduled to take place.
C. The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony at
the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed
maps and documents.
D. The public hearing shall be held in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
The officer presiding at the hearing, or his or her designee, shall have
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the "County and Municipal Investigations Law," N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq. shall apply.
E. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
F. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
G. If the approving authority requires, or the applicant proposes, in the
event any substantial amendment in the layout of improvements
proposed by the developer that have been the subject of a hearing, an
amended application for development shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application.
A. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development and
shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide
the findings and conclusions through:
§ 1408 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1409
BH1:50
§ 1410. PUBLIC NOTICE OF A HEARING.
The following public notice requirements shall apply to all hearings of the
Planning Board (except for notice regarding a minor subdivision or site plan
application, where required pursuant to § 1506 shall apply).
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in this section for action by the municipal agency on the
application for development; or
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
Planning Board who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution.
An action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above,
with those members voting against the motion for approval being
the members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution. The
vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the municipal agency; however, the
date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of
the decision for the purposes of the mailings, filings, and
publications required by § 1413.
A. Public notice of a hearing shall be given by the applicant for the
following applications for development:
1. Any request for a variance;
2. Any request for conditional use approval;
3. Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed of a
mapped street or public drainage way or on a lot not abutting a
street;
4. Any request for general development plan approval;
5. Any request for preliminary major subdivision approval;
6. Any request for interpretation of this Ordinance or Zoning Map;
7. Any request for preliminary major site plan; and
8. Any request for major site plan approval involving Subsections A1
through A3.
9. Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a or b.
B. Public notice shall not be required for the following applications.
1. Concept or informal plan review.
§ 1409 GENERAL § 1410
BH1:51
2. Final subdivision plan.
3. Final site plan.
4. Any other type of application or action by the Board not specifically
enumerated in § 1401.
C. The secretary of the Planning Board shall notify the applicant at least 2
weeks prior to the public hearing for the subject application. Notice of a
hearing requiring public notice shall be given by the applicant at least
10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the following manner:
1. By publication in the official newspaper of the Borough.
2. To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax duplicate
located in the State and within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of the hearing; provided that this
requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to a condominium
association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit
above or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any
co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it.
Notice shall be given by serving a copy on the property owner, as
shown on the current tax duplicate, or his or her agent in charge of
the property; or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his or her address as shown on the current tax
duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be obtained.
Notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
3. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner; notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowner's association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
4. To the clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities when
the property involved is located within 200 feet of said adjoining
municipality or municipalities, which notice shall be given by
personal service or certified mail.
5. To the Hunterdon County Planning Board by personal service or
certified mail when the application for development involves
property adjacent to an existing County road or proposed road
shown on the County Official Map or the County Master Plan or
adjoins other County land, or is situated within 200 feet of a
municipal boundary.
§ 1410 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1410
BH1:52
§ 1411. STANDARDS FOR GRANT OF VARIANCE.
6. To the Commissioner of the Department of Transportation of the
State of New Jersey by personal service or certified mail when the
property abuts a State highway.
7. To the State Planning Commission, by personal service or certified
mail when the hearing involves an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units, in which
case the notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Administrative Officer.
8. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving proper
notice to all property owners who do not reside within the
municipality.
D. Property List. Under the written request of an applicant, the Tax
Assessor shall, within 7 days, make and certify a list from current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the municipality to
whom the applicant shall be charged $10.00 and shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to
any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
E. Proof of Service. The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service
with the approving authority at least 3 days prior to the opening of the
public hearing.
F. Contents of Notice. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing and the nature of the matters to be considered, and an
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's office, and the
location and times at which any maps or documents for which approval
is sought are available for inspection.
G. In case of a discrepancy between the foregoing provisions of this § 1410
and the requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law, the requirements
of the Municipal Land Use Law shall apply.
A. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
Article unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and this Ordinance.
B. Any variance from the terms of this Article hereafter granted by the
Planning Board permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or
structures, or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall if no
other period of duration is established by the Board granting the
variance, expire by limitation unless such construction or alteration
shall have been actually commenced on each and every structure
permitted by said variance, or unless such permitted use has actually
been commenced, within 12 months from the date of entry of the
§ 1410 GENERAL § 1411
BH1:53
§ 1412. APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS TO THE PLANNING BOARD.
§ 1413. NOTICE OF DECISIONS.
Any decision of the Planning Board when acting upon an application for
development shall be given notice in the following manner:
§ 1414. EXCEPTIONS, WAIVERS, AND SPECIAL AREA STANDARDS
FOR THE RESIDENTIAL SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
(N.J.A.C. 5:21-3)
judgment or determination of the approving authority; except, however,
that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be
tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the
approving authority to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
A. Appeals to the Planning Board may be taken by an interested party
affected by any decision of the Administrative Officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning
provisions of this Ordinance or a duly adopted official map. Such appeal
shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the official
from whom the appeal was taken, specifying the grounds of such
appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Planning
Board for action under any of its powers without prior application to the
Administrative Officer.
A. Mailing of Decision. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the
applicant and to the appellant, if the appellant is a differing interested
party, or, if either or both is represented, then to the respective
attorney(s) without charge, and for a reasonable charge to any other
interested person who has requested it, not later than 10 days after the
date of the decision.
B. Newspaper Notice of Decision. A brief notice of every final decision
shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality. Such
publications shall be arranged by the Board Secretary without separate
charge to the applicant or to the appellant, if the appellant is a differing
interested party. The notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
C. Filing of Decision. A copy of the decision and all submitted documents
of record shall be filed with the Administrative Officer.
A. Exceptions (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.1).
§ 1411 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1414
BH1:54
1. The approving authority may grant such de minimis exceptions
from the requirements of the site improvement standards as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of the standards is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the development in question.
2. An application for an exception pursuant to this section shall be
filed in writing with the approving authority and shall include:
a. A statement of the requirements of the standards from which
an exception is sought;
b. A statement of the manner by which strict compliance with
said provisions would result in practical difficulties; and
c. A statement of the nature and extent of such practical
difficulties.
3. Exceptions shall become a part of the construction documents and
shall be retained by the Board of Jurisdiction.
4. Within 30 days of granting a de minimis exception request, a
municipal approving authority agreeing to an exception pursuant
to this section shall send a copy of the document(s) constituting the
de minimis exception resolution and/or document to the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and
Standards, 101 South Broad Street, CN 802, Trenton, NJ
08625-0802. Such notice shall be clearly marked "Site
Improvement Exception(s)."
5. An application for an exception may also be made by an officer or
agency of the municipality.
6. Examples of de minimis exceptions include, but are not limited to,
the following:
a. Reducing the minimum number of parking spaces and the
minimum size of parking stalls;
b. Reducing the minimum geometrics of street design, such as
curb radii, horizontal and vertical curves, intersection angles,
centerline radii, and others;
c. Reducing cartway width; and
d. Any changes in standards necessary to implement traffic
calming devices.
7. The approving authority's granting of a request for a de minimis
exception shall be based on a finding that the requested exception
meets the following criteria:
§ 1414 GENERAL § 1414
BH1:55
a. It is consistent with the intent of the Site Improvement Act;
b. It is reasonable, limited, and not unduly burdensome;
c. It meets the needs of public health and safety; and
d. It takes into account existing infrastructure and possible
surrounding future development.
B. Waiver Request (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.2).
1. The Borough or developer may, in connection with a specific
development, request a waiver of any site improvement standard
adopted under this section in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-40.4(c). A waiver request may also be made jointly by a
municipality and a developer.
2. The Site Improvement Advisory Board may approve a request for a
waiver based on any danger to public health and safety that would
be caused by adherence to a standard specified in this section.
3. A waiver may be requested by the Borough or a developer, or the
request may be made jointly. The waiver request shall consist of the
following:
a. A copy of the development application as submitted to the
municipal approving authority; and
b. A brief memorandum to the Commissioner of the Department
of Community Affairs containing sufficient information upon
which to base a determination, including:
(1) A short description of the project in narrative form;
(2) A citation to the particular site improvement standard
from which waiver is requested;
(3) A clear description of the condition(s) giving rise to the
request;
(4) A clear description of the anticipated result if the standard
were to be followed;
(5) The name, address, and telephone number of a contact
person for the developer; and
(6) The name, address, and telephone number of a contact
person for the municipal approving authority.
c. The party requesting the waiver shall send the request to the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Codes and Standards, 101 South Broad Street, CN 802,
Trenton, NJ 08625-0802.
§ 1414 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1414
BH1:56
§ 1415. APPEALS FROM PLANNING BOARD TO THE GOVERNING
BODY. [Added 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
d. Where a waiver is requested by the developer, the developer
shall send a copy of the request to the administrative officer of
the municipality concerned. Where a waiver is requested by
the Borough, the Borough shall send a copy of the request to
the developer.
e. A waiver may be requested by the developer or the Borough
approving authority at any time during the pendency of a
development application. The Site Improvement Advisory
Board recommends submission of a waiver request early in the
application process or prior to the submission of a formal
development application. If the applicant or the approving
authority determines during the approving authority review
process that a waiver request is appropriate, the approving
authority shall give consideration whenever possible to the
granting of an extension for the purpose of pursuing a waiver.
In some cases it may be impracticable for the party requesting
or appealing a waiver to complete the waiver process within
the time guidelines of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.; see, for example, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.3, 46(c),
46.1, 47, 48, and 50). In such cases, the municipal approving
authority may provide for the disposition of the waiver as a
condition of its approval.
f. There is no fee for requesting a waiver.
A. For any interested party desiring to appeal any final decision of the
Planning Board approving an application for development pursuant to
Subsection d. of Section 57 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, such appeal may be to
the Flemington Borough Mayor and Council ("the governing body") and
shall be made within 10 days of date of publication of such final decision
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10. The appeal to the governing body shall
be made by serving the Borough Clerk in person or by certified mail
with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and the name
and address of the appellant, and the name and address of his or her
attorney, if represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the governing
body only upon the record established before the Planning Board.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Borough Clerk by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, to
those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10,
and to the Board from which the appeal is taken at least 10 days prior to
the date of the meeting. The parties may submit oral and written
arguments on the record at such meeting, and the governing body shall
provide for verbatim recording and transcripts of such by either
stenographer, mechanical or electronic means pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10. The governing body shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his or her
§ 1414 GENERAL § 1415
BH1:57
expense. The municipal agency, in furnishing a transcript of the
proceedings to an interested party at his or her expense, shall not
charge such interested party more than the maximum permitted in
N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15. Said transcript shall be certified in writing by the
transcriber to be accurate.
C. The appellant shall: (1) within five days of service of the notice of appeal
pursuant this section, arrange for a transcript pursuant to Subsection f.
of Section 6 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10 for use by the governing body and
deposit of $50 or the estimated cost of such transcription, whichever is
less; or (2) within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal, submit a
transcript as otherwise arranged to the Borough Clerk: otherwise, the
appeal may be dismissed for failure to prosecute. The governing body
shall conclude a review of the record below not later than 95 days from
the date of publication of notice of the decision below pursuant to
Subsection i. of Section 6 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10, unless the applicant
consents in writing to an extension of such period. A brief notice of the
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality.
Such publications shall be arranged by the Borough Clerk. The period
of time in which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from
the first publication of the decision. Failure of the governing body to
hold a hearing and conclude a review of the record below and to render
a decision within such specified period shall constitute a decision
affirming the action of the Board.
D. The governing body may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in part,
with or without the imposition of conditions the final decision of the
Planning Board approving a variance pursuant to Subsection d. of
Section 57 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. The review shall be made on the
record made before the Planning Board.
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the governing body shall be necessary to reverse, remand or modify the
final action of the Planning Board or to impose conditions on or alter
conditions to any final action of the Planning Board. Otherwise, the final
action of the Board shall be deemed to be affirmed.
F. An appeal to the governing body shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed was
made unless the board from whose action the appeal is taken certifies
to the governing body, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with such board, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior
Court on application upon notice to the Planning Board from whom the
appeal is taken and on good cause shown.
G. The governing body shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant or,
if represented, then to his or her attorney, without separate charge, and
for a reasonable charge to any interested party who has requested it,
not later than 10 days after the date of the decision. A brief notice of the
§ 1415 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1415
BH1:58
Chapter 15
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES AND PLAT DETAILS
§ 1500. COMPLETE APPLICATION AND COMMENCING
APPLICABLE TIME PERIODS.
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the Borough.
Such publication shall be arranged by the Borough Clerk. The
governing body may make a reasonable charge for publication of any
notices required.
A. An application for development or a variance shall be complete for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when the
application is certified complete by the Administrative Officer. In the
event the application is not certified to be complete within 45 days of
the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete
upon the expiration of the 45-day period for purposes of commencing
the applicable time period, unless:
1. The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted
by ordinance and provided to the applicant; and
2. The Administrative Officer has notified the applicant, in writing, of
the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission of
the application.
B. The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the Administrative Officer shall
grant or deny the request within 45 days.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that the application is
entitled to approval.
D. The approving authority may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional
information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions in the
accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the approving
authority.
E. Attached to and made part of this Ordinance is an Appendix of
Checklists, which contains checklists for various types of applications
for development and variances. There shall be submitted to the
approving authority with every application for development a properly
completed checklist, or checklists, appropriate for each application for
development for which approval is sought or required. No application
§ 1415 GENERAL § 1500
BH1:59
§ 1501. PROVISIONS REQUIRED FOR ALL SUBMISSIONS.
All applications for development or variance shall submit the following
information in addition to any other information specific to the type of
submission:
for development or variance shall be complete unless and until such
properly completed checklist(s) has been so submitted. (The checklists
may be found at the end of this chapter.)
A. A completed and signed application form, containing the following
information:
1. Applicant's name, address, telephone and facsimile number (if
any);
2. Owner's name, address, telephone and facsimile number (if any);
3. Interest of applicant in property;
4. Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number (if any), email
address (if applicable) of applicant's attorney (if represented)
and professional representatives;
5. Street address of property;
6. Tax Block and Lot number(s) of property;
7. Zoning district in which the property is situated;
8. Description of property;
9. Description of proposed development;
10. Type of application and submission level.
B. The application fee applicable escrow fee in accordance with Chapter
28.
C. A list of all variances or waivers requested, with reasons for such
requests, citing the applicable section of the ordinance, excepting
concept plans.
D. A certification from the Tax Collector's office that no taxes or
assessments are due or delinquent on the subject property.
E. Proof of submission of application to the County Planning Board.
F. Affidavit of ownership and the consent of the owner for the filing of an
application for development.
G. A certification of corporation or partnership interest pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et seq., if applicable, excepting concept plans.
§ 1500 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1501
BH1:60
H. A copy of any existing protective covenants, easements or deed
restrictions applying to or to be applied to the subject land, excepting
concept plans.
I. The plat shall indicate the location and nature of any proposed
easement and/or land dedicated or reserved for public use.
J. A list of all required regulatory approvals at the Municipal, County,
State, and Federal level of government and their status, excepting
concept plans.
K. Plans legibly drawn at a scale no less than 1"=100', except as otherwise
permitted, with the tract oriented such that the north arrow points to
the top of the sheet. All boundary distances shall be in feet and tenths of
a foot. All bearings shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds. In the
event that the entire tract cannot be contained on one sheet, multiple
sheets may be submitted provided that each sheet contains reference to
adjacent sheets and the sheets are the same size. Details and profiles
may be drawn on originals at a different size than the plat provided that
all prints submitted shall be of the same size.
L. Details to Be Placed on Plans.
1. The name and address of the owner and applicant.
2. The name, signature, license or certification number, seal, and
address of architect, engineer, planner, land surveyor or landscape
architect, as applicable, involved in the preparation of the plat or
plan.
3. Title block denoting the type and level of submission, tax map
sheet, block and lot number(s), name of county and municipality,
and street location.
4. A key map drawn at a scale no less than 1"=2,000' showing the
location of the tract with reference to the surrounding properties,
streets, municipal boundaries, and water courses within 500 feet of
the subject parcel.
5. A listing of property owners, addresses and block/lot numbers
within 200 feet of the subject property.
6. A schedule of the required and proposed zoning district regulations
including, but not limited to the lot size, lot width, street frontage,
yard setbacks, open space requirements, parking requirements,
and lot coverages.
7. Lot numbers as assigned by the Tax Assessor.
8. A north arrow, scale and graphic scale (key map and plans shall
both be oriented the same direction).
§ 1501 GENERAL § 1501
BH1:61
§ 1502. PERMISSIBLE DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLAN
PREPARATION.
All plans and documents submitted shall be signed and sealed by the
appropriate licensed or certified professional.
§ 1503. CORPORATE OWNERS AND PARTNERSHIP DISCLOSURES.
A corporation, limited liability corporation or partnership applying for
permission to subdivide a parcel of land into 6 or more lots, or for a
variance to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units, or
for approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes shall list the
names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning at
least 10 percent of its stock of any class or at least 10 percent of the
interest in the partnership, as the case may be. If a corporation, limited
liability corporation or partnership owns 10 percent or more of the stock
of a corporation, or 10% or greater interest in the partnership, subject
to the above disclosure, that corporation, limited liability corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of its stockholders holding
10 percent or more of its stock or of 10 percent or greater interest in the
partnership, as the case may be, and this requirement shall be followed by
every corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership, until the names
and addresses of the non-corporate stockholders and individual partners
exceeding the 10 percent ownership criterion described herein have been
listed. Neither the approving authority, nor the governing body shall
approve the application of any corporation, limited liability corporation
or partnership which does not comply with this requirement pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 and 48.2, as amended.
9. A copy of the current zoning map depicting the subject tract and
the surrounding properties within 500 feet of said parcel.
10. Date of plan and/or survey and any revision date.
11. A computer disk of the proposed subdivision (or site) plan
compatible with GIS Arc/View.
M. Conformity Required. Whenever an application for development to the
approving authority is permitted or required by this Article, it shall be
in such form, and accompanied by such maps, documents, and
materials as are prescribed by this Article, and shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer in such numbers as is prescribed herein. No
development or variance application shall be deemed complete for
submittal unless it conforms to the form, content, and data
requirements of this Article and any other applicable provisions of this
Ordinance. No application shall be accepted unless it is filed on the
official application forms of the Borough. The standards for submission
contained in this Article shall be considered the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
§ 1501 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1504
BH1:62
§ 1504. STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.
Development plans shall be so designed as to enhance the general
appearance of the Borough and to promote the harmonious use of land;
to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, or
other dangers; to promote the general health, safety, and welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and buildings by
an undue concentration of population; to encourage creative development
and design consistent with the policies of the Master Plan of the Borough
of Flemington, and the regulations promulgated herein. Applications for
development shall be reviewed and approvals given or withheld based on
whether the development meets the standards for development contained
within this Ordinance as interpreted to advance the specific objectives set
forth below:
A. Character of the Land. All development shall respect the natural
character of the land, the drainage system, soil capabilities,
groundwater and aquifer recharge quality.
B. Relationship to Flemington Master Plan. All developments shall be
planned and designed to achieve the goals and objectives for land
development as are or may be set forth in the Flemington Borough
Master Plan duly adopted by the approving authority with regard to
conservation, historic preservation, community facilities, recreation,
open space, recycling, affordable housing, utility distribution,
circulation, land use, fiscal impact, economic development, and the
goals for development of adjacent municipalities, Hunterdon County
and the State.
C. Relationship to Borough Development Patterns. All development shall
be planned and designed to achieve the Borough goals of permitting
and encouraging a population density and a development pattern in the
municipality that facilitates the provision of public utilities and
services, including public water and public sewerage, storm drainage
systems, recreation areas, public schools, state, county, and local roads,
in an orderly, functional and economical manner.
D. Conservation of Open Space. Common open space and adequate
recreation areas shall be set aside in suitable locations to provide for
the recreation needs of the residents and the owners of the
development and those portions of the project that, because of their
natural features, constitute important visual amenities and
environmental resources. Development is intended to create after
completion a continuity of open space resulting from the integration of
upland, wetland, floodplain and surface water areas in accordance with
the goals and objectives of the Master Plan.
E. Appearance and Aesthetic Control. All development shall be planned
and designed to promote and achieve aesthetically pleasing views from
and to various land uses. The creation and promotion of such aesthetic
conditions shall strengthen and preserve the municipality's unique
§ 1504 GENERAL § 1504
BH1:63
environmental heritage and promote the civic pride, prosperity, and
general welfare of the residents of the development, the municipality,
and visitors thereto.
F. Review Guidelines. The following guidelines shall be used in the review
of any application for development or conditional use:
1. Regard for Natural Features. All residential and nonresidential
uses shall be designed with regard to the topography and natural
features of the site. The effects of prevailing winds, seasonal
temperatures and hours of sunlight on the physical layout and form
of the proposed buildings shall be taken into account. Special
consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural features,
including large trees, stands of specimen vegetation, groves,
waterways, aquifer recharge areas, scenic, paleontological, steep
slopes, ridge tops, scenic roads, archaeological, cultural, and
historic sites and other community assets within site area, and the
reduction of impacts on wildlife. The development shall be
designed and programmed so as to minimize tree clearance and the
destruction of natural amenities associated with the same.
2. Siting of Buildings. All housing and supporting uses shall be sited
so as to enhance privacy for residential uses, ensure natural light
for all principal residential rooms, and to the greatest extent
possible be designed to promote passive solar energy technology.
Buildings layout shall be reviewed for arrangement, efficiency and
aesthetic quality.
3. Relationship to Community Facilities. Housing shall be
conveniently served by community facilities and open space.
4. Circulation. The pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within
and adjacent to the site with particular emphasis on the provision
and layout of parking areas, off-street loading and unloading, the
movement of people, goods and vehicles from access roads within
the site, between buildings and between buildings and vehicles. In
particular the approving authority shall ensure compliance in site
design with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as it may be
amended or superseded. The approving authority shall ensure that
all parking spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently
arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed
so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads
and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the
site. The circulation shall be consistent with Borough, County, and
State requirements.
5. Open Space. Open space within all planned unit developments shall
be planned and designed to achieve the Borough goal of ensuring
that adequate recreation areas are set aside in suitable locations to
provide for the recreation needs of the residents and owners of the
planned unit development; and that those portions of the Borough
§ 1504 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1504
BH1:64
§ 1505. INFORMAL REVIEW/CONCEPT PLAN.
that, because of their natural features, constitute important visual
amenities and environmental resources are maintained in
accordance with sound conservation practice.
6. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be reviewed for the ability to
integrate the site elements of topography, water, buildings, parking
and loading areas, and the buffering of incompatible uses.
Landscaping shall be reviewed for diversity, including species,
function, sculpture, fencing, walls, and other landscaping
elements.
7. Lighting. Adequate lighting for the function of the site shall be
reviewed for the safe movement and security of persons and
vehicles. Particular attention shall be made to the minimization of
glare and impact upon adjacent property.
8. Signs. Signs shall be evaluated for the aesthetics of their design
and their harmony with other signs on- and off-site. The location of
signs shall be reviewed for the purpose of removing any hazard to
pedestrians or vehicles.
9. Utilities, Solid Waste Management and Recycling. Storm drainage,
sanitary and solid waste disposal including recycling, water supply,
electricity supply, telephone and cable television service shall be
reviewed and considered. Emphasis shall be given on the adequacy
of existing systems and the need for improvements, both on- and
off-site to adequately provide for the development's needs.
10. Compatibility of Residential and Non-Residential Development.
Applications for development and conditional uses shall be
designed to assure the compatibility of residential and nonresidential
uses by:
a. Providing commercial uses with appropriate space and, in
particular, sufficient depth from a street to satisfy the needs of
contemporary uses including the provision of adequately
landscaped off-street parking, buffer areas between
commercial and residential use areas, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation systems connecting the commercial uses to office,
residential and open space uses;
b. Protecting nonresidential development and nearby residences
against fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and
other hazards, and against offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust and other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat,
humidity, glare and other objectionable influences;
c. Protect residential and nonresidential development from the
noise, exhaust emissions, and other negative aspects of
congestion of vehicular traffic.
§ 1504 GENERAL § 1505
BH1:65
§ 1506. MINOR SUBDIVISION AND MINOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
A. An informal submission is optional and may be held at a meeting of the
Planning Board with reference to any informally prepared plat of
sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion. The
purpose of such a discussion is to review development concepts in order
to assist the applicant in the preparation of subsequent plans. No
decisions will be made and no formal action taken on an informal
discussion. Discussion and recommendations shall be informal and
shall not be binding on the approving authority or the applicant. The
approving authority shall have the right to limit and control the extent,
length, and scope of such informal discussion, to regulate when it may
occur, to require prior notice of a request for it, and to conclude it in the
interests of expediting other business or if the matters being presented,
in the judgment of the approving authority, should be presented
formally.
B. The data included on an informal submission of a site plan shall include
sufficient basic data to enable the approving authority and the applicant
to comment upon design concepts such as building location, ingress
and egress, parking, major natural features that will have to be
recognized or may influence certain design criteria, and the applicant's
basic intent for water, sewage treatment, and storm drainage facilities.
Informal submissions should be sketches to scale of possible plan(s) for
development. They are not binding on the municipality or upon the
developer. Precise engineered drawings are not necessary.
A. Criteria. Applications shall be classified either as minor subdivisions or
minor site plans only upon meeting the definitional requirements in
Chapter 12, Definitions.
B. Submission Requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth on
the submission checklist, see § 1516, the applicant shall file:
1. Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
2. The required application and escrow fees.
3. Certification from the Borough Tax Collector that no real estate
taxes or assessments for local improvements are delinquent.
C. If the application is complete, the approving authority shall approve or
deny the application, or approve it conditionally on terms insuring the
provision of improvements under this Ordinance.
D. Approval of a minor subdivision shall be considered final approval
which shall expire 190 days from the date of approval as determined by
the date on which the resolution granting approval was adopted unless
within such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the New Jersey State Statutes Title 46 Chapters 26A, 26B
and 26C, or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision,
is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer, the Borough
§ 1505 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1506
BH1:66
§ 1507. PRELIMINARY MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS AND
PRELIMINARY MAJOR SITE PLANS.
Engineer, and the Borough Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed
accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the chairman and
secretary of the approving authority (or the vice chairman or assistant
secretary, respectively, in their absence). All conditions upon which
approval is granted shall be adequately noted on the plat or described
in the deed prior to signing by such approving authority officials. In
reviewing the application for development for a proposed minor
subdivision, the approving authority may accept a plat not in conformity
with Title 46, Chapters 26A, 26B and 26C, provided that, if the
developer chooses to file the minor subdivision plat rather than record
a deed therefore, such plat shall conform with the provisions of Title 46,
Chapters 26A, 26B and 26C.
E. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of 2 years after the date of
minor subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor
subdivision shall have been duly recorded.
F. The approving authority may extend the 190-day period for filing minor
subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection D of this section if the
applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the approving
authority, 1), that the applicant was barred or prevented, directly, or
indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities; and
2), that the applicant applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the
period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as
determined by the approving authority. The applicant may apply for the
extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration
date.
G. The approving authority shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the approving authority but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date,
if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the approving
authority that the applicant was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities
and that the applicant applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. An applicant shall apply for the extension before,
1), what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor subdivision
approval; or 2), the 91st day after the applicant receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later.
A. The recommendations, if available, of the County Planning Board and
those of all other agencies and officials to whom the preliminary plat or
§ 1506 GENERAL § 1507
BH1:67
§ 1508. PRELIMINARY APPROVAL: MAJOR SITE PLANS AND
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
plan was submitted shall be given careful consideration in the final
decision on the development application. If the approving authority acts
favorably on the preliminary plat or plan, the chairman and secretary
of the approving authority (or the acting chairman or secretary, where
either or both may be absent), and the municipal engineer shall affix
their signatures to at least 10 copies of the plat or plan with the
notation that it has been approved.
1. Should minor revisions or additions to the plat or plan be deemed
necessary, the approving authority may grant preliminary approval
subject to specified conditions and receipt of revised plat or plan.
Should major revisions be deemed necessary, the approving
authority shall require that an amended plat or plan be submitted
and acted upon as in the case of the original application for
preliminary approval.
2. If the approving authority, after consideration and discussion of the
preliminary plat or plan, determines that it is unacceptable, a
notation shall be made by the chairman of the approving authority
to that effect on the plat or plan and a resolution adopted setting
forth the reasons for such rejection. One copy of the plat or plan
and said resolution shall be returned to the applicant within 10
days of such determination.
B. The approving authority shall give priority to and expedite development
applications which include dwelling units set aside for low and
moderate income households.
A. Preliminary site plan approval and/or preliminary major subdivision
approval shall be obtained at, or prior to, the time final approval as
determined by the date on which the resolution granting approval was
adopted, is obtained.
1. The applicant shall provide:
a. The required application and escrow fee.
b. Certification from the Borough Tax Collector that no real estate
taxes or assessments for local improvements are delinquent.
c. 3 copies of any additional documents required in connection
with the application.
2. Following any required hearing, the approving authority may
approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions the application for
preliminary approval. If the approving authority grants preliminary
approval, its chairman, secretary and Borough Engineer shall sign
the plat indicating the approval.
§ 1507 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1508
BH1:68
B. Preliminary Approval Rights. Preliminary approval shall, except as
provided in Subsection B4 below, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a 3-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval.
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to: use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and requirements peculiar to site plan approval,
except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Borough from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and
safety;
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat;
3. That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of 2
years, provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance such revised standards may govern.
4. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the approving authority may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection B1, 2, and 3 above for such period of time longer than 3
years as shall be determined by the approving authority to be
reasonable, taking into consideration (a) the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, (b) economic conditions, and (c) the comprehensiveness
of the development. The applicant may apply for and the approving
authority may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined
by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking into
consideration (a) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under preliminary approval, (b) the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section or sections awaiting final approval, (c) economic conditions,
and (d) the comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if
the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
5. Whenever the approving authority grants an extension of
preliminary approval pursuant to Subsection B3 and 4 above in this
section and preliminary approval has expired before the date on
which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what
would otherwise be the expiration date. The applicant may apply
for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be
the expiration date.
§ 1508 GENERAL § 1508
BH1:69
§ 1509. FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS AND FINAL MAJOR
SITE PLANS.
6. The approving authority shall grant an extension of preliminary
approval for a period determined by the approving authority but
not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the applicant proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the approving authority that the applicant was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with
the development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entities and that the applicant
applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals.
An applicant shall apply for the extension before, 1), what would
otherwise be the expiration date of preliminary subdivision
approval; or 2), the 91st day after the applicant receives the last
legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the approving authority from
granting an extension pursuant to Subsection B3 and 4 of this
section.
A. Procedure for Submitting Final Plats and Final Plans.
1. A final plat or plan shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer
within 3 years after the date of preliminary approval or any
authorized extension thereof.
The applicant shall submit a complete application to the
Administrative Officer at least 10 days, but no more than 14 days,
prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the approving
authority. The approving authority will schedule the matter for
consideration after the application has been declared complete.
a. Required Copies for Planning Board. Twenty copies each of the
final major subdivision plat and the application, and 20 each of
the final major site plan and the application; and a fee in
accordance with § 2800 of this Ordinance.
2. The Administrative Officer shall retain 1 copy each of the final
major subdivision plat or final major site plan and the completed
application and shall distribute the remaining as indicated in
§ 2800 of this Ordinance.
3. The final plat shall be accompanied by letters directed to the
chairman of the approving authority and signed by responsible
officer of the water, sewer, gas, telephone, and electric company
that has jurisdiction in the area. Such letters shall indicate the
general approval of the applicant's design, the proposed
construction entity responsible for each proposed utility
installation, and eventual ownership (if applicable).
§ 1508 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1509
BH1:70
4. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Borough
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities and
other improvements (both in the development and off-tract
improvements) in exact location and elevation; that he has
examined the drainage, erosion, stormwater control, and
excavation plans and found that the interests of the Borough and of
nearby properties are fully protected; and identifying those
portions of any improvements already installed; and that the
developer has either:
a. Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and the preliminary plat
approval and posted a maintenance guarantee with the final
plat in accordance with this Ordinance; or
b. Posted a performance guarantee in accordance with this
Ordinance and the preliminary plat approval for all partially
completed improvements or improvements not yet initiated
and either posted a maintenance guarantee for the completed
improvements in accordance with § 2800, or agreed to post a
maintenance guarantee in accordance with § 2800 at such time
as the improvements requiring such maintenance guarantee
are completed.
c. A statement from the Municipal Engineer that all
improvements installed prior to application have been
inspected as provided in § 2800 of this Ordinance, and that
such improvements meet the requirements of the municipality.
Any improvements installed prior to application for final
approval that do not meet or exceed municipal standards shall
be factored into the required performance guarantee. An "Asbuilt"
plan, showing the exact location of all improvements,
including utilities and their elevations, shall be required.
B. Details Required for Final Subdivision Plats.
1. All details stipulated in accordance with the checklist of this
Ordinance.
2. All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval
shall be submitted.
3. Detailed engineering data including:
a. Cross sections, profiles and established grades of all streets,
aisles, lanes and driveways, as approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
b. Plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains, as approved by the municipal engineer.
§ 1509 GENERAL § 1509
BH1:71
c. All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision
shall be balanced and closed with an error closure of 1 to
10,000, and the dimensions of all lot lines to within 1 to 20,000.
All dimensions, angles and bearings must be tied to at least 2
permanent monuments not less than 300 feet apart and all
information shall be indicated on the plat or plan. At least 1
corner of the subdivision shall be tied to U.S.G.S. benchmarks
with data on the plat or plan as to how the bearings were
determined.
C. Details Required for Final Site Plans.
1. All details stipulated in accordance with the checklist of this
Ordinance.
2. All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval
shall be submitted.
3. Detailed engineering data.
4. Architect's renderings of each building or a typical building and
design showing front, side and rear elevations.
D. Action by the Municipality.
1. Should either the Administrative Officer or the approving authority
determine that the application is incomplete, the Administrative
Officer, within 45 days from the date of submission of the
application, shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such a determination and the applicant may thereafter submit an
appropriately revised application to the Administrative Officer as in
the first instance. If the Administrative Officer neither certifies to
the applicant that the application is complete nor notifies the
applicant in writing that the application has been determined
incomplete, then the applicant shall be considered certified
complete and the time period for action by the approving authority
shall commence.
2. If the approving authority acts favorably on the final submission,
the chairman and the secretary of the approving authority (or the
acting chairman and secretary where either or both may be
absent), shall affix their signatures with a notation that it has been
approved. The applicant shall furnish such copies to the approving
authority for signing. In the case of final subdivisions only, the
applicant shall include at least 2 mylar copies of the approved plat
or plan. The approving authority shall grant final approval if the
detailed drawings, specifications, and estimates of the application
for final approval conform to the standards established by this
Ordinance for final approval, the conditions of preliminary approval
and, in the case of a major subdivision, the standards prescribed by
the New Jersey State Statutes Title 46, Chapters 26A, 26B and 26C.
§ 1509 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1509
BH1:72
3. After approval of the final plat or plan by the approving authority, 9
copies of the signed plat or plan shall be furnished by the secretary
of the approving authority to the appropriate agencies. An
approved final plat shall be signed by the chairman and secretary of
the approving authority (or the vice chairman or assistant secretary
in their absence, respectively).
4. Within 95 days of signing of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider
shall file a copy of same with the County Clerk. In the event of
failure to file within said 95 days, the approval of the major
subdivision shall expire and any further proceedings shall require
the filing of a new final plat as in the first instance. The approving
authority for good cause shown, may extend the time for filing for
an additional 95 days. Any further extensions shall be granted in
accordance to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
5. If the approving authority, after consideration and discussion of the
final submission, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation
shall be made by the Administrative Officer to that effect on the
plat or plan and a resolution adopted setting forth the reason for
such rejection. One copy of the plat or plan and the resolution shall
be returned to the applicant within 10 days of such determination.
E. Effect of Final Approval. Final approval of a subdivision or site plan
shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a two-year
period from the date of final approval from the date final resolution of
approval was adopted:
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed.
2. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the approving authority may extend the period of
protection for extensions of one year each, not exceeding 3 such
extensions.
3. Whenever the approving authority grants an extension of final
approval pursuant to Subsection E1 and 2 above in this section and
final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the
expiration date. The applicant may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
4. Staging Plan. For any area that will be developed in stages, the
approving authority may require the developer to submit a total
development plan in such detail as required by the approving
authority. Developers of large uses may request, and the approving
authority may approve, the construction of such uses in stages
provided that the plan is accompanied by a staging plan showing
the following:
§ 1509 GENERAL § 1509
BH1:73
§ 1510. CONDITIONAL USES, VARIANCES, AND OTHER
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION APPROVAL.
§ 1511. TIME FOR DECISION.
a. The anticipated date for commencing construction of each
stage. The staging of development on the tract shall be such
that if development of the tract were discontinued after the
completion of any stage, the developed portion of the tract
would comply in all respects to the requirements of this
Ordinance and be provided with adequate drainage, street,
and utility systems.
b. Those improvements that will be completed in each stage prior
to application for Certificate of Occupancy. The plan should
demonstrate that the staging of construction will minimize
adverse effects upon occupied building on the tract and
adjoining properties.
c. Written descriptions of the proposed operation in sufficient
detail to indicate the effects of the proposed use in producing
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, fire hazards, or
safety hazards. For nonresidential uses, the written description
shall also include the hours of operation of the use, the number
of shifts to be worked, the number of employees in each shift,
the number of vehicles to be stored or parked on the site, and
provisions to be made for site maintenance.
A. Conditional use approval, variances, and directions for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street, public
drainage way, flood control basin or reserved public area, shall be
obtained under the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law and this
Ordinance, and as provided by any rules and regulations adopted by the
approving authority which are consistent with this Ordinance and the
Municipal Land Use Law.
B. All applications shall be accompanied by plat(s). If subdivision and/or
site plan approval are also being requested, the plats shall be
accompanied by all supporting documents as required for subdivision/
site plan approval.
A. An approving authority shall grant or deny an application for
development within the number of days described below after a
determination of completeness (see § 1500) unless the applicant has
consented, in writing, to an extension of time.
1. Time periods are as follows:
a. Minor subdivision, 45 days.
b. Preliminary major subdivision for 10 or fewer lots, 45 days.
§ 1509 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1511
BH1:74
§ 1512. PLAT DESIGN STANDARDS AND ACCOMPANYING
INFORMATION.
c. Preliminary major subdivision for more than 10 lots, 95 days.
d. Preliminary site plan for 10 acres of land or less and 10
dwelling units or less, 45 days.
e. Preliminary site plan for more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units, 95 days.
f. Application for final major subdivision or final site plan
approval, 45 days.
g. Conditional use permit, 95 days.
h. As to combined applications:
(1) Conditional use permit and site plan approval, 95 days.
(2) Subdivision approval and/or conditional use permit, and/or
site plan approval, 95 days.
(3) Subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval and
zoning variance(s) or direction pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60b or c, 120 days.
i. In the event the developer elects to submit separate
consecutive applications, as permitted by the Municipal Land
Use Law, the 120 day provision, if applicable, shall apply to the
application for approval of the variance or direction for
issuance of a permit under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60b or c and the
time period for the subsequent approval shall be as otherwise
provided for the subdivision, site plan, or conditional use, as
the case may be.
2. Where the application involves an appeal from the decision of an
administrative officer, a conditional use permit, or variance, or for
direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76a, or a combination of
these: 120 days.
B. Failure of the approving authority to act within the required time period
shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant. A certificate of the
secretary of the approving authority as to the failure of the approving
authority to act shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or
other evidence of approval required by the Municipal Land Use Law
and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purpose of
filing subdivision plats.
A. Subdivision Plats.
1. Minor Subdivision Plat. The plat for a proposed subdivision shall be
based on an actual survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed in
§ 1511 GENERAL § 1512
BH1:75
the State of New Jersey, shall have his seal affixed thereto, shall be
drawn at a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch, and shall be of
such size as to comply with the New Jersey State Statutes Title 46,
Chapters 26A, 26B and 26C. All minor subdivision plans shall show
or include the following information.
a. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in
relation to the entire tract.
b. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to
be subdivided and within 200 feet thereof, showing the
distance of any structure from any new lot line established by
the subdivision.
c. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent Borough tax records.
d. The tax map sheet, block, and lot numbers identifying any lot
which, at this stage, is intended to be restricted to low and
moderate income housing.
e. Area of each lot in acres to the nearest one-hundredths of an
acre, and in square feet.
f. If more than one lot is proposed, or if lots have been subdivided
previously on the same property, each lot shall be shown and
designated by number, letter, or other identification.
g. The bearings and distances of all lot lines.
(1) Metes and bounds description showing dimensions,
bearings, curve data, radii, arcs, chords and central angles
for all centerlines and rights-of-way lines.
h. Street frontage in feet.
i. All streets and roads within 500 feet of the subdivision.
j. Official name of street on which the property is situated.
k. Proposed future streets and sight triangle easements.
l. The location, width and direction of flow of all streams, brooks,
drainage ditches and culverts in the tract to be subdivided and
within 200 feet of the tract to be subdivided.
m. Zoning district in which the property is situated. If the
proposed subdivision is within more than one district, the
zoning district line shall be shown and the most accurate
information available as to the measurements within each
district shall be included on the plat.
n. When the subdivision is submitted for approval as a minor
subdivision, information on soil testing needs to accompany
§ 1512 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1512
BH1:76
the plan. No such data are required when the sewage is to be
discharged into an existing central sewage treatment system.
All plats shall show the location of any existing potable water
supplies and existing or proposed septic systems now on the
tract.
o. All floodway or flood hazard areas and wetlands shall be shown
and designated.
p. The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements in the area to be subdivided.
q. Where appropriate, New Jersey plane coordinate system.
Otherwise submit deed book and page of reference meridian.
r. Graphic and numeric scale of plat.
s. Observations by a professional engineer regarding drainage
conditions related to the proposed subdivision which may
affect municipal facilities and neighboring properties.
t. Contours as shown on U.S.G.S. topographic maps.
u. Slopes between 15 percent and 25 percent and slopes 25
percent or greater.
v. Existing well and septic locations.
2. Preliminary Subdivision Plat.
a. The preliminary plat shall be designed, drawn, and signed by a
professional person who is duly licensed by the State Board of
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 45:8. The preliminary plat and any engineering
documents to be submitted may be in tentative form for
discussion purposes.
b. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a
scale of not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet and shall be shown
or be accompanied by the following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation
to the surrounding areas: a scale of 1 inch equals 400 feet
is recommended. If available, submission of computer disk
of CAD release 13 or higher, of the key map.
(2) Name of the subdivision, reference meridian, graphic
scale, and names and addresses of:
(a) Owner(s) of record;
(b) Owners of adjoining land;
(c) Subdivider or his agent; and
§ 1512 GENERAL § 1512
BH1:77
(d) Professional person(s) who prepared the plat.
(3) Date of original submission and of each subsequent
revised submission.
(4) Subdivision boundary line in heavy solid line and acreage
of tract to be subdivided to the nearest one tenth of an
acre.
(5) Zoning district(s) in which the subdivision is situated. If
the proposed subdivision is within more than one district,
the zoning district line shall be shown and the most
accurate information available as to the measurements
within each district shall be included on the plat.
(6) Total number of proposed lots.
(7) Prior to submission of a preliminary plat the applicant
shall furnish the Borough Assessor with 2 blackline or
blueline on white prints of the plat upon which the
Assessor will designate the appropriate block and lot
numbers. The applicant shall then prepare the plans
showing these block and lot numbers.
(8) Location of existing and proposed lot lines, buildings, and
other structures located on the tract and within 200 feet of
its boundaries, including the location of lot(s) on which low
and moderate income housing units are proposed to be
constructed, streets, high tension power lines, gas,
petroleum and other transmission lines, bridges, culverts,
and any natural features such as wooded areas to the
proper scale, width and direction of all streams, brooks,
drainage structures, and drainage ditches on the tract and
within 200 feet of its boundaries.
(9) Lot layout showing the lot lines and dimensions to the
nearest foot, the street frontage of each lot in feet, and
dashed or dotted lines showing the front, side and rear
setbacks
(10) All streets and cul-de-sacs to be constructed on the tract,
including locations, proposed street names, right-of-way
widths, paving widths, tentative centerline elevations at
intersections and other critical points, and centerline
gradient shown in percent of slope. Cross sections at 50
foot intervals and centerline profiles for all proposed new
streets.
(11) All proposed street names shall be forwarded to the
Borough Council for approval.
§ 1512 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1512
BH1:78
§ 1513. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
(12) A detailed intersection plan shall be drawn at a scale of 1
inch equals 30 feet showing existing conditions and the
design, grade and location of the items required for
drainage, curbs and streets. The profile of the intersecting
streets shall be shown for a distance of 300 feet on either
side of the intersection.
(13) Each plat shall delineate those areas having steep slopes
and those areas having critical slopes. Existing and
proposed contours at 2 foot intervals shall be shown for
areas with less than 15 percent slope and 5 foot intervals
for areas with 15 percent or greater slopes. For tracts
containing slopes in both categories, the developer shall
show every 10 foot contour with a wider line. In instances
where there is more than one slope category, the
approving authority may allow some other satisfactory
contour intervals and topographic data to meet the
objectives of this section. All elevations shall be related to
a bench mark noted on the plan and wherever possible be
based on U.S. Geological Survey mean sea level datum.
The approving authority may waive contour requirements
on portions of lots greater than 1 acre in areas where the
topographic data, because of the terrain or the absence of
any proposed improvements or other conditions, would not
contribute to the approving authority's determination.
(14) Location of wetlands, ponds, streams, and land subject to
periodic or occasional flooding or similar conditions on the
tract and within 200 feet of its boundaries; floodways or
flood hazard areas as defined herein.
(15) Storm water drainage system plan showing: location of
inlets and manholes; invert elevations and gradients; and
sizes, types and materials of pipes to be installed.
(16) All required design data supporting the adequacy of
existing and proposed facilities, including a copy of
drainage computations, together with a marked up plan
showing the associated and contributing watersheds.
(17) Location of any recorded right-of-way or easement on the
subdivision or within 200 feet of its boundaries, with
identification of such easement.
(18) Septic and well locations on the subdivision or within 200
feet of its boundaries. Soil borings and permeability test
results shall be shown on the plan.
§ 1512 GENERAL § 1513
BH1:79
§ 1514. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT.
Environmental Impact Statements, when required, shall include the
following information:
A. Dedication of Right-of-Way. No subdivision or site plan involving any
street(s) requiring additional right-of-way width as specified in the
Master Plan and the street requirements of this Ordinance shall be
approved unless such additional right-of-way, either along one or both
sides of said street(s), as applicable, shall be deeded by easement to the
municipality or other appropriate governmental agency.
B. Additional Information. The approving authority reserves the right to
require additional information before granting preliminary approval
when unique circumstances affect the tract and/or when the application
for development poses special problems for the tract and surrounding
area. Such information may include, but not be limited to, drainage
calculations and traffic analysis.
A. General Provisions. The impact of the environment generated by land
development projects necessitate a comprehensive analysis of the
variety of problems that may result and the actions that can be taken to
minimize these problems. It is further recognized that the level of detail
required for various types of applications will vary depending on the
size of the project, the nature of the site and the location of the project.
Therefore, having determined that flexibility is needed in preparing the
environment impact statement, the requirements for such a document
pertaining to different types of development applications are listed
below:
1. All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a plan
approved by the soil conservation district and all silviculture
operations conducted in accordance with a plan prepared by a
professional forester are specifically exempt from the
environmental impact statement requirements.
2. A variance application not involving a site plan or subdivision
application shall not require an environmental impact statement
unless specifically requested by the approving authority. The
approving authority shall inform the applicant regarding any
additional information that may be required.
3. Any minor subdivision and/or minor site plan applications to the
approving authority shall not require an environmental impact
statement unless specifically requested by the approving authority.
The approving authority shall inform the applicant regarding any
information that may be required.
4. All preliminary major subdivision and/or preliminary major site
plan applications shall be accompanied by an environmental impact
statement.
§ 1513 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1514
BH1:80
B. Submission Format. When an environmental impact statement is
required, the applicant shall retain qualified professionals to perform
the necessary work. The qualifications of the individual(s) preparing the
report shall be submitted. The applicant shall use the Borough's
Geographic Information System (GIS) containing the inventory of
environmental factors to present an overview of the natural limitations
of the site and to guide the layout of the proposed development. All
environmental impact statements shall consist of written and graphic
materials which clearly present the required information addressing
the following areas and utilizing the following format:
1. Project Description. Indicate the purpose and scope of the
proposed project. Enumerate the benefits to the public which will
result from the proposed project and describe the suitability of the
site for the intended use. A description of the proposed project
shall be presented to indicate the extent to which the site must be
altered, the kinds of facilities to be constructed, how they are to be
considered and the uses intended. The resident population,
working population, and visitor population shall be estimated. The
compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed project shall be
described in relation to the following:
a. Municipal master plan, especially the land use and open space
elements;
b. Master plan of adjacent municipalities, if applicable;
c. Hunterdon County Master Plan;
d. Regional and State planning guides, including the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan;
e. Other pertinent planning documents.
2. Site Description and Inventory. Provide a description of
environmental conditions on the site which shall include, but not be
limited to, the following items:
a. Types of Soils. List and describe each soil type located on the
site. If applicable, provide percolation data. Where the
proposed area of land disturbance will involve soils with
moderate or severe limitations (as per the Soil Survey of
Hunterdon County - Soil Conservation Service) relative to the
type of project proposed, a complete mapping of all soil types
on the site shall be required indicating where those moderate
and severe limitations exist. Use of the Borough's GIS is
appropriate.
b. Topography. Describe the topographic conditions of the site,
with specific delineation of any lands with slopes between 15
percent to 24 percent and those exceeding 25 percent.
§ 1514 GENERAL § 1514
BH1:81
c. Geology. Describe the geologic formations and features
associated with the site as well as depth to bedrock conditions.
Delineate those areas where bedrock is in close proximity to
the surface (within 2 feet of the surface as well as major rock
outcroppings).
d. Vegetation. Describe the existing vegetation on the site. When
required, prepare a map showing the location of major
vegetative groupings such as meadows, farm fields, bogs,
swamp or floodplain, upland forest or successional forest,
indicating the type of plant species found in these distinct
areas.
e. Wildlife. Identify any nesting areas, feeding areas or habitats
for threatened or endangered species. Where applicable, other
data assembled regarding wildlife activity on the site shall also
be mapped and/or described.
f. Surface Water. Describe existing watercourses and water
bodies that are partially or totally on the site and their
relationship to the area of land disturbance. Calculate existing
surface runoff from the site. When the natural drainage pattern
will be significantly altered, an analysis shall be conducted
which will investigate flow, depth, capacity and water quality of
the receiving waters. When required, floodplain and wetland
areas will be mapped in consultation with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. Existing drainage
structures shall be mapped and the capacity of the drainage
network shall be determined. Additionally, wetland areas shall
be delineated.
g. Subsurface Water. Describe the subsurface water conditions on
the site both in terms of depth to ground water and water
supply capabilities of the site. Where existing conditions
warrant, provide detailed information regarding existing wells
within 500 feet of the site relative to depth, capacity and water
quality. Discuss the water supply capabilities of the adjacent
areas and the recharge capabilities of the site.
h. Unique, Scenic, Historic Features and Archaeological Sites.
Describe and map those portions of the site that can be
considered to have unique, scenic, historic and archaeological
qualities.
i. Existing Development Features. Describe any existing features
on the site that are not considered to be part of the natural
environment. This may include, but not necessarily be limited
to roads, housing units, accessory structures, utility lines, etc.
j. Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as prescribed
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 1514 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1514
BH1:82
3. Area and Regional Description. Provide a description of the
surrounding environs. Describe the existing land use pattern.
When required, describe in detail the existing infrastructure with
respect to the drainage and transportation network as well as any
central sewerage and water supply facilities. Include an
appropriate regional analysis relative to the proposed project.
4. Environmental Performance Controls. Describe in detail what
measures will be employed during the planning, construction and
operation phases which will minimize or eliminate negative
impacts on and off site that could result from the proposed project.
Of specific interest are:
a. Drainage plans which shall include but not be limited to soil
erosion and sedimentation controls. Every effort should be
made to limit off-site surface runoff to pre-development levels.
b. Sewage disposal techniques.
c. Water supply and water conservation proposals.
d. Site design techniques sensitive to the natural environment
which should include innovative landscape, building and
circulation design.
e. Energy conservation measures.
f. Noise reduction techniques.
g. Miscellaneous on-site and off-site public improvements.
5. Impact. Discuss both the negative and positive and off-tract
impacts. Indicate those negative impacts that are unavoidable. The
specific concerns that shall be considered include, but are not
limited to, the following:
a. Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface runoff.
b. Flooding and floodplain disruption.
c. Degradation of surface water quality.
d. Groundwater pollution.
e. Reduction of groundwater capabilities.
f. Sewage disposal.
g. Solid waste disposal.
h. Vegetation destruction.
i. Disruption of wildlife habitats.
j. Destruction of scenic and historic features.
§ 1514 GENERAL § 1514
BH1:83
§ 1515. TRAFFIC IMPACT STATEMENT.
Traffic Impact Statements, when required, shall conform to the following
provisions:
k. Impact on ridge lines.
l. Air quality degradation.
m. Noise levels.
n. Energy utilization.
o. Neighborhood deterioration.
p. Effect on public services (i.e., schools, fire, police, etc.)
q. Traffic congestion.
r. Health, safety and welfare of existing residents.
s. Regional development policies.
6. Alternatives. Discuss what alternatives were considered both in
terms of site design and project location. Indicate why an
alternative was rejected if it would have resulted in less of a
negative impact than the subject proposal.
7. Licenses, Permits and Other Approvals Required by Law. The
applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms of
approval required by law for the construction and operation of the
proposed project. This list shall include, but will not be limited to,
approvals required by the municipality, as well as agencies of the
County, State and Federal governments. Where approvals have
been granted, copies of said approvals shall be attached. Where
approvals are pending, a note shall be made to that effect.
8. Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or other
written sources of information related to the project, the project
site and the municipality which were consulted and employed in
compilation of the environmental impact statement shall be listed.
A list of all agencies and individuals from whom pertinent
information was obtained orally or by letter shall be listed
separately. Dates and locations of all meetings shall be specified.
A. When Required. All applications for preliminary major subdivision
approval where more than 10 lots are proposed and all applications for
preliminary major site plan approval shall be accompanied by a traffic
impact statement analyzing the proposed development and its expected
impacts upon existing municipal facilities and services, and shall
include:
1. Traffic Impact. An analysis of the existing road network available to
serve the proposed development as well as the proposed road
§ 1514 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1515
BH1:84
§ 1516. SUBMISSION CHECKLIST.1
Chapter 16
DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 1600. SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.
§ 1601. through § 1630. (RESERVED)2
network within the development itself and the surrounding road
network which will be affected by the proposed development,
including the capacity of the existing and proposed roadways; the
anticipated traffic volumes as a result of the proposed development
as well as the increase in traffic volumes expected from other
developments within the area; and any problem spots in the overall
road network including unsafe intersections, turns or grades. This
information may be submitted in a separate document.
A. The Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21) shall
govern any site improvements carried out or intended to be carried out
or required to be carried out in connection with any application for any
subdivision, site plan approval, or variance before any Planning Board
created pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.) to the extent as provided in Chapter 26, Zoning, Section 2629
Parking, Number of Spaces Table 26.2.
B. Except as is otherwise specifically provided, these rules shall control all
matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, maintenance, and use of any site improvements
constructed by a developer. The rules are to be interpreted as the
minimum required to ensure public health and safety, and the maximum
that may be required in connection with development.
C. These rules shall apply to all site improvement work and appurtenant
construction including streets, roads, parking facilities, sidewalks,
drainage structures, grading, and utilities which are undertaken by a
developer.
1. These rules shall apply to all utilities created by or deriving their
authority from municipal ordinance to operate within a given
jurisdiction.
2. Choice among options contained in these rules shall be the
applicant's unless otherwise specified in these rules.
1. Editor's Note: The Submission Checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
2. See NJ Residential Site Improvements — N.J.A.C. 5:21
§ 1515 GENERAL § 1631
BH1:85
§ 1631. HISTORIC DISTRICT REVIEW ORDINANCE.3 [Ord. No.
2010-17]
A. Introduction. The requirements of this Historic District Review
Ordinance shall apply to all development, including new construction,
repair, renovation, alteration, reconstruction, demolition, relocation,
and additions to existing buildings, structures, real property, natural
objects or configurations or any portion or group of the foregoing which
are located in the Flemington Borough Historic District, or specifically
identified as historic sites within the Historic Preservation Plan of the
Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(10). These requirements
do not apply to normal maintenance (including in-kind repair of existing
building features, repainting of existing color schemes, in-kind repair of
an existing roof, etc.). Prior to construction or alteration of buildings or
structures in the Historic District, an Application for Review by the
Flemington Historic Preservation Commission must be submitted to the
Flemington Borough Clerk, and the project must be reviewed at one of
the Commission's regularly scheduled meetings. See Chapter 14 of the
Flemington Borough Land Development Ordinance for additional
information regarding project review.
B. The purposes of the Historic District Review Ordinance include:
1. Safeguarding the heritage of Flemington Borough by preserving its
historical, cultural, social, economic and architectural resources;
2. Encouraging the continued use of historic buildings, structures and
sites and to facilitate their appropriate re-use;
3. Maintaining and developing a harmonious setting for the
historically significant buildings, structures, sites, objects and
District;
4. Preventing the unnecessary demolition or relocation of historic
resources;
5. Preventing new construction or development which is not in
keeping with or that negatively impacts the ambience and
character of the Historic District;
6. Encouraging the proper maintenance, per the Borough's existing
Property Maintenance Code Chapter 9B, and preservation of
buildings, structures and sites within the Historic District so as to
promote Flemington Borough as an attractive area to live, work
and visit;
7. Protecting and enhancing property values;
3. Editor's Note: The 2010 Flemington Master Plan Historic District Map has been provided
for reference as an attachment to Chapter 26, Zoning.
§ 1631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1631
BH1:86
8. Promoting civic pride in and appreciation of Flemington Borough's
historic resources for the education, pleasure and welfare of its
citizens and visitors; and
9. Fostering beautification and private reinvestment.
C. General Guidelines.
1. Building Design. All development that is situated within the
Flemington Borough Historic District and all development that
affects individual historic sites shall be designed to reflect the
design vocabulary, massing, proportion, directional expression,
height, width, scale, orientation, windows, roof, details and
materials of vernacular 18th and 19th and early 20th-century styles
found in the Borough of Flemington. These styles include Georgian,
Federal, Greek Revival, Gothic Revival, Italianate, Second Empire,
Queen Anne, Shingle, Romanesque Revival, Colonial Revival,
Neoclassical and Tudor Revival styles. Acceptable styles and
examples from the relevant periods can be found within the
following references, which are maintained for review in the
Borough Hall and the Public Library:
a. Historic District Guidelines; Flemington Historic Preservation
Commission (McCormick Taylor, 2006): See for definitions of
general architectural, style and building terminology, as well
as more detailed design recommendations.
b. What Style Is It? A Guide to American Architecture (Poppeliers,
John C., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1983)
c. A Field Guide to American Houses (McAlester, Knopf, 1984)
d. Identifying American Architecture (Blumenson, Norton)
e. The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties (www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps/
standards_guidelines.htm): See for definitions regarding
historic preservation terminology including "preservation,"
"restoration," "rehabilitation," "reconstruction," "renovation,"
etc.
2. Procedures for review by the Flemington Historic Preservation
Commission are contained within Chapter 14 of the Flemington
Borough Land Development Ordinance.
3. New buildings are not required to copy historic examples.
Individual architectural expressions that incorporate the stylistic
tenets of historical buildings are acceptable, provided that the
design principles in the above references are adhered to. New
buildings shall show a harmony of design with their surroundings,
and any shapes, massing, materials, signs, lighting, colors and
other characteristics which might cause a new building to call
§ 1631 GENERAL § 1631
BH1:87
excessive attention to itself and create disharmony within the
historic district, shall be avoided.
4. All buildings shall be related harmoniously to the context of the
site, the neighborhood as a whole and to existing buildings and
other structures in the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the
proposed building or buildings. The achievement of such
relationship may include the enclosure of space in conjunction with
other existing/proposed buildings or the creation of focal points.
With respect to public spaces, building design/orientation may
have to be adjusted in order to maintain a positive spatial
relationship or to preserve visual access to community focal points,
either natural or man-made.
5. The selection of building design elements, for example in the use of
materials, windows, color, texture, and other design
considerations, should ensure that such treatment is generally
consistent with traditional and vernacular 18th and 19th and early
20th- century architectural styles. If the applicant is an existing
building, the design elements shall be consistent with the existing
building's style and configuration.
6. Building additions and renovations should be designed to reflect
the existing building in terms of scale, materials, massing, window
and door configuration and color.
7. Appearance of the side and rear elevations of buildings shall
receive architectural treatments comparable to that of any
proposed front façade only if said elevations are generally within
the public view.
8. Buildings should, where appropriate, strengthen the particular
design features of their neighborhood by, for example, reinforcing
the "street wall", or continuing a particular design feature or
statement. Such construction should complement the existing
historic building designs in the Borough.
9. Buildings deemed to be "Significant" and indicated as such on the
Flemington Historic District Map, shall be reviewed with particular
care and have special requirements that are described later in this
section (see Subsection C7). These are buildings that have been
determined to be particularly important to the character of the
Historic District.
10. Buildings located on Main Street, from the Traffic Circle to the
Monument, along East Main Street to Hopewell Avenue, as well as
North Main Street from the Monument to Hopewell Avenue, are
also considered to be particularly important to the character of
Flemington and the Historic District, partly through their location
along the busiest thoroughfare and partly from the quality of
buildings along this route. Many of these structures are indicated
to be "Significant" on the Flemington Historic District Map.
§ 1631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1631
BH1:88
Because of the importance of this area to the character of the
Borough, all of these buildings will be reviewed with particular
care. Some buildings that are particularly prominent or visible may
be reviewed using the same criteria as "Significant" structures,
even if they are not listed as such on the Historic District Map.
11. Contemporary designs for new buildings and for additions to
existing buildings or landscaping in the Historic District are not
discouraged if such designs are compatible with the character,
scale and materials of the neighborhood and its environment.
12. New additions or alterations to buildings should be done in such a
manner that they reflect the materials, massing and scale of the
existing building. In addition, alterations and additions should be
designed such that they are reversible, i.e. that if they were to be
removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
original building would be unimpaired.
13. Exterior alterations should not destroy the distinguishing qualities
or character of the property and its environment, and the removal
or alteration of any historical material or architectural features is
not permitted.
14. Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than
replaced wherever possible, and in the event replacement is
necessary, the new material should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual
qualities.
15. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be
based on accurate duplication of original features, substantiated by
physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or
the availability of different architectural features from other
buildings.
16. Wherever possible, there should be compliance with the standards
set forth in the "Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties", as periodically amended and
available through the National Park Service.
17. Alternative Materials. The use of nonhistoric, alternative materials
may be considered under certain circumstances. These materials
include, but are not limited to: vinyl or composite siding (smooth
finish only); vinyl, fiberglass or composite railings and porch
columns, particularly when these materials are paintable;
fiberglass or composite trim, brackets or moldings; composite
porch floor decks; vinyl, clad, or aluminum windows and doors;
fiberglass/asphalt shingle roofing; etc. The use of these materials
will be limited on all buildings or structures deemed to be
"Significant" on the Flemington Historic District Map, or that are
located along Main Street, from the Traffic Circle to the Monument,
along East Main Street to Hopewell Avenue, as well as North Main
§ 1631 GENERAL § 1631
BH1:89
Street from the Monument to Hopewell Avenue, as indicated in
Subsection C10 above. Specifically, the use of vinyl siding or
windows and doors of alternative materials will be prohibited on
the public sides of "Significant" structures. Where visible roofs
need to be replaced on "Significant" structures, using replacement
materials and methods that match the historic materials is
preferable. If the use of historic materials is not feasible, particular
care will be taken in selecting alternative materials that match
the historic appearance as closely as possible. Composite materials
that are painted and that match the configuration of the historic
materials are considered to be more acceptable than other
replacement materials. Buildings in other parts of the Historic
District that are considered to be "Contributing", "Non-
Contributing" or "Encroaching" will be permitted to use alternative
materials, provided that the following conditions are met:
a. Vinyl or composite siding shall be smooth (i.e. not textured)
and shall be of a scale and color compatible with the buildings
in the immediate vicinity of the applicant property. Existing
decorative trim shall not be removed or covered by new vinyl
siding or trim casing. This trim shall be retained and repaired
so that the building's distinguishing historic features shall
remain.
b. Replacement windows and doors shall fit the existing openings
exactly, and shall be configured to match the historic
appearance and detail. Existing window and door openings
shall not be "infilled" or made smaller to accommodate
standard window or door sizes.
c. Alternative materials may only be used to replace existing
porches if the historic porch is not repairable, if the new porch
configuration and appearance closely matches the original,
and if the new materials that are clearly visible from a public
way are painted. The Commission will consider additional new
materials as they become available.
d. Alternative materials may be considered for visible roofs when
existing slate, copper, wood shakes, etc., are shown to be
beyond repair. The alternative materials on the visible facades
shall match the existing appearance as closely as possible.
Alternative materials are acceptable to be used on roofs that
are not visible from public streets.
18. Sustainable Energy Sources and Energy Efficiency. This Ordinance
is not intended to discourage the installation and use of sustainable
energy sources, including solar panels, geothermal wells and wind
turbines, provided that the installations meet all required building,
zoning and safety codes, etc., and that they are installed to have as
minimal an impact on the visible portions of the historic property as
possible. Particular care shall be taken to reduce the impact on
§ 1631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1631
BH1:90
buildings listed as "Significant" on the Flemington Historic District
Map or that are located along Main Street, from the Traffic Circle
to the Monument, along East Main Street to Hopewell Avenue, as
well as North Main Street from the Monument to Hopewell Avenue.
19. This Ordinance is not intended to discourage the improvement of
the energy efficiency characteristics of the historic structures in
Flemington. However, where energy efficiency improvements are
being considered, care should be taken to reduce negative impacts
on the historic character of the building. In particular on all
buildings or structures deemed to be "Significant" on the
Flemington Historic District Map, or that are located along Main
Street, from the Traffic Circle to the Monument, along East Main
Street to Hopewell Avenue, as well as North Main Street from the
Monument to Hopewell Avenue, it is important to keep, repair or
restore existing character-defining features that affect energy
efficiency, including original doors and windows. Energy efficiency
improvements for these features can be achieved through weatherstripping,
interior storm windows, appropriate exterior storm
windows or doors and other appropriate measures. See the
Borough's "Historic District Guidelines" for suggestions.
20. Additional Matters Considered. In regard to all applications,
additional pertinent matters may be considered, but in no instance
shall interior arrangements be considered except as it may result in
exterior changes important to the integrity of the historic
structure, such as additions, chimneys, roof design, blocking of
windows or similar changes.
D. Building Massing and Scale of New Buildings and Additions.
1. Scale of Building. The size of a proposed building or addition and
the mass of a proposed building or addition in relation to open
spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be
visually compatible with the other buildings and built features to
which it is visually related.
2. On proposed buildings and additions, long, horizontal facades
should be broken down into segments having vertical orientation
and tall vertically oriented facades shall be broken down into
horizontal components through use of appropriate design features
in proportions complementary to the overall architecture and
design.
3. New buildings or additions with expansive blank walls are
prohibited, particularly on sides of the building facing public ways.
4. New buildings and additions should be designed so that facades are
the prominent architectural feature and the roofs are visually less
dominant in the total design. Architecturally accurate roof styles
shall be consistent with the surrounding historic context.
§ 1631 GENERAL § 1631
BH1:91
5. A pedestrian scale should be achieved at ground level and along
street frontages and entryways through the use of such scale
elements as windows, doors, columns, plazas, awnings, canopies,
and site furnishings.
6. In new infill construction, the alignments of proposed facades shall
be consistent with the existing setback of nearby buildings to the
extent permitted by this Ordinance.
7. Height. The height of any proposed structure and landscaping shall
be visually compatible with adjacent structures.
8. Proportion of Building's Front Façade. The relationship of the width
of any new building or addition to the height of the front elevation
shall be visually compatible with the nearby buildings and
structures.
9. Proportion of Openings. The relationship of the width of windows to
the height of windows in a new building or addition shall be visually
compatible with the nearby buildings and structures.
10. Rhythm of Solids to Voids on Facades Fronting on Public Places.
The relationship of solids to voids in facades of new or altered
buildings shall be visually compatible with the nearby buildings and
structures.
11. Rhythm of Spacing of Structures on Streets. The relationship of any
new structure to the open space between it and adjoining
structures shall be visually compatible with the nearby buildings
and structures.
12. Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projection. The relationship of
new or renovated entrances and porch projections to the street
shall be visually compatible with the nearby buildings and
structures.
13. Roof Shapes. The roof shape of a new building or addition shall be
visually compatible with nearby buildings and structures.
14. Walls of Continuity. Features of a proposed building or addition,
such as walls, open-type fencing, evergreen landscape masses,
shall form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to the extent
necessary to maintain visual compatibility of any structure with the
nearby buildings and structures.
15. Directional Expression of Front Elevation. A new or altered
building shall be visually compatible with nearby buildings and
structures, whether this is a vertical, horizontal or nondirectional
character.
E. Facade Treatment.
§ 1631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1631
BH1:92
1. The Flemington Historic Preservation Commission is particularly
concerned with elevations of buildings that are visible from public
ways. Rear and side elevations that are not visible will have greater
flexibility in terms of design and materials.
2. Multi-tenant buildings shall provide uniform store fronts,
doorways, windows, awnings and other design features for all
ground floor tenants. Upper floors of said buildings shall at a
minimum be coordinated with the ground floor through common
materials and colors.
3. New buildings should use windows of similar sizes and shapes or
incorporate other façade elements that establish the same pattern
as other buildings in the immediate area.
4. Design elements that carry through a block such as store front
patterns, window spacing, entrances, canopies or awnings, etc.,
should be incorporated into new or renovated facades.
5. Exterior mounted mechanical and electrical equipment (e.g. air
conditioning units, satellite dishes, etc.) shall be located so that
they are not visible from public ways, or shall be completely
screened from public view with opaque architectural elements that
are unobtrusive and visually compatible with the character of the
Historic District and the nearby structures.
6. Facade renovations should be consistent with the original
architectural style of the building. Original details should be
retained; when it becomes necessary to introduce new features,
they should harmonize with existing features. If windows and doors
must be replaced, new windows and doors that match the original
design should be used. Window and door sizes and shapes should
not be altered by any building renovation. Changes to window and
door sizes and configurations may be considered if a building is
being restored to an earlier, documented, historic appearance. In
buildings that are listed as Significant or which are located along
Main Street, from the Traffic Circle to the Monument, along East
Main Street to Hopewell Avenue, as well as North Main Street from
the Monument to Hopewell Avenue, replacement doors, windows
and trim on the visible facades should match the original materials.
On other buildings, alternative materials may be used. See
Subsection C10 for more information.
7. The use of overly dramatic and/or intrusive lighting designs and
fixtures is not permitted.
F. Building Materials, Colors and Texture.
1. On existing buildings, original materials shall be retained wherever
possible. No existing brick or stone shall be covered for cosmetic
reasons, and the repair and restoration of existing materials
deemed of architectural value is strongly encouraged. Great care
§ 1631 GENERAL § 1631
BH1:93
shall be taken in the cleaning and repair of existing materials. The
gentlest, effective means shall be used in all cases. "Sandblasting"
and other abrasive cleaning techniques, as well as harsh chemical
cleaning methods are not to be used under any circumstances.
2. Where appropriate, building renovations shall incorporate
elements of the original structure into the renovation design.
3. The use of brick, stone, clapboard, shakes and other façade
materials of a traditional and vernacular nature is strongly
encouraged. In general, a maximum of 2 principal facade materials
shall be permitted for new structures.
4. Flat, metal panels and mirrored glass surfaces are prohibited on all
existing, historic buildings, as are flush metal, composite or wood
doors on visible facades. On buildings indicated as "Significant" on
the map of the Flemington Historic District or buildings located
along Main Street, from the Traffic Circle to the Monument, along
East Main Street to Hopewell Avenue, as well as North Main Street
from the Monument to Hopewell Avenue, the use of vinyl or
aluminum siding on facades visible from public ways shall also be
prohibited.
5. The painting of buildings in patterns, checks, stripes or overly bold
colors is not permitted.
6. The use of colors generally associated with traditional building
design is required on all buildings. Accent or complementary colors
which harmonize with the main façade colors shall be permitted for
trim, awning and other building details. Acceptable paint colors
from the relevant periods can be found within the following
reference, which is maintained for review in the Planning Office:
Paint in America, the Colors of Historic Buildings (Moss, Roger,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994)
7. Relationship of Materials, Texture and Color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related, especially those
immediately adjacent.
G. Demolition.
1. The integrity of historic districts depends on the preservation and
retention in situ of the original historic structures. Therefore, the
review of applications for the demolition or partial demolition of
any structure within the Flemington Historic District will be
undertaken with the greatest care. The demolition or partial
demolition of any structure deemed Contributing or Significant in
the Historic District is not permitted, except when public health or
safety is at risk, as certified by a licensed structural engineer.
§ 1631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1631
BH1:94
2. Applications to demolish any structure within the Historic District
must be presented to the Flemington Historic Preservation
Commission and must address the following issues, as well as any
other factors the Historic Preservation Commission considers to be
relevant:
a. The structure's historic, architectural and aesthetic
significance;
b. Its current use;
c. Its condition;
d. Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would
be detrimental to the public interest;
e. The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be
reproduced or could be reproduced only with great difficulty;
f. The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare;
g. The extent to which its retention would encourage study and
interest in Flemington's history, stimulate interest and study in
architecture and design, educate citizens in American culture
and heritage, or make the municipality a more attractive and
desirable place in which to live; and
h. The probable impact of its removal upon the character and
ambience of the Historic District.
H. Relocation of Structures Out of the Flemington Historic District.
1. The integrity of historic districts depends on the preservation and
retention in situ of the original historic structures. Therefore, the
review of applications for the relocation of any structure currently
located within the Flemington Historic District to a location outside
of the District will be undertaken with the greatest care. The
relocation of any structure deemed Contributing or Significant in
the Historic District is generally not permitted, except when public
health and safety is at risk.
2. Applications to relocate any structure currently located within the
Flemington Historic District to a location outside of the District
must be presented to the Flemington Historic Preservation
Commission and must address the following issues, as well as any
other factors the Historic Preservation Commission considers to be
relevant:
a. The structure's historic, architectural and aesthetic
significance;
§ 1631 GENERAL § 1631
BH1:95
b. Its current use;
c. Its condition;
d. The extent of the historic and architectural loss to the site and
District that results from moving the structure from its original
location;
e. The reasons for not retaining the structure at its present site;
f. The proximity of the proposed new location to Flemington
Borough, including the accessibility by the residents of
Flemington Borough and other citizens;
g. The probability of significant damage to the structure during
the relocation.
h. The extent to which its retention would encourage study and
interest in Flemington's history, stimulate interest and study in
architecture and design, educate citizens in American culture
and heritage, or make the municipality a more attractive and
desirable place in which to live; and
i. The probable impact of its relocation upon the character and
ambience of the Historic District.
I. Relocation within Flemington Borough.
1. The integrity of historic districts depends on the preservation and
retention in situ of the original historic structures. Therefore, the
review of applications for the relocation of any structure currently
within the Flemington Historic District to another location within
the District will be undertaken with the greatest care. The
relocation of any structure deemed Contributing or Significant in
the Historic District is not permitted.
2. Applications to relocate any structure currently located within the
Flemington Historic District to another location within the District
must be presented to the Flemington Historic Preservation
Commission and must address the following issues, as well as any
other factors the Historic Preservation Commission considers to be
relevant:
a. The structure's historic, architectural and aesthetic
significance;
b. Its current use;
c. Its condition;
d. The extent of the historic and architectural loss to the site and
District that results from moving the structure from its original
location;
§ 1631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1631
BH1:96
e. The reasons for not retaining the structure at its present site;
f. The probability of significant damage to the structure during
the relocation;
g. The extent to which its retention would encourage study and
interest in Flemington's history, stimulate interest and study in
architecture and design, educate citizens in American culture
and heritage, or make the municipality a more attractive and
desirable place in which to live;
h. The probable impact of its relocation upon the character and
ambience of the Historic District; and
i. The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of
the proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this Ordinance.
J. Other Requirements.
1. Signage. Appropriately designed signage can be an important
design feature in the Historic District. A member of the Historic
Preservation Commission is appointed by the HPC Chair to the SRC
(Sign Review Committee) and participates in the review of
proposed signage on properties within the Historic District,
whether or not they will be attached to a structure. Relatively
small, painted signage either mounted to the face of the building as
part of the storefront design, or perpendicular to the face of the
building, is encouraged. Large, contemporary, neon or neon-like, or
plastic internally illuminated signs are not permitted, as are signs
that conceal important architectural features. All signs must also
meet the requirements of the Flemington Land Development
Ordinance, Chapter 26, Zoning. [Amended 6-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-12]
2. Awnings. Appropriately designed awnings may be acceptable on
residential and nonresidential buildings. All awnings shall be
constructed and installed so that the frame and fabric of the
awning is integrated into the overall building design. Awnings shall
not extend beyond a dimension appropriate with the size and scale
of the subject building. Awnings shall not be placed so as to conceal
or disfigure any architectural feature or detail. Awning materials
shall be limited to cloth, canvas and similar materials; metal and
aluminum awnings are prohibited. Plastic and/or internally
illuminated awnings are also prohibited. Awnings may be solid or
striped, but colors shall complement the façade colors. If the
building has several tenants, the overall awning design should be
consistent and compatible across the entire façade.
3. Public Art. All art visible from public ways, including murals,
outdoor sculpture, etc., that is being permanently attached or
applied to structures in the Historic District shall be reviewed by
§ 1631 GENERAL § 1631
BH1:97
the Flemington Historic Preservation Commission for compatibility
with the design of the building and neighboring structures.
4. Street Furniture. The installation of all street furniture, including
benches, fencing, trash cans, lighting, planters, etc., that is visible
from public ways must be reviewed by the Flemington Historic
Preservation Commission. The items should be selected to fit the
scale, materials and character of the Historic District.
5. Building and Accessibility Codes. The Flemington Historic
Preservation Commission does not review applications for
compliance with relevant building or accessibility codes.
Compliance with these codes is the responsibility of the applicant.
The Flemington HPC review in no way supersedes or alters
building code or accessibility requirements, although these codes,
including the Rehabilitation Subcode and Barrier Free Subcode of
the Uniform Construction Code of the State of New Jersey, take into
account existing conditions and the special characteristics of
historic buildings. Any changes to the exterior of a building in the
Flemington Historic District that are necessitated by requirements
of building and handicapped accessibility codes should be designed
to complement the character and style of the existing building to
the greatest degree possible.
K. Violations and Penalties.
1. Any person who undertakes an activity which would cause a
change in the exterior architectural appearance of any
improvement within the Flemington Historic District or on any
individually listed structure by addition, alteration, relocation,
demolition or replacement without obtaining the approval of the
Flemington Historic Preservation Commission shall be deemed to
be in violation of this Ordinance.
2. Upon learning of the violation, the Construction Official for
Flemington Borough shall personally serve upon the owner of the
lot or property whereon the violation is occurring a notice
describing the violation in detail and giving the owner 10 days to
abate the violation by restoring the property, structure or
improvement to the condition it was in prior to the violation
occurring. If the owner cannot be personally served within the
municipality with this notice, a copy shall be posted on the site and
a copy sent to the owner at his or her last known address as it
appears on the municipal tax rolls.
3. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 days of
service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Construction
Official shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint,
returnable in the Municipal Court, charging violation of this
Ordinance and specifying the wrongful conduct of the violator.
Each separate day the violation exists past the initial 10 day
§ 1631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1631
BH1:98
§ 1632. LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.
abatement period shall be deemed to be a new and separate
violation of this Ordinance.
4. The penalty for violation past the initial 10 day abatement period
shall be as follows:
a. For each day up to 15 days, not more than $50.00 per day.
b. For each day 16 to 30, not more than $75.00 per day.
c. For each day beyond 30 days, not more than $100.00 per day.
5. If any person undertakes activity which would cause a change to
the exterior architectural appearance of any structure within the
historic district or of any structure individually listed as historically
significant within the Borough of Flemington by addition, alteration
or replacement without first having obtained the approval of the
Historic Preservation Commission, he or she shall be required to
immediately stop the activity, apply for approval and take any
necessary measures to preserve the historic structure affected,
pending a decision. If the proposed project is denied, the historic
structure shall be immediately restored to its pre-activity condition.
The Construction Official is authorized to seek injunctive relief
regarding a "stop action" on the activity in the Superior Court,
Chancery Division, not less than 10 days after the delivery of notice
pursuant to Subsection K2 above. Such injunctive relief shall be in
addition to the penalties authorized in Subsection K4 above. [Ord.
No. 2010-17]
A. Every applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall comply with
the following minimum standards, except that, with respect to the
alternative design concepts set forth below, the applicant may choose
between the concepts or present an alternate design equal or superior
to the design concepts in terms of quantity of landscaping materials and
suitability to the site and to the proposed development. The approving
Board may require additional landscaping, if necessary, to create an
appropriate landscaping scheme for the site, given the nature of the
site and the proposed development thereof. Where subdivisions only
are applied for, the minimum standards shall apply only to street trees
and to common open space and areas proposed to be dedicated to the
public. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
1. General. Landscape plans shall conform to the following general
design principles:
a. Use landscaping to accent and complement building, e.g.,
groupings of tall trees to break up long, low buildings and
lower plantings for taller buildings.
§ 1631 GENERAL § 1632
BH1:99
b. Locate landscaping to provide for climate control, e.g., shade
trees on the south to shield the hot summer sun and
evergreens on the north side for windbreaks.
c. Provide for a variety and mixture of landscaping. The variety
shall consider susceptibility to disease, colors, season,
textures, shapes, blossoms, and foliage.
d. Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered
in the choice of landscaping.
e. Consider the impact of any proposed landscaping plan at
various time intervals so that, e.g., shrubs do not grow and
eventually block sight distances or encroach upon road or
sidewalks.
f. All landscape plants shall be typical full specimens conforming
to the American Association of Nurserymen Standards and/or
Landscape Plans and Specifications for quality and installation.
g. Assure that no aspect of the landscape design inhibits access to
a development by emergency vehicles.
2. Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided for all streets.
a. Spacing between trees shall be 40 feet on center.
b. The use of more than one variety of street tree along a roadway
shall be provided in order to avoid problems to be associated
with monoculture.
c. Trees shall be planted in groupings of similar varieties. Use
trees of similar form, height and character along a roadway to
promote uniformity and allow for smooth visual transition
between species.
d. Tree variety selection shall be based upon on-site conditions
and tree suitability to these conditions. The Street Tree
Selection Guide with the approved street tree list shall be
followed.
§ 1632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1632
BH1:100
STREET TREE SELECTION GUIDE
Shade Trees for Street Planting
Species
Botanical Name Common Name
Mature Height
Tall (more than 40')
Medium (30-40')
Small (less than
30')
Value as a
Street Tree Comments
Acer campestre Hedge Maple Small Moderate Globe shaped, urban
tolerant
Acer rubrum Red Maple Tall Excellent Globe shaped, wet site
tolerant, invasive roots
A. rubrum
'Columnare'
Columnar Red
Maple
Tall Moderate Columnar, wet site
tolerate, invasive roots
A. rubrum
'October Glory'
October Glory
Red Maple
Tall Excellent Broad oval shape, wet site
tolerant, good fall color
A. rubrum
'Scanlon'
Scanlon Red
Maple
Medium Excellent Columnar, wet site
tolerant, urban intolerant
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple Tall Excellent Broad oval shape, urban
intolerant
A. saccharum
'Columnare'
Columnar Sugar
Maple
Tall Excellent Columnar, urban intolerant
A. saccharum
'Green Mountain'
Green Mountain
Sugar Maple
Tall Excellent Broad oval shape, urban
intolerant
A. saccharum
'Temple's Upright'
Temple's Upright
Sugar Maple
Tall Moderate Columnar, urban intolerant
Aesculus carnea
'Brioti'
Ruby
Horsechestnut
Medium Moderate Globe shaped, red flowers,
urban tolerant
Aesculus
hippocastanum
'Baumanni'
Double
Flowering
Horsechestnut
Tall Moderate Narrow conical shape,
double white flowers,
urban tolerant
Carpinus betulus European
Hornbeam
Small Moderate Broad oval shape, urban
tolerant
Carpinus betulus
'Fastigiata'
Pyramidal
European
Hornbeam
Medium Moderate Columnar shape, urban
tolerant
Carpinus
caroliniana
American
Hornbeam
Small Moderate Spreading shape, difficult
to transplant
Celtis occidentalis Common
Hackberry
Tall Moderate Globe shaped, wet site, dry
site, urban tolerant
§ 1632 GENERAL § 1632
BH1:101
STREET TREE SELECTION GUIDE
Shade Trees for Street Planting
Species
Botanical Name Common Name
Mature Height
Tall (more than 40')
Medium (30-40')
Small (less than
30')
Value as a
Street Tree Comments
Cladrastis
kentukea (lutea)
Yellowwood Medium Moderate Globe shaped, white
flowers in early summer
Fraxinus
americana
White Ash Tall Excellent Globe shaped, urban
tolerant, spray for borers
Fraxinus
pennsylvanica
"Marshall's
Seedless'
Marshall's
Seedless Green
Ash
Tall Excellent Wet site, urban tolerant,
spray for borers
Gleditsia
triacanthos
inermis
'Shademaster'
Shademaster
Thornless
Honeylocust
Tall Moderate Broad oval shape, mimosa
webworm problem, urban
tolerant
Gleditsia
triacanthos
inermis 'Skyline'
Skyline Thornless
Honeylocust
Tall Moderate Pyramidal, mimosa
webworm problem, urban
tolerant
Liquidambar
styraciflua
American Sweet
Gum
Tall Poor-
Moderate
Broad oval shape, good fall
color, wet site tolerant,
gumballs are litter
problem
Magnolia
xloebneri 'Merrill'
Dr. Merrill
Magnolia
Small Moderate Broad oval shape, white
flowers, urban tolerant
Magnolia
salicifolia
Anise Magnolia Medium Excellent Narrow conical shape,
white flowers
Platanus acerifolia London Planetree Tall Moderate Spreading shape, urban
tolerant
Platanus
occidentalis
American
Sycamore
Tall Poor Spreading shape, wet site
tolerant, subject to twig
blight
Pyrus calleryana
'Chanticleer'
Chanticleer Pear Medium Excellent Broad oval shape, urban
tolerant, white flowers,
red fall color
Quercus palustris Pin Oak Tall Moderate Narrow conical, wet site
tolerant, lower branches
are a problem
§ 1632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1632
BH1:102
STREET TREE SELECTION GUIDE
Shade Trees for Street Planting
Species
Botanical Name Common Name
Mature Height
Tall (more than 40')
Medium (30-40')
Small (less than
30')
Value as a
Street Tree Comments
Quercus phellos Willow Oak Tall Moderate Broad oval shape, wet site
tolerant, fine texture
Quercus rubra Red Oak Tall Excellent Spreading shape, urban
tolerant
Ulmus americana American Elm Tall Moderate Vase shaped, resistant to
Dutch Elm Disease
Zelkova serrata
'Green Vase'
Japanese Zelkova Tall Moderate Wine-glass shaped, wide
canopy, resembles elm, dry
site tolerant
Zelkova serrata
'Village Green'
Village Green
Zelkova
Tall Excellent Vase shaped, resembles
elm, dry site tolerant
e. Trees shall be a minimum of 3 inches to 3 1/2 inches caliper
(based upon American Nurserymen Standards). Within sight
triangles, a single tree may be permitted only with site-specific
approval of the Borough Engineer. Such trees, including those
at driveways, shall be of such size as will enable them to be
immediately pruned up to 7 feet branching height upon
planting.
3. Culs-de-sac. Cul-de-sac islands provide an opportunity to create
visual interest, soften the harshness of a large paved area, increase
groundwater recharge, screen headlight glare into residences, and
preserve existing vegetation.
a. All plant material shall exhibit a mature height under 30 inches
or above 7 feet with no more than three trunks in order to
allow for proper visibility.
b. All plants shall be tolerant of harsh, dry roadwide conditions.
c. Ground cover plantings shall be consistent with the degree of
maintenance expected for the culs-de-sac and of sufficient
density to entirely cover the ground plane.
4. Stormwater. Stormwater management areas include retention and
detention basins, drainage ditches and swales, and wetland areas.
Sensitively-designed basins and swales can benefit the health,
welfare and safety of Borough residents. This may involve
§ 1632 GENERAL § 1632
BH1:103
integration of these areas as aesthetic landscape features,
naturalized wetland areas, or active and passive recreation areas,
in addition to their stormwater management function.
a. Stormwater Detention Areas.
(1) The detention area shall be graded creatively to blend into
the surrounding landscape and imitate a natural
depression with an irregular edge. This shall include
gentle berming and avoiding linear, geometric basins.
(2) The quantity of trees to be planted on the interior of the
basins shall be equal to the number of trees that would be
necessary to cover the entire area, based upon a 20 foot by
20 foot grid to the high water line or outflow elevation. Of
this number 10 percent shall be 2-2.5 inches caliper, 20
percent shall be 1-2 inches caliper, and 70 percent shall be
6-8 feet height whips. The trees shall be planted in groves
and spaced 5 feet to 15 feet on center.
(3) The ground plane shall be seeded with a naturalization,
wildflower and/or wet meadow grass mix. The specific
blend shall be approved by the Borough Landscape
Architect.
(4) All woody and herbaceous plants shall be species
indigenous to the area and/or tolerant to typical wet/dry
floodplain conditions.
TREES AND SHRUBS RECOMMENDED FOR WET
SITES
Amelanchier alleghiensis Allegheny Serviceberry
Viburnum recognitum Arrowwood Viburnum
Aronia melanocarpa Black Chokeberry
Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum
Salixiinigra Black Willow
Acer negundo Boxelder
Celphalanthus occidentalis Buttonbush
Sambucus Canadensis Elderberry
Betula populifolia Gray Birch
Fraxinus pennsyanicum Green Ash
Vaccinium corymbosium Highbush Blueberry
Ilex glabra Inkberry Holly
Quercus palustris Pin Oak
Salix Pussy Willow
§ 1632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1632
BH1:104
TREES AND SHRUBS RECOMMENDED FOR WET
SITES
Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Cornus Red Twig Dogwood
Betula nigra River Birch
Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow Serviceberry
Cornus amomum Silky Dogwood
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple
Alnus serrulata Smooth Alder
Lindera benzoin Spicebush
Salix Streamco Willow
Rhododendron viscosum Swamp Azalea
Rosa palustris Swamp Rose
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
Magnolia virgineana Sweetbay magnolia
Liquidambar styraciflora Sweetgum
Clethra alnifolia Sweet Pepperbush
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
Itea virginica Virginia Sweetspire
Ilex verticillata Winterberry Holly
(5) Planting shall not be located within 10 feet of low flow
channels to allow for maintenance.
(6) The perimeter area (slopes above the high water line) shall
include shade trees (approximately 60/1000 linear feet),
evergreen trees (approximately 30 ornamental trees and
shrubs screening drainage structures and creating visual
interests.
(7) Provisions for emergency access as well as general
maintenance of the basins shall be reviewed by the
Borough Engineer. Plantings shall be designed to disguise
yet not hinder vehicular access.
(8) Plantings are not permitted upon any dikes associates with
a detention basin unless approved by the Borough
Engineer.
b. Stormwater Retention Areas - Open Space/Recreation
Features. This landscape treatment can take on a variety of
landscape forms, from formal reflecting pools and canals or
entry fountain features to natural park-like lakes and ravines.
§ 1632 GENERAL § 1632
BH1:105
(1) Water fountains/features are encouraged in the design of
research and developments.
(2) The waters edge shall be easily maintained and stable.
Possible treatments might include rip-rap, stone walls,
natural plantings, decking and bulkheads.
(3) The planting of the perimeter of the feature shall
accentuate views and interest and integrate pedestrian
paths, sitting areas, and other uses.
(4) Plantings shall include formal or informally-massed
deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs to screen and
frame views with ornamental trees, shrubs and grasses
used for visual interest or special effects. A continuous
landscape area shall be provided.
(5) If used as a recreational feature, the connection to the
water must be addressed and controlled. The types of uses
shall be specified and the plantings and pedestrian spaces
shall be integrated with these uses.
(6) Plants with pervasive root systems shall not be located
where they may cause damage to drainage pipes or other
underground utilities.
(7) All engineered basin structures shall be designed to blend
into the landscape in terms of construction materials,
color, grading and planting.
5. Open Space. Common or public open space provided as a part of
any cluster development shall be landscaped in one of the following
ways, depending upon the intent of the use for the open space.
a. Preservation of Open Space. This treatment is appropriate in
areas adjacent to and inclusive of natural amenities to be
preserved, such as wooded areas, water bodies; streams and
wetlands, as well as other undevelopable areas
The following standards shall apply:
(1) Use open space to preserve existing natural amenities
during site planning.
(2) Provide pedestrian walkways and bridges as necessary to
connect to open space on adjacent tracts of land.
(3) Cleared areas shall be renaturalized where appropriate.
(4) The planting quantities and sizes for renaturalized areas
shall be as per renaturalization standards.
§ 1632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1632
BH1:106
(5) The ground plane shall be seeded with a naturalization
wildflower and/or meadow grass mix. The specific blend
shall be approved by the Borough Landscape Architect.
b. Recreation Open Space. Recreational open space includes
lands provided for active recreation and passive recreation and
as additions to park lands. It can take on many forms, from a
tot lot or tennis and swimming complex in a residential
development to an English landscape garden in an office
development. The landscape treatment of these areas shall
address safety, visual interest, microclimate and use.
The following standards shall apply:
(1) The proposed use of all open space areas shall be indicated
and comply with Borough ordinances.
(2) Open space in commercial, office or similar developments
shall include sitting and outdoor eating areas. Provisions
for other active and passive recreation facilities is
encouraged.
(3) Grading and plantings of the recreation area shall remain
consistent with the overall landscape design. The
landscape design shall consist of massed deciduous and
evergreen trees and berms to create spaces and views and
ornamental trees and shrub masses for visual variety,
interest and detail.
(4) Plants shall be provided in a mix of sizes with shade trees
averaging 2-2.5 inches caliper, ornamental and evergreen
trees averaging 6-8 feet in height and shrubs 24-36 inches
height.
(5) In general, plants shall be provided at the following rate:
(a) Shade trees - 15 per acre
(b) Evergreen Trees - 5 per acre
(c) Flowering Shrubs - 3 per acre
(d) Shrubs - 20 per acre
The above quantities do not include plants necessary
to achieve screening, which shall be provided.
(6) Irrigation of all open space/planted areas within nonresidential
developments shall be provided.
(7) All plants shall be tolerant of specific site conditions,
which shall be indigenous species. Exotic, invasive plant
species are not permitted.
§ 1632 GENERAL § 1632
BH1:107
(8) Suggested improvements for residential recreation open
space areas include a tot lot (play structure with slide and
a separate swing set), an open air shelter, an open lawn
area for open field play, pedestrian pathways, and
benches. Other improvements shall be provided as
required by ordinance based upon population.
(9) The adjacent residences shall be partially screened from
play areas using berms and planting.
(10) If a recreation facility fronts onto a roadway, a post and
rail fence or other protective measures may be integrated
to provide protection and separation. The adjacent street
tree planting shall be continued along this area, and any
reverse frontage buffer planting shall be integrated with
open space planting.
(11) All open space should optimally be located centrally within
a development. In large developments, several smaller
facilities may be appropriate. Adequate access from
buildings, roadways, and other open space areas shall be
provided. Pedestrian easements between lots, connecting
to open space areas in another development or a public
facility, shall be provided.
6. Buffers. Landscaping buffers are areas provided to minimize and
screen any adverse impacts or nuisances on a site or from any
adjacent area. Included within any landscape buffer area shall be a
landscape strip consisting of trees, conifers, shrubs, berms, and if
appropriate, fences or walls and providing a completely planted
visual barrier. In areas of less than 25 feet width, the provisions of
the windbreak/heavy buffer requirements shall be followed.
a. Nonconforming Use Buffer. These buffers shall be provided
where a residential zone abuts an area currently used or zoned
for a different or higher intensity use. The following landscape
treatment shall be provided to assure complete visual
screening.
(1) Provide a buffer area as per zoning ordinance yard/setback
requirements.
(2) Preserve existing trees within the provided landscape
buffer area. If existing vegetation is insufficient, the
landscape strip shall be supplemented with new
understory plantings of shade-tolerant coniferous and
ornamental trees in naturalistic groupings in order to
provide a complete visual screen.
(3) Areas void of existing vegetation shall receive landscape
treatment including berming and planting consisting of
groupings of predominantly evergreen trees, with
§ 1632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1632
BH1:108
deciduous and ornamental trees and shrubs for visual
interest and variety.
(4) Berming shall be 2-8 feet in height and meander in a
naturalistic manner without adversely affecting natural
drainage.
(5) Planting shall consist of evergreen trees of minimum
height 6-8 feet planted 10 feet on center, shade trees 2 1/
2-3 inches caliper, flowering tree 4-5 feet height and
shrubs 2 feet high, planted in naturalistic groupings of
mixed plant varieties and sizes.
b. Reverse Frontage Buffer. Reverse frontage screening shall be
required where residential units and/or lots back onto any
arterial or major collector street. The following landscape
treatments shall be provided in order to screen private
residential spaces from the roadway.
(1) Provide a continuous landscape/sidewalk easement or
open space strip of not less than 50 feet width.
(2) Preserve existing trees within the provided landscape
buffer area. Supplement understory with shade tolerant
naturalistic massed plantings of evergreen and
ornamental trees in order to complete screening of
residences. Meander sidewalk into new plantings and, as
necessary, to preserve existing trees.
c. Filtered Buffer. Filtered screening shall be required around the
perimeter of parking areas and where interior roads run
parallel with other roads, parking areas, or the perimeter of a
site in order to screen unsafe distractions and avoid confusion.
The following standards shall apply:
(1) Provide landscape buffer area of 25 feet in width or as per
zoning ordinance front yard requirements, whichever is
greater.
(2) Preserve existing trees within the landscape buffer area. If
existing vegetation is insufficient, the landscape strip shall
be supplemented with new understory plantings of shadetolerant
coniferous and ornamental trees in naturalistic
groupings.
(3) In areas of necessary disturbance, existing quality
vegetation shall be relocated for use in other areas.
Detailed plans for tree removal and relocation must be
made on plans and in the field (tag trees) for review and
inspection.
§ 1632 GENERAL § 1632
BH1:109
(4) The landscape design shall provide shade for parking
areas and evergreen and ornamental trees to screen
nuisances and emphasize appropriate views.
(5) All plants shall be tolerant of harsh roadside conditions.
(6) If a 25 feet landscape strip cannot be provided, a row of
evergreen trees or a combination of a low wall and berm
with planting may be required.
d. Windbreak/Heavy Screening. Windbreak screening shall be
required where necessary to provide windbreak or to stop
windborne debris from leaving a site. This type of screening
may also be required in undersized buffer areas or around
outdoor storage facilities. The following standards shall apply:
(1) Provide a landscape strip consisting of a double staggered
row of evergreen trees of 6-8 feet height spaced 8 feet on
center.
(2) If a landscape buffer area is less than 10 feet wide, or
windborne debris is produced, then a fence may be
required in addition to planting.
(3) All outdoor storage facilities shall be screened with a
landscape strip. If the strip is less than 10 feet wide, a
fence shall be required.
(4) If a fence is required, it shall be 6 feet high and of a design
consistent with the architecture of the principal building.
Planting shall be included in any fencing plan.
e. Parking Areas. The objectives of the landscape architectural
treatment of all parking areas shall be to provide for safe and
convenient movement of vehicles, to limit pedestrian/vehicular
conflicts, to limit paved areas, to provide for screening from
public right-of-way and buildings, to soften the overall visual
impact of parking lots, and to provide shade and reduce heat
island effects.
(1) Large parking lots shall be subdivided into modules of
10-12 spaces on a side. Separation of modules should be
achieved by a landscape buffer area and strip of 10 feet
width. Integrating pedestrian circulation into these strips
should be considered.
(2) Trees within the parking areas shall be provided at a
minimum rate of 1 tree per 3 parking spaces, except where
the normal spread of the tree exceeds 30 feet.
Preservation or relocation of existing trees greater than 5
inches in caliper is encouraged to meet this requirement.
§ 1632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1632
BH1:110
Landscape buffer or parking area perimeter plantings do
no satisfy this requirement.
(3) Any parking area in a front yard or within clear view from
the public right-of-way shall be screened from view by a
landscape buffer area.
(4) Parking areas shall be screened from interior drives using
evergreen, deciduous and flowering trees and shrubs to
create a continuous landscape strip of 10 feet minimum
width. Consider integration of pedestrian walkways within
these strips.
(5) Plant sizes shall be a minimum 2.5-3 inch caliper for shade
trees, 5-6 feet height for evergreen and ornamental trees
and 2 feet height for shrubs.
(6) Parking lot lighting should be sited within landscape
islands. However, trees shall not hinder safe lighting
coverage. Therefore, varieties must be considered. Shade
trees should be used so as to reduce glare to adjacent
properties, buildings and roadways.
(7) Pedestrian and vehicular conflicts shall be minimized
through design, yet, when necessary, clearly indicated by
change of paving and/or plant material.
7. Amenities/Resources. The objectives of landscape architectural
treatment of sites inclusive of historic resources and natural
amenities shall be to preserve and enhance such amenities for
present and future residents. Historic resources and natural
amenities are areas of unique landscape character. This may
include, but is not limited to, bodies of water, streams, wetlands,
windbreaks, groves of trees, hedge rows, orchards, unique vistas,
farmsteads, villages and historic structures and landmarks. Land
developments in the Borough shall be designed to preserve and
utilize these amenities as features. The architectural, site plan and
landscape architectural design shall utilize these amenities for
design themes, preserving their heritage and enhancing their
significance.
8. Provisions Applicable to Site Plans and Subdivisions.
a. Utilize the uniqueness of the existing bodies of water, groves of
trees, hedge rows, historic structures and landmarks, and
farmsteads within the site plan as features.
b. Respect the historic value and character of the villages and
hamlets which exist in the Borough. Development within these
areas shall conserve their individual character.
§ 1632 GENERAL § 1632
BH1:111
c. Provide landscaping as required, integrated with existing
vegetation or historic landscape themes.
d. When appropriate, the development of historical markers or
displays in coordination/agreement with the Historic
Preservation Commission shall be required.
e. Use of native plants and xeriscaping is encouraged in order to
reduce the need for water, pesticides and chemical fertilizer in
planted areas. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
9. Landscape Maintenance. A landscape management/ maintenance
specification shall be provided in conjunction with all approved
subdivisions as to street trees, common open space and areas to be
dedicated to the public and all approved site plans.
10. Water Conservation. All sprinkler and irrigation systems installed
on or after the adoption date of this Ordinance are required to
include automatic rain sensors which prevent watering during and
shortly after precipitation. [Ord. No. 2012-01, adopted 3-12-12]
11. Tree Replacement Alternatives.
All required trees shall be planted on the site in compliance with
Section 1632, Landscaping Standards. In the event relief shall
be requested by the applicant based upon practical physical
difficulties and undue hardship related to the condition of the
site, the Board shall solicit comments and recommendations of the
Borough Engineer and Borough Planner in determining whether
the relief requested by the applicant shall be granted.
In lieu of planting the required trees, the Board may permit the
applicant to make an in lieu of payment to be deposited in the
Borough of Flemington Tree Fund as established by this chapter.
The contribution, in lieu of planting the trees, shall be $550.00 for
each tree and shall be deposited in the Borough Tree Fund prior
to the Borough issuing any building permits for the development.
[Ord. No. 2005-27]
12. Tree Fund.
There shall be established a Borough Tree Fund for the purposes
set forth in this chapter. [Ord. No. 2005-27]
a. All funds collected from an applicant, as a contribution in lieu
of planting trees shall be deposited in a dedicated account
clearly designated as the Borough of Flemington Tree Fund. All
funds so deposited shall be used exclusively for the planting of
trees. This fund may be used to plant trees on private property
locations facing a street, public property and rights-of-way,
including but not limited to public parks, public schools, and
public buildings.
§ 1632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1632
BH1:112
§ 1633. LIGHTING. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
b. The Tree Fund shall be administered by the Shade Tree
Commission, who shall report to the Borough Council on an
annual basis detailing the use of the fund.
A. Street lighting of a type supplied by the applicable utility and of a type
and number approved by the approving authority shall be provided for
all street intersections and along all arterial, collector and local streets
and anywhere else deemed necessary for safety reasons. Wherever
electric utility installations are required to be underground, the
applicant shall provide for underground service for street lighting.
B. All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways
and driveways serving commercial, public, office, multiple family,
recreational or other uses having common off-street parking and /or
loading areas shall be adequately illuminated for security and safety
purposes. The lighting plan in and around the parking areas shall
provide for non-glare lights focused downward. The light intensity
provided at ground level shall be indicated in footcandles on the
submitted site plans and shall average at least 0.5 footcandle at
intersections. Refer to Exhibit A for other areas to be illuminated.
Lighting shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting height not more
than 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured
from the ground level to the centerline of the light source.
C. Any other outdoor lighting such as building and sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient
detail to allow a determination of the effects upon adjacent properties,
traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objectives of these
specifications are to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light
shall shine into building windows, nor onto streets and driveways so as
to interfere with or distract driver vision. Maximum vertical
illumination when measured at a point 5 feet within the adjacent
property line and at a height of 5 feet and facing the light fixtures, shall
be no greater than 0.1 vertical footcandles. To achieve these
requirements, the intensity of such light sources, the light shielding and
similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval. Wall
mounted fixtures are only permitted if directed into a site and not
positioned towards neighboring properties or public streets.
1. Exhibit A - Illumination Standards for Street, Parking, and
Pedestrian Areas.
a. Street Illumination.
§ 1632 GENERAL § 1633
BH1:113
Area Classification
Street
Hierarchy
Commercial
(Maximum
Footcandles)
Intermediate
(Maximum
Footcandles)
Residential
(Maximum
Footcandles)
Collector/or
greater
1.2 0.9 0.6
Minorresidential
subcollector
0.9 0.6 0.4
Local 0.6 0.4 0.4
b. Parking Illumination - (Open parking facilities).
Vehicular Use Area
Only
General Parking &
Pedestrian Safety
Level of
Activity
Maximum
Lux
Maximum
Footcandles
Maximum
Lux
Maximum
Footcandles
Low
activity
5 0.5 2 0.2
Medium
activity
11 1 6 0.6
High
activity
22 2 10 0.9
c. Pedestrian Way Illumination - Average Levels for Special
Pedestrian Security.
Walkways &
Bikeway
Classification
Maximum
Average
Level
Footcandles
Mounting
Heights 3
to 5 meters
(9 to 15
feet)
Footcandles
Mounting
Heights 5 to
10 meters
(15 to 30
feet)
Footcandles
Sidewalks
(roadside) and
Type A
bikeways:
Commercial
Areas
0.9 2.0 4.0
Intermediate
Areas
0.6 1.0 2.0
Residential
Areas
0.2 0.4 0.8
§ 1633 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1633
BH1:114
§ 1634. CONNECTIVITY AND COMPLETE STREETS. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
Walkways &
Bikeway
Classification
Maximum
Average
Level
Footcandles
Mounting
Heights 3
to 5 meters
(9 to 15
feet)
Footcandles
Mounting
Heights 5 to
10 meters
(15 to 30
feet)
Footcandles
Walkways
distant from
roadways and
Type B
bikeways, park
walkways and
bikeways
0.5 0.6 1.0
Pedestrian
Tunnels
4.0 5.0 -
Pedestrian
Overpasses
0.3 0.4 -
Pedestrian
Stairways
0.6 0.8 -
D. Outdoor lighting levels shall be reduced by at least 30 percent after
11:00 p.m. or during nonoperating hours, whichever is later. Reduced
lighting levels shall not apply to the following:
1. Lighting necessary for emergency purposes.
2. With the exception of landscape lighting, lighting for residential
properties including multi-family properties, not having common
areas.
3. Code required lighting for steps, stairs, walkways, and building
entrances.
4. Motion activated lighting. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
A. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets.
Sidewalks shall be 5 feet wide in nonresidential zone districts and 4 feet
wide in residential districts. In general, sidewalks shall be placed in the
right-of-way, parallel to the street unless an exception has been
permitted to preserve topographical or natural features, or to provide
visual interest, or unless the applicant shows that an alternative
pedestrian system provides equally safe and convenient circulation.
Sidewalks may be placed in a public access easement adjoining the
right-of-way in order to provide sufficient room for various functions
within the right-of-way, as follows:
§ 1633 GENERAL § 1634
BH1:115
B. Handicapped Passage. Sidewalks and walkways less than 6 feet in
width shall provide widened areas at least every 200 lineal feet
sufficient to permit the passage of 2 wheelchairs in opposite directions.
The widened area shall be at least 6 feet wide. In general, this
requirement may be met through the intersection of driveway's paved
surfaces with sidewalks.
C. Sidewalks and graded areas shall comply with the design criteria of the
American with Disabilities Act and New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
D. In addition to required sidewalks along streets, commercial
developments shall provide internal sidewalks creating convenient
linkages between the commercial development and all surrounding
streets. Internal sidewalks shall be provided linking such commercial
development to adjoining nonresidential developments. Cross-access
easements shall be provided for such pedestrian linkages.
E. Permeable paving materials shall be used where appropriate, such as
but not limited to emergency access drives.
F. Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be placed in the outside lane of a
roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is
permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the
outer lane of moving vehicles.
G. Bicycle Parking.
1. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided where 20 or more
vehicle parking spaces are required for nonresidential or multifamily
development.
a. Nonresidential Uses. Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided
for a rate of 1 bicycle space for each 20 vehicle parking spaces
required under Section 2629 herein, with a minimum
requirement of 2 bicycle parking spaces.
b. Residential Use. Only multi-family development shall be
required to provide bicycle parking at a rate of 1 bicycle space
for each 5 dwelling units.
2. Bicycle parking areas shall be designed to provide secure
anchoring for locking devices.
3. Bicycle parking shall be located 4 feet from all building entrances,
fire hydrants, curb ramps, etc. and shall be placed to avoid conflicts
with pedestrians and vehicles.
4. Bicycle parking shall be placed within 50 feet of the building
entrance.
H. The creation of culs-de-sac shall be prohibited. All new streets shall
connect to an existing or proposed street.
§ 1634 FLEMINGTON CODE § 1634
BH1:116
Chapter 26
ZONING
§ 2600. SHORT TITLE.
The short form by which this Ordinance may be known shall be "The Zoning
Chapter of the Land Development Ordinance of the Borough of Flemington".
§ 2601. PURPOSES.
It is the intent and purpose of this Ordinance to exercise the authority
delegated to municipalities under the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975,
c. 291; codified as N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) to regulate development.
This Ordinance is intended to implement the policies of the Master Plan in
its provisions:
A. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in a manner
that will promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters;
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
D. To ensure that the development of the Borough of Flemington does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the County and State as a whole;
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and preservation of the
environment;
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies;
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New
Jersey citizens;
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which will result in congestion or blight;
I. To provide a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
J. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban
§ 1634 GENERAL § 2601
BH1:117
sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of
land;
K. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
L. To encourage the coordination of various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land;
M. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources;
N. To promote the maximum practical recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning
practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan goals and to
compliment municipal recycling programs;
O. To encourage a mixture of land uses that facilitates non-vehicular and
pedestrian access;
P. To plan adequately for the timely provision of new community facilities,
including but not limited to:
1. Firehouses;
2. Schools;
3. Community centers;
4. Parks;
5. Bicycle lanes and pedestrian paths;
6. Municipal facilities; and
7. Public transit.
Q. To encourage the redevelopment and revitalization of existing
underutilized or abandoned lands and buildings;
R. To promote the redevelopment and revitalization of the commercial
center of Flemington through coordinated parking, streetscape
improvements, signage, and lighting in keeping with the historic
character of this district;
S. To preserve and enhance historic buildings, places and landscapes,
encourage the maintenance of traditional architectural forms in
buildings, and retain streetscape characteristics.
T. To establish design standards to encourage the construction of new
buildings to complement the style and scale of existing buildings;
U. To promote the preservation of natural features during land
development;
§ 2601 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2601
BH1:118
§ 2602. INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is imposed and
required by other provisions of the Borough of Flemington, County, State, or
Federal government, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. Where
such other laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions require
greater restrictions than are imposed by this Ordinance, the provisions of
such other laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions shall control.
§ 2603. PROHIBITED USES.
All principal, accessory and conditional uses not expressly permitted in this
Ordinance are hereby prohibited.
§ 2604. TIME OF COMPLIANCE.
All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in any use or structure and
shall apply to the entire structure or structures whether or not the entire
structure or structures were involved in the erection, enlargement,
alteration, moving or change in use.
§ 2605. DATE OF APPROVAL.
The time period for the effect of approval shall begin with the date of
the adoption of the resolution memorializing such approval of the subject
application by the Board of Jurisdiction.
§ 2606. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
V. To promote the visual improvement of the Borough's major arterials by
the coordination of visual design and character of signage, planting
additional street trees, and requiring on-site landscaping improvements
during the redevelopment review process.
W. To encourage the coordination of development through the connection
of commercial properties by easement and physical improvement.
X. To decrease the visibility and extent of parking lots and access
driveways by:
1. Requiring the installation of landscaped traffic islands in parking
lots;
2. Screening parking lots from the traveling public and adjacent
residents by a combination of landscaping, berming, walls and
fencing; and
3. Reducing the required number of parking spaces in pedestrianoriented
development and redevelopment.
§ 2601 GENERAL § 2606
BH1:119
§ 2607. EXCEPTIONS AND PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS.
A. Required Conformance. No structure shall be erected and no existing
building shall be moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any land
be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose other than as
permitted within the zoning districts so described by this Ordinance,
nor shall any open space or yard area be encroached upon or reduced in
any manner except in strict conformity with the regulations contained
herein.
B. Unlawful Encroachment. In the event of any unlawful encroachment or
reduction of open space or yard area, the building or structure, as the
case maybe, shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance and the Certificate of Occupancy for such building or
structure shall be null and void.
C. Exception for Certain Utilities and Other Infrastructure. The provisions
for review by a board of competent jurisdiction shall not apply to utility
distribution or collection lines for water, sewerage, storm water, natural
gas, and electric, nor telephone, cable television or other
telecommunications lines supplied by a public or local utility, or cable
television company which are located in or on a public street providing
service to private property.
D. Frontage on Public Street. Every principal use shall be located on a lot
with frontage upon an existing improved public street or new street
which has been built in accordance with the applicable Borough
standards or for which such improvement has been insured by the
posting of a performance guaranty in accordance with this Ordinance.
E. Dedication of Right-of-Way. No subdivision or site plan involving any
street(s) requiring additional right-of-way width as specified in the
Master Plan or Official Map and the street requirements of this
Ordinance shall be approved unless such additional right-of-way, either
along one or both sides of said street(s), as applicable, shall be deeded
to the municipality or other appropriate governmental agency.
F. Yards. No open space provided around any principal building for the
purposes of complying with the front, side, or rear yard requirements of
this Ordinance shall be considered as providing for the required yard
areas of another principal building.
A. Permitted Modifications for Residential Infill Development. New
principal dwellings in the Transition Residential district and the Single
Family district on infill lots may encroach within the yard areas as
otherwise required in this Ordinance under the following criteria:
1. Front Yard. The front yard depth may be reduced to the average of
the setbacks from the streetline of existing dwellings on both sides
of the proposed residence. In the event an adjacent lot is vacant,
§ 2606 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2607
BH1:120
the average shall be calculated using the required setback for the
vacant lot.
2. Side Yard. The side yard may be reduced to the depth of the side
yard of the adjacent lot but in no instance shall the distance
between dwellings be reduced to less than 10 feet.
B. Height Limits. Except for one-and two-family dwellings as permitted in
this Ordinance, penthouses or roof structures for the housing of
stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain the building, skylights,
spires, cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys or similar structures may be
erected above the height limits prescribed by this Ordinance but in no
case shall such extension exceed 20 percent of the maximum height
permitted in the district.
C. Child Care Centers and Family Day Care Homes.
1. Child Care Centers. Child care centers shall be permitted in any
nonresidential district. Any child care center shall be duly licensed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. A child care center functionally
integrated within a nonresidential development owned or operated
for the benefit of their employees, their tenant's employees, or
employees within an office or business park or research and
development complex shall not be required to provide additional
off-street parking for the use. In the calculation of any floor area
ratio applicable to an office or business park or research and
development complex, the area occupied by a child care center
shall not be included.
2. Family daycare homes as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5a. and b.
are principal permitted uses in all residential zone districts.
D. Emergency Housing. Trailers for emergency housing for households
displaced by fire, storm, flooding, or other natural disaster may be
located on individual lots in zoning districts where single-family
detached and two-family residential uses are permitted for the period of
reconstruction. The installation of such trailers shall conform to the
following requirements:
1. No trailer shall be installed at a site prior to the issuance of all
required Uniform Construction Code permits.
2. The trailer shall be placed on the lot where the residence made
uninhabitable by such disaster is located.
3. No more than one unit of emergency housing shall be permitted per
lot.
4. All such trailers shall be removed from the reconstruction site upon
the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy prior to
permitting the occupancy of the permanent residence.
§ 2607 GENERAL § 2607
BH1:121
5. No such trailer shall be placed in the front yard setback required
for the respective zoning district.
6. Such temporary housing shall not exceed 900 square feet in floor
area.
E. Groundwater Remediation. Temporary structures and equipment
required for the remediation of groundwater contamination pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq. shall be permitted in any district provided that:
1. Existing on-site buildings shall be used to the extent feasible to
house equipment and offices;
2. Structures and equipment shall be set back from any property line
a minimum of 25 feet, and shall emit no noise when measured at
the property line.
3. Equipment shall be enclosed by opaque fencing.
4. All temporary structures and equipment shall be removed within 90
days following completion of the remedial action.
5. Disturbed areas shall be graded and seeded with an appropriate
ground cover in accordance with the soil erosion control
regulations of the municipality or county.
6. Groundwater remediation action shall be exempt from site plan
review as otherwise required in this Ordinance.
F. Public and Local Utilities and Cable Television Facilities. Distribution
facilities for public and local utilities and cable television companies
shall be permitted in any district, but shall not include communication
towers or antennas, utility yards for the storage of vehicles, equipment
and supplies, nor for maintaining and extending distribution networks,
power generation, or facilities requiring a New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System permit (NJPDES), provided that:
1. The proposed installation in a specific location must be reasonably
necessary for the satisfactory provision of service by the utility to
the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be
located.
2. The design of any building in connection with such facilities must
conform to the general character of the area and not adversely
affect the safe, comfortable enjoyment of property rights in the
zone in which it is located.
3. Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as may
be required. Fences, when used to enclose public utility facilities
such as electrical power substations, shall be built in accordance
with the applicable requirements of the New Jersey Board of Public
Utility Commissioners and the National Electrical Code in effect at
the time of construction.
§ 2607 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2607
BH1:122
4. Landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawns, shall be provided.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the
approving authority during site plan review.
6. All of the other area, yard, height and building coverage
requirements of the respective zone and any other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance shall be met.
G. Sales Offices. Temporary sales offices for the marketing of residential
development shall be permitted only upon the lot or tract to which such
sales relate. Temporary sales offices shall conform to the following
requirements:
1. No such office shall be installed prior to the filing of stamped final
subdivision plats or issuance of signed and sealed site plans, as the
case may be.
2. Sales offices shall provide for no less 5 and no more than 10
temporary off-street parking spaces located in a safe and
convenient manner. Off-street parking shall be provided as
determined by the Approving authority during site plan review.
3. No sales office shall be located within 25 feet of a lot line or
streetline. Such offices shall be temporarily landscaped along the
foundation of the structure.
4. Sales offices shall be removed from the site under any of the
following circumstances:
a. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a model dwelling
unit.
b. The sale or lease of 75 percent of the total number of housing
units in the development.
H. Temporary Construction Trailers. Temporary construction trailers at
work sites shall be permitted in all zoning districts for office use and the
storage of equipment and supplies during active construction activities.
The installation of such trailers shall conform to the following
requirements:
1. No trailer shall be installed at a work site prior to the issuance of a
construction permit.
2. All such trailers shall be removed from the work site upon the
issuance of a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy to
which the use of the trailer relates.
3. No trailer shall remain at a work site where active construction
activity has ceased for a period of more than 30 days, except where
inclement weather prohibits the immediate renewal.
§ 2607 GENERAL § 2607
BH1:123
§ 2608. EXISTING AND NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES
OR LOTS.
4. No trailer shall be located within 25 feet of a lot line or streetline.
Such trailers shall be temporarily screened from public view by a
combination of opaque fencing and/or landscaping.
5. No more than 3 temporary construction trailers shall be permitted
per work site, and shall be removed prior to the issuance of the last
certificate of occupancy.
I. Temporary Uses. Application may be made to the Borough Council for a
permit for a temporary use inconsistent with the provisions of this
Article for special events lasting for a period not to exceed 2 weeks in
any one year. Such events may include, but not be limited to, circuses,
bazaars, fairs, and athletic contests. In the granting or denial of such
temporary use permit the Borough Council may consider the following:
1. The adequacy of provisions for public safety, including, but not
limited to, fire prevention, crowd control, and emergency medical
services.
2. The adequacy of provisions for vehicular and pedestrian traffic
control, including ingress and egress, parking, attendants and
temporary traffic signage.
3. The adequacy of provisions for food handling, solid waste, and
sanitary sewerage.
4. The sufficiency of insurance for the event.
5. Any other measures necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
The Borough Council may impose reasonable conditions on the
issuance of any temporary use permit including, but not limited to,
the posting of adequate surety and the reimbursement of expenses
incurred by the municipality.
A. Continuance. Any nonconforming use or structure lawfully existing at
the time of passage of the ordinance which made such use or structure
nonconforming may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so
occupied and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the
event of partial destruction (up to but not exceeding 50 percent of
value) thereof.
B. Nonconforming Use Certificate. A prospective purchaser, prospective
mortgagee, or any other person interested in any land upon which a
nonconforming use or structure exists may apply in writing for the
issuance of a certificate certifying that the use or structure was in
existence before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use
or structure nonconforming and that said use or structure may continue
§ 2607 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2608
BH1:124
as a lawful preexisting use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68. The
applicant shall have the burden of proof.
C. Application Procedure. Applications pursuant hereto shall be made to
the Zoning Officer within 1 year of the adoption of the ordinance which
rendered such use or structure nonconforming, or at any such time to
the Planning Board. Notice shall be given in accordance with § 1410. A
fee in accordance with Chapter 28 shall be required for the Certificate
of Non-Conforming Use. The Board Secretary shall publish notice of the
Zoning Officer's decision of either approval or denial of the certification
in the Planning Board's official newspaper within 10 days of the
issuance of such certification or denial of same. Any interested party
affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer may appeal such decision
to the Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 within 20
days of the publication of the notice of decision.
D. Maintenance. Maintenance may be made to a nonconforming use,
structure, or lot provided the maintenance work does not change the
use, expand the building or the functional use of the building, or
increase the area of a lot used for a nonconforming purpose.
E. Building Additions. Any existing structure with a permitted use located
on either a conforming or nonconforming lot, but which building is
situated on the lot so as to violate one or more yard requirements, may
have additions to the principal building and/or construct an accessory
building without an appeal for a variance, provided:
1. The existing use(s) on the lot are conforming to the permitted
use(s) stipulated in this Ordinance for the lot in question; and
2. The total permitted building coverage is not exceeded; and
3. The accessory building and/or addition do not violate any other
requirements of this Ordinance including, but not limited to,
height, setback, and parking; and
4. There is no increase in the existing nonconformity.
5. This section shall not apply to infill development.
6. The addition of eave overhangs, cellar doors and similar features is
permitted, if they do not more than extend 4 feet beyond the
building setback.
F. Subdivision of Lots. An existing lot whose area and/or dimensions are
sufficient to permit a subdivision, but where a structure exists on the lot
with one or more setback violations, may nevertheless be subdivided
without an appeal for a variance provided the subdivision itself does not
create any new zoning violations and does not increase the severity of
the existing setback violations.
G. Merging of Substandard Lots. Whenever title to 2 or more contiguous
lots is held by the same owner, regardless of whether or not each of the
§ 2608 GENERAL § 2608
BH1:125
§ 2609. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURE OR USE.
The following regulations shall apply to all accessory buildings:
§ 2610. ZONING DISTRICTS. [Amended Ord. No. 2009-15; Ord. No.
2017-10]
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Borough of Flemington is hereby
divided into the following districts:
Zoning District Zoning Symbol
Single Family Residential SF
Transition Residential TR
Townhouse Residential TH
Garden Apartment Residential GA
Senior Citizen Residential SC
Transition Commercial TC
Community Business CB
Downtown Business DB
lots may have been approved as portions of a subdivision or acquired
by separate conveyance or by other operation of law, and one or more
individual lots should, by reason of substandard area or yard space
or similar measurements, not conform with the minimum lot area and
dimension requirements for the zone in which it is located, the
contiguous lots shall be merged into a single lot.
A. Accessory Buildings as Part of Principal Buildings. Any accessory
building attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the
principal building and the total structure shall adhere to the yard
requirements for the principal building regardless of the technique of
connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
B. Accessory Buildings Not to Be Constructed Prior to Principal Building.
No permit shall be issued for the construction of an accessory building
prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the construction of the
main building upon the same premises. If construction of the main
building does not precede or coincide with the construction of the
accessory building, the Construction Official shall revoke the
construction permit for the accessory building until construction of the
main building has proceeded substantially toward completion.
C. Location and Setback of Accessory Buildings. An accessory building or
structure may be erected in side and rear yard areas only excepting
certain limited uses otherwise permitted in this Ordinance and shall be
set back from property lines as required herein. In the event that no
accessory building or structure setback is established in the particular
district, the setback requirements for principal buildings shall apply.
§ 2608 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2610
BH1:126
Zoning District Zoning Symbol
Downtown II Business DBII
Professional Office PO
Village Artisan Shopping [Ord. No.
2012-15]
VAS
Highway Retail HR
Super Shopping Overlay O/SS
Public School and Parks PS/P
§ 2611. ZONING MAP. [Ord. No. 2013-11; Ord. No. 2017-10]
The Zoning Map entitled "Zoning, Flemington Borough, Hunterdon County,
NJ," dated June 2013, is hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance.
§ 2612. INTERPRETATION OF ZONING MAP.
A. Amendments
1. Ordinance No. 2017-10. The Zoning Map is amended to remove the
Inclusionary Housing Overlay District.4 [Ord. No. 2017-10]
A. Interpretation of Boundaries and Property Lines. Zoning district
boundary lines are intended to follow street centerlines, railroad rightsof-
way, streams and lot or property lines as they exist on lots of record
at the time of enactment of this Ordinance unless otherwise indicated
by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be in
feet and measured horizontally and, when measured from a street, shall
be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the centerline of
that street is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact
location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be
determined by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
B. Construction. Where boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where
they approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale more
than 20 feet distant therefrom, the street centerlines, railroad rights-ofway,
streams and lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Use of Scale. Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the
location of the boundary, unless indicated by dimensions on the Zoning
Map, shall be determined by use of the stated scale on the Map.
D. Applicability Within Each District. The zoning standards, controls and
designations apply to every structure, lot and use within each district
and the district line extends vertically in both directions, i.e. above and
below grade.
4. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map and the Historic District Map are included as attachments
to this chapter.
§ 2610 GENERAL § 2613
BH1:127
§ 2613. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SF) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Single Family Residential (SF) District is to
provide locations for detached dwellings occupied by one household
generally located in the outer ring of development in the Borough. It is
the lowest density residential district in the Borough. In addition to
single family uses, governmental and institutional uses are permitted.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Single Family Residential Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Place of Worship.
3. ECHO Housing.
a. The ECHO Housing unit shall be located to the rear of the
principal residence, but shall not be located in the side or rear
setbacks. The Zoning Officer may require a landscaped buffer
of evergreen trees and shrubs to minimize visual impact on
neighboring properties.
b. The ECHO unit shall be separated from the principal dwelling
by a minimum of 5 feet.
c. The ECHO housing unit shall comply with the minimum unit
size requirements for Neighborhood Preservation Balanced
Housing Program (N.J.A.C. 5:43-1.1 et seq.) as follows:
(1) Efficiency - 500 sq. ft.
(2) 1 bedroom - 600 sq. ft
(3) 2 bedroom - 750 sq. ft.
d. No ECHO housing unit shall exceed 900 square feet in area.
e. The exterior of ECHO housing units shall be covered with a
material and color that is complementary with the facade of
the primary residence on the property.
f. The unit shall be removed from the premises within 6 months
of the end of the term of occupancy of the approved applicant
and the lot restored to its status prior to the installation of the
unit. The Zoning Officer may extend the time period for
removal up to an additional 3 months upon adequate
documentation of marketing efforts to sell the unit during the
initial 6 month period.
4. Cemetery.
§ 2613 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2613
BH1:128
5. Municipal use, including parks and recreation.
6. Community gardening.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Single family detached dwellings:
a. Private garage.
b. Private swimming pool and other outdoor recreation.
c. Storage shed.
d. Home occupation in accordance with § 2627G.
e. Deck, gazebo and cabana.
2. Place of Worship:
a. Rectory or parish house.
b. Maintenance shed or garage.
c. Child care center and senior care center.
d. Social hall primarily for the use of members.
3. Cemetery:
a. Grounds keepers house.
b. Office.
c. Mausoleum, columbarium or other funerary structure
excepting funeral homes or crematoria.
d. Maintenance building or structure.
4. Signs, § 2631.
5. Off-street parking.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
8. Shelters and fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals. [Ord.
No. 2012-01]
9. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board:
1. Accessory apartment meeting the following criteria:
§ 2613 GENERAL § 2613
BH1:129
a. No more than one accessory apartment per lot shall be
permitted.
b. The accessory apartment shall be used only for one family.
c. The owner of the lot must reside in the primary dwelling.
d. The accessory apartment shall be created within the existing
square footage of the primary dwelling and any required
access and egress shall be created within the existing
structure.
e. Any exterior entrance to the accessory apartment shall not be
located on the same facade of the building as the primary
dwelling.
f. The accessory apartment must contain at least 500 square feet
in gross floor area, but must not constitute more than 35
percent of the gross floor area of the principal building.
g. At least one additional off-street parking space shall be
provided for the use of the accessory apartment occupants.
h. The accessory apartment structure and lot shall be in full
compliance with all applicable health and construction codes.
i. The owner of the accessory apartment must submit an affidavit
of continuing use every 2 years.
j. Flemington Borough acknowledges the need to provide its fair
share of housing for low and moderate income households. Any
property owner applying for an accessory apartment under this
section must affirmatively demonstrate that the accessory
apartment is to be rented to and occupied by a household
meeting the affordable housing criteria of the NJ Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) and the Affordable Housing
Procedural Requirements of Section 2632.
k. Accessory apartments shall be affirmatively marketed to the
housing region and shall be administered by an experienced
administrative entity as further described in Section 2633.
l. Recognizing that Flemington Borough is meeting its unmet
need with accessory apartments for low and moderate income
households, the Borough has not been required to bond to fund
the creation of accessory apartments. However, in the event
that development fee revenue is available, the Borough will
provide at least $10,000.00 to subsidize the physical creation
of an accessory apartment conforming to the requirements of
this section.
m. The maximum number of accessory apartments permitted
under this section shall be the number that the municipality is
§ 2613 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2613
BH1:130
permitted to apply toward its unmet fair share obligation of
low and moderate income housing in accordance with the
applicable regulations of COAH that exist at the time of
application.
n. The accessory apartment shall be rented only to a household
which is either a low or moderate income household at the time
of initial occupancy of the unit.
o. Ten (10) year affordability controls shall be imposed via a deed
restriction or other instrument acceptable to the Borough
Attorney and COAH.
p. Rents of accessory apartments shall be affordable to low or
moderate income households as per COAH regulations and
shall include a utility allowance.
2. Public and private nonprofit day school meeting the following
criteria:
a. The minimum lot size shall be 3 acres.
b. The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
c. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
d. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum
of 25 feet from surrounding properties and public roads.
e. Outdoor athletic fields shall be oriented to minimize adverse
impacts on neighboring residential uses from noise, lighting,
and vehicular and pedestrian access.
3. Any other requirement not herein modified shall apply to any
conditional use.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all SF Districts.
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Max
Building
Coverage
Single
Family
Detached
11,250 sf 75' 150' 25' 10' 35' 35'(1) .50 .25
Accessory
Building(2,6)
NP 5' 5' 18'
Place of
Worship
43,560 sf 100' 200' 25' 25' 35' 80'(3) .50 .25
§ 2613 GENERAL § 2613
BH1:131
§ 2614. TRANSITION RESIDENTIAL (TR) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Max
Building
Coverage
Accessory
Building(2,6)
NP 15' 15' 28'
Cemetery(4) 5 acres 200' 400' 50'' 10' 10' N/A .25 .10
Accessory
Building
(2,5,6)
35 15' 15' 25'
Municipal 2,000 sf 45' 50' 25' 10' 10' 45' .75 .50
Public and
Private
School
3 acres 150' 350' 50' 25' 50' 45' .75 .50
Accessory
Building
(2,6)
NP 15' 30' 25'
NP = Not Permitted.
N/A = Not Applicable.
(1) – Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – No more than 2 accessory structures or buildings for lots <15,000 sf; no more than 3 accessory
structures or buildings for lots >15,000 sf.
(3) – The ridgeline of the main roof shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
(4) – Setbacks apply to graves and monuments or other markers.
(5) – Applies to any accessory structure or building in a cemetery excluding uses in Note No. (3).
(6) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures, and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities and residential sheds, in Chapter 16. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Transition Residential (TR) District is to
provide for a medium density residential district of single family
detached and two-family dwellings located between primarily
commercial districts and single family zones. Certain governmental and
institutional uses would also be permitted.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Transition Residential Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Two-family dwelling.
§ 2613 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2614
BH1:132
3. Place of Worship.
4. ECHO Housing.
a. The ECHO Housing unit shall be located behind the rear of the
principal residence, but shall not be located in the side or rear
setbacks. The Zoning Officer may require a landscaped buffer
of evergreen trees and shrubs to minimize visual impact on
neighboring properties.
b. The ECHO unit shall be separated from the principal dwelling a
minimum of 5 feet.
c. Each ECHO housing unit shall comply with the minimum unit
size requirements for Neighborhood Preservation Balanced
Housing Program (N.J.A.C. 5:43-1.1 et seq.) as follows:
(1) Efficiency - 500 sq. ft.
(2) 1 bedroom - 600 sq. ft.
(3) 2 bedroom - 750 sq. ft.
d. No ECHO housing unit shall exceed 900 square feet in area.
e. The exterior of ECHO housing units shall be covered with a
material and color that compliments the facade of the primary
residence on the property.
f. The unit shall be removed from the premises within 6 months
of the end of the term of occupancy of the approved applicant
and the lot restored to its status prior to the installation of the
unit. The Zoning Officer may extend the time period for
removal up to an additional 3 months upon adequate
documentation of marketing efforts to see the unit during the
initial 6 month period.
5. Municipal use, including parks and recreation.
6. Community gardening.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Single family detached and two-family dwellings:
a. Private garage.
b. Private swimming pool and other outdoor recreation.
c. Storage shed.
d. Home occupation.
e. Deck, gazebo and cabana.
§ 2614 GENERAL § 2614
BH1:133
2. Place of Worship:
a. Rectory or parish house.
b. Maintenance shed or garage.
c. Child care center.
d. Social hall primarily for the use of members.
3. Signs, § 2631.
4. Off-street parking.
5. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
6. Shelters and fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals. [Ord.
No. 2012-01]
7. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board:
1. Conversion of single family detached dwelling to a two-family
dwelling meeting the following criteria:
a. The existing dwelling may be expanded and shall meet the
minimum gross floor area requirements for the conversion.
b. Each dwelling unit shall have individual kitchen and bathroom
facilities.
c. Each dwelling unit created by such conversion shall have a
minimum gross floor area of 600 square feet plus 120 square
feet per bedroom.
d. No dwelling unit or portion thereof created by conversion shall
be permitted below grade.
e. No conversion shall be permitted under the provisions of this
section which would result in the creation of more than 2
dwelling units in a structure or on a lot.
2. Bed and breakfast accommodation conforming to the following
criteria:
a. No more than 6 guest rooms or suites shall be permitted.
b. No expansion of the existing dwelling shall be permitted.
c. Off-street parking space equal to one for each guest room or
suite shall be required. Off-street parking may be
accommodated off-site provided that the location is within 600
feet of the subject site and an adequate guaranty subject to the
§ 2614 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2614
BH1:134
approval of the Approving Authority's Attorney that establishes
a right to the use of the off-tract parking is secured.
d. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
e. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served
food and drink on the premises.
f. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or
suites.
g. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of
30 days.
3. Public and private nonprofit day school meeting the following
criteria:
a. The minimum lot size shall be 3 acres.
b. The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
c. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
d. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum
of 25 feet from surrounding properties and public roads.
e. Outdoor athletic fields shall be oriented to minimize adverse
impacts on neighboring residential uses from noise, lighting,
and entrances.
4. Any other requirement not herein modified shall apply to any
conditional use.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all TR districts.
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Single
Family
Detached
9,000 sf 50' 125' 25' 8' 25' 35'(1) .50
Accessory
Building(4)
NP 5' 5' 18'
Two Family
Dwelling
7,500 sf
dwelling;
15,000 sf
total
75' 125' 25' 8'(2) 25' 35'(1) .50
Accessory
Building(4)
NP 5' 5' 18'
§ 2614 GENERAL § 2614
BH1:135
§ 2615. TOWNHOUSE (TH) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Place of
Worship
43,560 sf 100' 200' 25' 25' 35' 80'(3) .60
Accessory
Building(4)
NP 15' 15' 28'
Governmental 2,000 sf 20' 50' 5' 5' 5' 45' .75
Public and
Private
School
3 acres 150' 350' 50' 25' 50' 45' .75
Accessory
Building(4)
NP 15' 30' 25'
NP = Not Permitted.
N/A = Not Applicable.
(1) – Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – Where two existing units, each on a separate lot, join each other by a common vertical wall from
foundation to roof, the side yard between the existing 2 units shall be 0 feet.
(3) – The ridgeline of the main roof shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
(4) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities and residential sheds, in Chapter 16.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Townhouse (TH) Residential District is for
townhouse dwellings at a density of 6 units per acre with common open
space and amenities in a planned environment. Additionally, municipal
and certain institutional uses are permitted.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Townhouse Residential Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except the following:
1. Townhouse dwelling.
2. Municipal use, including parks and recreation.
3. Community gardening.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Townhouse Use:
a. Common elements for the use of all residents:
§ 2614 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2615
BH1:136
(1) Community center.
(2) Outdoor recreational facilities, including swimming pool,
tennis court or other court sports.
(3) Off-street parking and car sheds.
(4) Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street
furniture.
b. For individual uses:
(1) Home occupation in accordance with this Ordinance.
(2) Private garages.
(3) Decks for fee simple townhouses after initial construction.
2. Signs, § 2631.
3. Maintenance building, not to exceed 1,500 square feet in gross
floor area.
4. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
5. Shelters and fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals. [Ord.
No. 2012-01]
6. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. Public and private non-profit day schools
may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the Planning
Board meeting the following criteria:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 3 acres.
2. The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
3. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
4. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum of
25 feet from surrounding properties and public roads.
5. Outdoor athletic fields shall be oriented to minimize adverse
impacts on neighboring residential uses from noise, lighting, and
entrances.
6. Any other requirement not herein modified shall apply to any
conditional use.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all TH Districts:
§ 2615 GENERAL § 2615
BH1:137
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Townhouse:
Tract 2 1/2
acres
200' 200' 60' 30' 50' .70
Lot (Fee
Simple)
2,000 sf 22' 80' 22' 22 22' 38'(1)
Accessory
Building(2)
NP 30' 30' 18' .10
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 25' 10' 10' 35' .75
Public and
Private
School
3 acres 150' 350' 50' 25' 50' 45' .70
Accessory
Building(2)
NP 15' 30' 25' .05
NP = Not Permitted.
NA = Not Applicable.
(1) – Or 3 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities and residential sheds, in Chapter 16.
Principal
Use
Minimum
Front Yard
Area
Minimum
Rear Yard
Area
Min. Unit
Width
Max.
Gross
Density
Min. Open
Space
Min.
Distance
Between
Buildings
Min.
Distance
Between
Buildings
and
Accessory
Uses
Townhouse 500 sf 500 sf 22' 6 units per
acre
20% of
Tract
25' 15'
F. Additional Regulations for Townhouse Development.
1. The minimum number of dwellings in each structure shall be 4 and
the maximum 12.
2. The establishment of an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of all common elements shall be required, the form
and substance of which shall be approved by the Board of
jurisdiction with the advice of the Board Attorney.
3. Each dwelling unit shall have at least 2 exterior exposures with at
least one window in each exposure.
§ 2615 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2615
BH1:138
§ 2616. GARDEN APARTMENT (GA) DISTRICT. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
4. Exterior television reception shall be limited to one master antenna
for the entire development.
5. Air-conditioning units in windows or through exterior walls shall
not extend more than 6 inches from the exterior surface.
6. A swimming pool and/or recreation complex for the use of all
residents shall be permitted in a suitable location a minimum of 25
feet from any dwelling. Such complexes shall be sited so as to
minimize adverse effects from noise, lighting, and entrances.
7. Fences, walls and landscaping shall be used to delineate yard areas
for the private use of residents and screen mechanical equipment.
8. A comprehensive pedestrian system linking common amenities to
each townhouse structure shall be established with a minimum
width of 8 feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Garden Apartment (GA) District is to
provide for multi-family housing in a garden apartment configuration at
a density not to exceed 24 units per acre. Municipal use, including
public recreation, is also permitted.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Garden Apartment Zone, no lot shall be
used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any
purpose except the following:
1. Multi-family dwelling.
2. Municipal use, including parks and recreation.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Multi-Family Dwelling:
a. Community center for the common use of residents.
b. Outdoor recreational facilities, including swimming pool,
tennis court or other court sports.
c. Off-street parking, private garages and car sheds.
d. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
2. Signs, § 2631.
3. Maintenance building, not to exceed 1,500 square feet in gross
floor area.
4. Solar facilities.
§ 2615 GENERAL § 2616
BH1:139
5. Shelters and fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals. [Ord.
No. 2012-01]
6. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all GA Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min.Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Garden
Apartment
7 acres 200' 200' 60' 30' 50' 32'(1) .60
Tract
Requirements)
NP 30' 30' 18'
Accessory
Building(2)
NP 30' 30' 18'
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 5' 5' 5' 45' .75
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Or 2 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities and residential sheds, in Chapter 16.
Principal
Use
Maximum
Dwellings
per
Building
Maximum
Floor Area
per Floor
Max. Bldg.
Length
Max.
Gross
Density
Min. Open
Space
Min.
Distance
Between
Buildings
Min.
Distance
Between
Buildings
and
Accessory
Uses
Garden
Apartment
Building
16 10,000 200' 24 units
per acre
40% of
Tract
25' 15'
E. Additional Regulations for Garden Apartment Development.
1. The establishment of an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of all common elements shall be required where no
rental units are proposed, the form and substance of which shall be
approved by the Board with the advice of the Board Attorney.
2. Each dwelling unit shall have at least one exterior exposure with at
least one window.
§ 2616 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2616
BH1:140
§ 2617. SENIOR CITIZEN RESIDENTIAL(SC) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
3. Exterior television reception shall be limited to one master antenna
for the entire development.
4. Air-conditioning units in windows or through exterior walls shall
not extend more than 6 inches from the exterior surface.
5. A swimming pool and/or recreation complex for the use of all
residents shall be permitted in a suitable location a minimum of 25
feet from any dwelling. Such complexes shall be sited so as to
minimize adverse effects from noise, lighting, and entrances.
6. Fences, walls and landscaping shall be used to screen mechanical
equipment.
7. A comprehensive pedestrian system linking common amenities to
each garden apartment building shall be established with a
minimum width of 8 feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Senior Citizen Residential (SC) District is
to provide a development zone in a limited area for the creation of agerestricted
dwelling units to fulfill the needs of senior citizens by
allowing them to remain in their community by reducing housing costs
and maintenance responsibilities and to provide age-restricted housing
affordable to senior citizen households of low and moderate income.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Senior Citizen Residential District, no
lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied
for any purpose except for dwelling units age-restricted to persons 55
years or older in accordance with the U.S. Fair Housing Amendments
Act of 1988 as it may be amended or superseded.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Community Center for the common use of residents.
2. Outdoor recreational facilities, including swimming pool, tennis
court or other court sports.
3. Off-street parking, private garages and car sheds.
4. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
5. Signs, § 2631.
6. Maintenance building, not to exceed 1,500 square feet in gross
floor area.
7. Solar facilities.
§ 2616 GENERAL § 2617
BH1:141
8. Shelters and fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals. [Ord.
No. 2012-01]
9. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all SC Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Min.
Open
Space
Senior
Apartment
Building
Tract
Requirements
2 ac. 200' 200' 35' 30' 50' 32'(1) .60 40%
Accessory
Building(2)
NP 30' 30' 18'
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Maximum
Dwellings
per
Building
Maximum
Floor Area
per Floor
Maximum
Building
Length
Maximum
Gross
Density
Minimum
Distance
Between
Buildings
Min.
Distance
Between
Buildings
and
Accessory
Uses
Senior
Apartment
Building
24 10,000 sf 200' 10 units per
acre
25' 15'
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Or 2 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities and residential sheds, in Chapter 16.
E. Additional Regulations.
1. The establishment of an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of all common elements shall be required where no
rental units are proposed, the form and substance of which shall be
approved by the Board with the advice of the Board Attorney.
2. Each dwelling unit shall have at least one exterior exposure with at
least one window.
3. Exterior television reception shall be limited to one master antenna
for the entire development.
§ 2617 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2617
BH1:142
§ 2618. TRANSITION COMMERCIAL (TC) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-10]
4. Air-conditioning units in windows or through exterior walls shall
not extend more than 6 inches from the exterior surface.
5. A swimming pool and/or recreation complex for the use of all
residents shall be permitted in a suitable location a minimum of 25
feet from any dwelling. Such complexes shall be sited so as to
minimize adverse effects from noise, lighting, and entrances.
6. Fences, walls and landscaping shall be used to screen mechanical
equipment.
7. A comprehensive pedestrian system linking common amenities to
each garden apartment building shall be established with a
minimum width of 8 feet.
8. A minimum of 20 percent of all residential units constructed
pursuant to the Senior Citizen Residential District shall be
affordable to households of low and moderate income pursuant to
the applicable terms of the Ordinance.
9. The affordable units constructed pursuant to the Senior Citizen
Residential District shall adhere to the affordable housing
procedural regulations and affirmative marketing requirements in
Sections 2632 and 2633 of this chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Transition Commercial (TC) District is to
provide areas for more intensive commercial uses commonly with a
wholesale component or outdoor storage which were developed in
proximity to rail lines or highways.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Transition Commercial Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except as herein described. Uses shall be defined in
accordance with their SIC Code number where shown with a number in
parentheses (thus). The following establishments or uses shall be
permitted:
1. Plumbing, heating and air-conditioning contracting (1711),
however, no outside storage is permitted.
2. Painting and paperhanging contracting (172).
3. Electrical contracting (173).
4. Paint, glass and wallpaper sales and service (523).
5. Hardware store (525).
6. Lawn and garden center (5261).
7. Variety store (533).
§ 2617 GENERAL § 2618
BH1:143
8. General merchandise store (539).
9. Grocery store (541).
10. Meat and fish markets, including frozen food purveyors (542).
11. Fruit and vegetable market (543).
12. Candy, nut and confectionery store (544).
13. Dairy products sales (545).
14. Retail bakery (546).
15. Other food stores (549).
16. Apparel and accessories store (56).
17. Furniture and accessories store (57).
18. Restaurants, excluding fast food restaurants (581).
19. Drug and proprietary stores (591).
20. Second hand shops (593).
21. Jewelry, hobby, camera, gift, luggage, leather, dry goods, sewing,
and similar shops (594).
22. Opticians and optical goods (5995).
23. Art and drafting supply, gallery, auction room, antique store,
cosmetics, pets and pet supply store, picture framing, philatelist
shop, awning shop, and other miscellaneous retail uses (5999).
24. Offices for finance, insurance, and real estate services (60-65, 67).
25. Dry cleaners (7212), dry cleaning plant excepting rug cleaning
(7216), laundry services excluding coin-operated services (7219).
26. Photographic and portrait studio (7221).
27. Beauty (7231) and barber (7241) shops.
28. Shoe repair and shoeshine services (7251).
29. Tax return preparation (7291), babysitting bureaus, bartering
services, buyer's clubs, clothing and costume rental excluding
industrial laundering and linen supply, vending machine operators,
dating service, debt and diet counseling, hair replacement or
removal, tanning salon, shopping services for individuals,
locksmith, and other similar personal services (7299).
30. Advertising, credit reporting, reproduction, computer
programming, data processing, building services, and similar
business services (73).
§ 2618 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2618
BH1:144
31. Repair of appliances, electronic equipment, watches and jewelry,
furniture and upholstery, antiques excluding automobiles, optical
goods, cameras, precision instruments, leather goods including
luggage and tack, musical instruments including tuning, office
equipment and similar repair services but not to include
automobile (motor vehicle) repair (7699).
32. Physical fitness facility (7991).
33. Legal services (8111).
34. Child day care services (8351)
35. Medical and dental offices (801, 802, 803, 804).
36. Engineering, surveying, architectural, accounting, auditing,
bookkeeping, research and development, management, public
relations and similar services (87).
37. Municipal use.
38. Paperbound containers and boxes (265).
39. Miscellaneous Repair (762-764).
40. Dance studios (791).
41. Metalworking machinery (354).
42. Electrical apparatus and equipment (5063).
43. Florists (5992).
44. Optical goods stores (5995).
45. Individual and family services (8322).
46. Labor organizations (8631).
47. Sales offices only for wholesale machinery.
48. Community gardening.
49. Brewery. [Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
50. Any combination of one or more permitted, conditional, or
accessory uses. [Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Outdoor dining.
2. Outdoor display.
3. Off-street parking.
§ 2618 GENERAL § 2618
BH1:145
4. Private garages for commercial vehicles used in conjunction with
the principal use.
5. Fences and walls.
6. Signs, § 2631.
7. Storage and maintenance buildings.
8. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
9. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all TC Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Floor
Area
Ratio
Retail and
Service Use
20,000 sf 100' 175' 25' 15'(1) 50' 35'(2) .70 .22
Accessory
Building(3)
NP 15' 30' 18' inclusive
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 5' 5' 5' 35' .25
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Minimum side yard shall increase to 35 feet where adjacent to a residential use.
(2) – Or 2 stories, whichever is less.
(3) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26.
E. Additional Regulations for Retail and Service Uses.
1. Outdoor storage of materials shall be permitted in side or rear
yards only. Such storage shall be screened from the view of
adjacent uses and any public street by a combination of fencing,
walls and landscaping in accordance with the standards of § 1632.
2. All equipment stored on the site shall be placed within an enclosed
building.
3. Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each outdoor dining area shall first be reviewed
and approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the outdoor dining area.
§ 2618 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2618
BH1:146
b. All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least 8 feet of passage
between tables and chairs and the curb.
c. All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least 6 feet of
unobstructed access to building entrances and exits.
d. No outdoor dining area shall be located in front of any
driveway, parking lot entrance, alley, or other vehicular
thoroughfare nor impede adequate sight distance for
motorists.
e. Outdoor dining areas may only be located in front of adjacent
to the building in which the restaurant operates. [Ord. No.
2014-6]
f. Food and drink served in outdoor dining areas shall be the
same as served in the restaurant.
g. No food or drink shall be prepared in the outdoor dining area.
h. Tables and chairs shall be placed and maintained in an orderly
fashion and shall not create a hazard.
i. Tables and chairs may be left out overnight, but other
accessories shall be removed when the establishment is closed.
j. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor dining
areas for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
Ordinance or other rule or regulation. Nothing herein shall be
construed to vary, alter, or amend any rule or regulation
relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
4. Outdoor Display. Outdoor displays shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each display area shall first be reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the display area.
b. All displays shall allow at least 5 feet of passage between the
display and the curb.
c. All displays shall allow at least 6 feet of unobstructed access to
building entrances and exits.
d. No display shall be located in front of any driveway, parking lot
entrance, alley, or other vehicular thoroughfare nor impede
adequate sight distance for motorists.
e. Displays may only be located adjacent to or in front of the
building in which the business displaying wares is located.
§ 2618 GENERAL § 2618
BH1:147
§ 2619. COMMUNITY BUSINESS (CB) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
f. Displays shall not extend more than 4 feet from the facade of
the building.
g. The only merchandise which may be displayed is the
merchandise sold by the business.
h. No display may exceed 6 feet in height.
i. Displays shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and shall not
create a hazard.
j. Displays may only be shown during daylight hours and when
the business is otherwise open to the public.
k. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor
displays for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
ordinance or other rule or regulation. [Ord. No. 2014-6]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Community Business (CB) District is
provide a mixed use zone combining a number of different residential
housing types, retail sales and services limited to the everyday needs of
residents and small scale office uses. This district is located at the
southern end of the Borough around the Route 12 traffic circle where it
functions as Flemington's southern gateway.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Community Business Zone, no lot shall
be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any
purpose except as herein described. Commercial uses shall be defined
in accordance with their SIC Code number where shown with a number
in parentheses (thus). The following establishments or uses shall be
permitted:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Two-family dwelling.
3. Plumbing, heating and air-conditioning contracting (1711).
4. Painting and paperhanging contracting (172).
5. Electrical contracting (173).
6. Meat and fish markets, including frozen food purveyors (542).
7. Fruit and vegetable market (543).
8. Candy, nut and confectionery store (544).
9. Dairy products sales (545).
10. Retail bakery (546).
§ 2618 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2619
BH1:148
11. Grocery stores (541) and other food stores (549).
12. Apparel and accessories store (56).
13. Drug and proprietary stores (591).
14. Opticians and optical goods (5995).
15. Art and drafting supply, gallery, auction room, antique store,
cosmetics, pets and pet supply store, picture framing, philatelist
shop, awning shop, and other miscellaneous retail uses (5999).
16. Garment pressing (7212).
17. Coin operated laundries (7215).
18. Offices for finance, insurance, and real estate services (60-65, 67).
19. Dry cleaning plant excepting rug cleaning (7216), laundry services
excluding coin-operated services (7219).
20. Photographic and portrait studio (7221).
21. Beauty (7231) and barber (7241) shops.
22. Shoe repair and shoeshine services (7251).
23. Tax return preparation (7291), babysitting bureaus, bartering
services, buyer's clubs, clothing and costume rental excluding
industrial laundering and linen supply, vending machine operators,
dating service, debt and diet counseling, hair replacement or
removal, tanning salon, shopping services for individuals,
locksmith, and other similar personal services (7299).
24. Advertising, credit reporting, reproduction, computer
programming, data processing, building services, and similar
business services (73).
25. Engineering, surveying, architectural, accounting, auditing,
bookkeeping, research and development, management, public
relations and similar services (87).
26. Legal services (8111).
27. Medical and dental offices (801, 802, 803, 804).
28. Municipal use.
29. Miscellaneous repair (762-764).
30. Dance studios (791).
31. Optical goods stores (5995)
32. Commercial printing (275).
§ 2619 GENERAL § 2619
BH1:149
33. Farmer's market.
34. Commercial agriculture. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Single family detached dwellings:
a. Private garage.
b. Private swimming pool and other outdoor recreation.
c. Storage shed.
d. Home occupation in accordance with this Ordinance.
e. Deck, gazebo and cabana.
2. Outdoor display.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Private garages for commercial vehicles used in conjunction with
the principal use.
5. Fences and walls.
6. Signs, § 2631.
7. Storage and maintenance buildings.
8. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
9. Shelters and fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals on
residential lots. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
10. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board:
1. Conversion of single family detached or two-family dwelling to a
bank, credit union, savings and loan association, or other retail
financial service; or, office use meeting the following criteria:
a. The gross floor area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet or the
size of the existing dwelling, whichever is greater.
b. Parking lots shall be oriented to the side and rear of the
building line established by the front wall of the building.
c. Any applicable requirement of Subsection D2 below.
2. Bank, credit union, savings and loan association, or other retail
financial service meeting the following criteria:
§ 2619 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2619
BH1:150
a. Drive-thru facilities shall only be permitted on lots of 20,000
square feet or larger.
b. Parking lots shall be oriented to the side and rear of the
building line established by the front wall of the building.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all CB Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Floor
Area
Ratio
Single
Family
Detached
4,000 sf 40' 90' 25' 8' 25' 35'(1) .60 N/A
Accessory
Building(3)
NP 5' 5' 18'
Two Family
Dwelling
2,500 sf/
dwelling
75' 90' 25' 7'(2) 25' 35'(1) .70 N/A
Accessory
Building(3)
NP 5' 5' 18'
Commercial
Use
4,000 sf 40' 100' 25' 10'(2) 30' 35'(1) .75 .20
Accessory
Building(3)
NP 15' 30' 18'
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 5' 5' 5' 35' .75 .25
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – Minimum side yard shall increase to 15 feet where adjacent to a residential use.
(3) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26. [Ord. 2012-01]
F. Additional Regulations for Commercial Uses.
1. Maximum building size shall not exceed 5,000 square feet or 3,000
square feet on any one level. An existing building shall not be
demolished in order to utilize this provision.
2. Outdoor Display. Outdoor displays shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. All displays shall allow at least 8 feet of passage between the
display and the curb.
b. All displays shall allow at least 6 feet of unobstructed access to
building entrances and exits.
§ 2619 GENERAL § 2619
BH1:151
§ 2620. DOWNTOWN BUSINESS (DB) DISTRICT. [Ord. No. 2014-4]
c. No display shall be located in front of any driveway, parking lot
entrance, alley, or other vehicular thoroughfare nor impede
adequate sight distance for motorists.
d. Displays may only be located adjacent to or in front of the
building in which the business displaying wares is located.
e. Displays shall not extend more than 4 feet from the facade of
the building.
f. The only merchandise which may be displayed is the
merchandise sold by the business.
g. No display may exceed 6 feet in height.
h. Displays shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and shall not
create a hazard.
i. Displays may only be shown during daylight hours and when
the business is otherwise open to the public.
j. The location of each display area shall first be reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the display area.
k. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor
displays for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
Ordinance or other rule or regulation.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Downtown Business (DB) District is to
provide for mixed uses in the traditional business and governmental
center of the Borough and is a transitional area between the Downtown
Business (DB) Zone and the Village Artisan Shopping (VAS) Zone. [Ord.
No. 2012-15]
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Downtown Business II Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except as herein described. Commercial uses shall be
defined in accordance with their SIC Code number where shown with a
number in parentheses (thus). The following establishments or uses
shall be permitted:
1. Apartment(s) on second and upper floors of principal structures.
2. Paint, glass and wallpaper sales and service (523).
3. Hardware store (525).
4. Lawn and garden center (5261).
§ 2619 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2620
BH1:152
5. Variety store (533).
6. General merchandise store (539).
7. Grocery store (541).
8. Meat and fish markets, including frozen food purveyors (542).
9. Fruit and vegetable market (543).
10. Candy, nut and confectionery store (544).
11. Dairy products sales (545).
12. Retail bakery (546).
13. Other food stores (549).
14. Apparel and accessories store (56).
15. Furniture and accessories store (57).
16. Restaurants, excluding fast food restaurants (581).
17. Drug and proprietary stores (591).
18. Second hand shops (593).
19. Jewelry, hobby, camera, gift, luggage, leather, dry goods, sewing,
and similar shops (594).
20. Opticians and optical goods (5995).
21. Art and drafting supply, gallery, auction room, antique store,
cosmetics, pets and pet supply store, picture framing, philatelist
shop, awning shop, and other miscellaneous retail uses (5999).
22. Offices for finance, insurance, and real estate services (60-65, 67).
23. Photographic and portrait studio (7221).
24. Beauty (7231) and barber (7241) shops.
25. Advertising, credit reporting, reproduction, computer
programming, data processing, building services, and similar
business services (73).
26. Engineering, surveying, architectural, accounting, auditing,
bookkeeping, research and development, management, public
relations and similar services (87).
27. Legal services (8111).
28. Repair of appliances, electronic equipment, watches and jewelry,
furniture and upholstery, antiques excluding automobiles, optical
goods, cameras, precision instruments, leather goods including
§ 2620 GENERAL § 2620
BH1:153
luggage and tack, musical instruments including tuning, office
equipment and similar repair services but not to include
automobile repair (7699).
29. Medical and dental offices (801, 802, 803, 804).
30. Municipal use.
31. Coin operated laundries, etc. (7215).
32. Miscellaneous repair (762-764).
33. Dance studios (791).
34. Travel agencies (4724).
35. Florists (5992).
36. Optical goods stores (5995).
37. Individual and family services (8322).
38. Farmer's market. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
39. Commercial agriculture. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
40. Brewery. [Ord. No. 2015-19 § 2]
41. Any combination of one or more permitted, conditional, or
accessory uses. [Ord. No. 2015-19 § 2]
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Outdoor dining.
2. Outdoor display.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Private garages used in conjunction with the principal use(s).
5. Fences and walls.
6. Signs, § 2631.
7. Storage and maintenance buildings.
8. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
9. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board:
1. Bed and breakfast accommodation conforming to the following
criteria:
§ 2620 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2620
BH1:154
a. No more than 6 guest rooms or suites shall be permitted.
b. No expansion of the existing dwelling shall be permitted.
c. Off-street parking equal to one for each guest room or suite
shall be required. Off-street parking may be accommodated offsite
provided that the location is within 600 feet of the subject
site and an adequate guaranty subject to the approval of the
Board Attorney that establishes a right to the use of the offtract
parking is secured.
d. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
e. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served
food and drink on the premises.
f. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or
suites.
g. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of
30 days.
2. Public and private non-profit day school meeting the following
criteria:
a. The minimum lot size shall be 3 acres.
b. The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
c. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
d. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum
of 25 feet from surrounding properties and public roads.
e. Outdoor athletic fields shall be oriented to minimize adverse
impacts on neighboring residential uses from noise, lighting,
and entrances.
3. Any other area, yard, height, and building coverage requirement
not herein modified shall apply to any conditional use.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all DB Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Non-
Municipal
Use
7,000 sf 45' 100' 25'(1) 0' 50' 40'(2) .75
Accessory
Buildings(3)
NP 15' 30' 18'
§ 2620 GENERAL § 2620
BH1:155
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 5' 5' 5' 45' .80
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – The front yard depth may be reduced to the average of the setbacks from the streetline of existing
buildings on both sides of the proposed building. In the event an adjacent lot is vacant, the average shall
be calculated using the required setback for the vacant lot.
(2) – Or 3 stories, whichever is less.
(3) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26. (Ord. No. 2012-01)
F. Additional Regulations for Retail and Service Uses.
1. All equipment stored on the site shall be placed within an enclosed
building.
2. Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each outdoor dining area shall first be reviewed
and approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the outdoor dining area.
b. All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least 8 feet of passage
between tables and chairs and the curb.
c. All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least 6 feet of
unobstructed access to building entrances and exits.
d. No outdoor dining area shall be located in front of any
driveway, parking lot entrance, alley, or other vehicular
thoroughfare nor impede adequate sight distance for
motorists.
e. Outdoor dining areas may only be located in front of adjacent
to the building in which the restaurant operates. [Ord. No.
2014-4]
f. Food and drink served in outdoor dining areas shall be the
same as served in the restaurant.
g. No food or drink shall be prepared in the outdoor dining area.
h. Tables and chairs shall be placed and maintained in an orderly
fashion and shall not create a hazard.
§ 2620 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2620
BH1:156
i. Tables and chairs may be left out overnight, but other
accessories shall be removed when the establishment is closed.
j. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor dining
areas for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this ordinance
or other rule or regulation. Nothing herein shall be construed
to vary, alter, or amend any rule or regulation relating to the
sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
3. Outdoor Display. Outdoor displays shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each display area shall first be reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the display area.
b. All displays shall allow at least 5 feet of passage between the
display and the curb.
c. All displays shall allow at least 6 feet of unobstructed access to
building entrances and exits.
d. No display shall be located in front of any driveway, parking lot
entrance, alley, or other vehicular thoroughfare nor impede
adequate sight distance for motorists.
e. Displays may only be located adjacent to or in front of the
building in which the business displaying wares is located.
f. Displays shall not extend more than 4 feet from the facade of
the building.
g. The only merchandise which may be displayed is the
merchandise sold by the business.
h. No display may exceed 6 feet in height.
i. Displays shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and shall not
create a hazard.
j. Displays may only be shown during daylight hours and when
the business is otherwise open to the public.
k. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor
displays for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
Ordinance or other rule or regulation.
4. There shall be no retail sales activities open to the public for the
purpose of selling any goods or services in any basement, cellar, or
attic, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the use of such areas for storage or the basement or cellar
for public restrooms.
§ 2620 GENERAL § 2620
BH1:157
§ 2621. DOWNTOWN II BUSINESS (DBII) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2014-7]
5. There shall be no drive-in or drive-thru facilities allowed for any
purpose.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Downtown Business II (DBII) District is to
provide for mixed uses in the traditional business and governmental
center of the Borough and is a transitional area between the Downtown
Business (DB) zone and the Village Artisan Shopping (VAS) Zone. [Ord.
No. 2012-15]
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Downtown Business II Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except as herein described. Commercial uses shall be
defined in accordance with their SIC Code number where shown with a
number in parentheses (thus). The following establishments or uses
shall be permitted:
1. Apartment(s) on second and upper floors of principal structures.
2. Paint, glass and wallpaper sales and service (523).
3. Hardware store (525).
4. Lawn and garden center (5261).
5. Variety store (533).
6. General merchandise store (539).
7. Grocery store (541).
8. Meat and fish markets, including frozen food purveyors (542).
9. Fruit and vegetable market (543).
10. Candy, nut and confectionery store (544).
11. Dairy products sales (545).
12. Retail bakery (546).
13. Other food stores (549).
14. Apparel and accessories store (56).
15. Furniture and accessories store (57).
16. Restaurants, excluding fast food restaurants (581).
17. Drug and proprietary stores (591).
18. Second hand shops (593).
§ 2620 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2621
BH1:158
19. Jewelry, hobby, camera, gift, luggage, leather, dry goods, sewing,
and similar shops (594).
20. Opticians and optical goods (5995).
21. Art and drafting supply, gallery, auction room, antique store,
cosmetics, pets and pet supply store, picture framing, philatelist
shop, awning shop, and other miscellaneous retail uses (5999).
22. Offices for finance, insurance, and real estate services (60-65, 67).
23. Photographic and portrait studio (7221).
24. Beauty (7231) and barber (7241) shops.
25. Advertising, credit reporting, reproduction, computer
programming, data processing, building services, and similar
business services (73).
26. Engineering, surveying, architectural, accounting, auditing,
bookkeeping, research and development, management, public
relations and similar services (87).
27. Legal services (8111).
28. Repair of appliances, electronic equipment, watches and jewelry,
furniture and upholstery, antiques excluding automobiles, optical
goods, cameras, precision instruments, leather goods including
luggage and tack, musical instruments including tuning, office
equipment and similar repair services but not to include
automobile repair (7699).
29. Medical and dental offices (801, 802, 803, 804).
30. Municipal use.
31. Coin operated laundries, etc. (7215).
32. Miscellaneous repair (762-764).
33. Dance studios (791).
34. Travel agencies (4724).
35. Florists (5992).
36. Optical goods stores (5995).
37. Individual and family services (8322).
38. Funeral home and crematorium (7261) with a minimum lot area of
1 acre.
39. Farmer's market. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
40. Commercial agriculture. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
§ 2621 GENERAL § 2621
BH1:159
41. Brewery. [Ord. No. 2015-19 § 2]
42. Any combination of one or more permitted, conditional, or
accessory uses. [Ord. No. 2015-19 § 2]
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Outdoor dining.
2. Outdoor display.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Private garages used in conjunction with the principal use(s).
5. Fences and walls.
6. Signs, § 2631.
7. Storage and maintenance buildings.
8. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
9. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board:
1. Bed and breakfast accommodation conforming to the following
criteria:
a. No more than 6 guest rooms or suites shall be permitted.
b. No expansion of the existing dwelling shall be permitted.
c. Off-street parking equal to one for each guest room or suite
shall be required. Off-street parking may be accommodated offsite
provided that the location is within 600 feet of the subject
site and an adequate guaranty subject to the approval of the
Board Attorney that establishes a right to the use of the offtract
parking is secured.
d. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
e. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served
food and drink on the premises.
f. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or
suites.
g. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of
30 days.
2. Public and private nonprofit day school meeting the following
criteria:
§ 2621 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2621
BH1:160
a. The minimum lot size shall be 3 acres.
b. The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
c. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
d. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum
of 25 feet from surrounding properties and public roads.
e. Outdoor athletic fields shall be oriented to minimize adverse
impacts on neighboring residential uses from noise, lighting,
and entrances.
3. Any other area, yard, height, and building coverage requirement
not herein modified shall apply to any conditional use.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all DB II Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Non-
Municipal
Use
7,000 sf 45' 100' 25'(1) 0' 50' 40'(2) .75
Accessory
Buildings(3)
NP 15' 30' 18'
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 5' 5' 5' 45' .80
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – The front yard depth may be reduced to the average of the setbacks from the streetline of existing
buildings on both sides of the proposed building. In the event an adjacent lot is vacant, the average shall
be calculated using the required setback for the vacant lot.
(2) – Or 3 stories, whichever is less.
(3) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26.
F. Additional Regulations for Retail and Service Uses.
1. All equipment stored on the site shall be placed within an enclosed
building.
2. Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each outdoor dining area shall first be reviewed
and approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
§ 2621 GENERAL § 2621
BH1:161
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the outdoor dining area.
b. All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least 4 feet of passage
between tables and chairs and the curb.
c. All outdoor areas shall allow at least 4 feet of unobstructed
access to building entrances and exits.
d. No outdoor dining area shall be located in front of any
driveway, parking lot entrance, alley, or other vehicular
thoroughfare nor impede adequate sight distance for
motorists.
e. Outdoor dining areas may only be located in front of adjacent
to the building in which the restaurant operates. [Ord. No.
2014-7]
f. Food and drink served in outdoor dining areas shall be the
same as served in the restaurant.
g. No food or drink shall be prepared in the outdoor dining area.
h. Tables and chairs shall be placed and maintained in an orderly
fashion and shall not create a hazard.
i. Tables and chairs may be left out overnight, but other
accessories shall be removed when the establishment is closed.
j. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor dining
areas for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
Ordinance or other rule or regulation. Nothing herein shall be
construed to vary, alter, or amend any rule or regulation
relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
3. Outdoor Display. Outdoor displays shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each display area shall first be reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the display area.
b. All displays shall allow at least 5 feet of passage between the
display and the curb.
c. All displays shall allow at least 6 feet of unobstructed access to
building entrances and exits.
d. No display shall be located in front of any driveway, parking lot
entrance, alley, or other vehicular thoroughfare nor impede
adequate sight distance for motorists.
§ 2621 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2621
BH1:162
§ 2622. PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (PO) DISTRICT. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
e. Displays may only be located adjacent to or in front of the
building in which the business displaying wares is located.
f. Displays shall not extend more than 4 feet from the facade of
the building.
g. The only merchandise which may be displayed is the
merchandise sold by the business.
h. No display may exceed 6 feet in height.
i. Displays shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and shall not
create a hazard.
j. Displays may only be shown during daylight hours and when
the business is otherwise open to the public.
k. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor
displays for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
ordinance or other rule or regulation.
4. There shall be no retail sales activities open to the public for the
purpose of selling any goods or services in any basement, cellar, or
attic, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the use of such areas for storage or the basement or cellar
for public restrooms.
5. There shall be no drive-in or drive-thru facilities allowed for any
purpose.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Professional Office (PO) District is to
provide an area in close proximity to the county courts and
administration offices. The Professional Office district would provide an
area for law, title, paralegal, and similar offices as the need grows with
an expanding county population.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Professional Office Zone, no lot shall be
used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any
purpose except as herein described. Commercial uses shall be defined
in accordance with their SIC Code number where shown with a number
in parentheses (thus). The following establishments or uses shall be
permitted:
1. Offices for finance, insurance, and real estate services (60-65, 67).
2. Engineering, surveying, architectural, accounting, auditing,
bookkeeping, research and development, management, public
relations and similar services (87), excepting research and
development uses (873).
3. Legal services (8111).
§ 2621 GENERAL § 2622
BH1:163
4. Governmental use.
5. Child care center (8351).
6. Beauty shops (7231).
7. Barber shops (7241).
8. Individual and family services (8322).
9. Photographic studios, portrait (7221).
10. Shoe repair shops and shoeshine parlors (7251).
11. Miscellaneous personal services (7299).
12. Medical and dental offices.
13. Farmer's market.
14. Commercial agriculture. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
C. Conditional Use. Public and private nonprofit day school.
D. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Off-street parking.
2. Private garages for commercial vehicles used in conjunction with
the principal use, excepting public works garages or yards.
3. Fences and walls.
4. Signs, § 2631.
5. Storage and maintenance buildings.
6. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
7. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all PO Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Floor
Area
Ratio
Office 9,000 sf 50' 100' 25' 10' 50' 35'(1) .75 .22
Accessory
Building(2)
NP 15' 30' 18'
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 25' 5' 10' 45' .80 .25
§ 2622 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2622
BH1:164
§ 2623. VILLAGE ARTISAN SHOPPING (VAS) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2011-17; Ord. No. 2012-01]; Ord. No. 2014-5
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Floor
Area
Ratio
Other
Governmental
10,000 sf 60' 100' 25' 10' 50' 45' .80 .25
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Village Artisan Shopping (VAS) District is
to include the majority of the destination oriented retail outlet shopping
in Flemington. This district is highway oriented but is designed to
encourage walking from store to store once the destination has been
reached. It contrasts with the more pedestrian oriented outlet shopping
in the Downtown Business district and the more highway oriented
shopping in the Highway Retail zone. The district is also intended for
artisans who sell or produce arts and crafts and offer instruction
(subject to terms of conditional use for manufacturing). An overall site
plan may be submitted for a village shopping center, indicating
buildings, driveways, loading and parking areas, lighting, landscape,
provisions for storm drainage and signs. Once approved, modification
may be made to the plan as a minor site plan to the Planning Board, if
there is no effect on external circulation, lighting, drainage,
landscaping or signs.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Village Artisan Shopping Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except as herein described. Where applicable, commercial
uses shall be defined in accordance with their National American
Industry Classification System (NAICS) number.
The following establishments or uses shall be permitted:5 [Ord. No.
2012-15; amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-8]
1. Paint, glass and wallpaper sales and service (SIC 523).
2. Hardware store (SIC 525).
3. Lawn and garden center (SIC 5261).
5. Editor's Note: SIC Codes provided
§ 2622 GENERAL § 2623
BH1:165
4. Variety store (SIC 533).
5. General merchandise store (SIC 539).
6. Grocery store (SIC 541).
7. Meat and fish markets, including frozen food purveyors (SIC 542).
8. Fruit and vegetable market (SIC 543).
9. Candy, nut and confectionery store (SIC 544).
10. Dairy products sales (SIC 545).
11. Retail bakery (SIC 546).
12. Other food stores (SIC 549).
13. Department stores (SIC 531).
14. Apparel and accessories store (SIC 56).
15. Furniture and accessories store (SIC 57).
16. Restaurants (SIC 581).
17. Drug and proprietary stores (SIC 591).
18. Second hand shops (SIC 593).
19. Jewelry, hobby, camera, gift, luggage, leather, dry goods, sewing,
and similar shops (SIC 594).
20. Opticians and optical goods (SIC 5995).
21. Art and drafting supply, gallery, auction room, antique store,
cosmetics, pets and pet supply store, picture framing, philatelist
shop, awning shop, and other miscellaneous retail uses (SIC 5999).
22. Repair of appliances, electronic equipment, watches and jewelry,
furniture and upholstery, antiques excluding automobiles, optical
goods, cameras, precision instruments, leather goods including
luggage and tack, musical instruments including tuning, office
equipment and similar repair services but not to include
automobile repair (SIC 7699).
23. Physical fitness centers (SIC 7991).
24. Municipal use.
25. Places of worship.
26. Child day care services (SIC 8351).
27. Miscellaneous repair (SIC 762-764).
28. Dance studios (SIC 791).
§ 2623 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2623
BH1:166
29. Wood kitchen cabinets (SIC 2434).
30. Jewelry manufacturing (SIC 3911).
31. Optical goods stores (SIC 5995).
32. Plumbing, heating and air-conditioning contracting (SIC 1711),
however, no outside storage is permitted.
33. Finance, insurance, etc. (SIC 60-65, 67)
34. Photographic studios, beauty and barber shops (SIC 7221, 7231,
7241, 7251).
35. Farmer's market. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
36. Commercial agriculture. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
37. Artisan studios. [Ord. No. 2012-15]
38. Learning center. [Ord. No. 2012-15]
39. Brewery. [Ord. No. 2015-19 § 2]
40. Any combination of one or more permitted, conditional, or
accessory uses. [Ord. No. 2015-19 § 2]
41. Entertainment center.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Outdoor dining.
2. Outdoor display.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Private garages for commercial vehicles used in conjunction with
the principal use, excepting public works garages or yards.
5. Fences and walls.
6. Signs, § 2631.
7. Storage and maintenance buildings.
8. Kiosks, if located surrounded by building of the village stores and
not visible to any residential stores.
9. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
10. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. Subject to the following conditions:
1. Bed and breakfast. [Ord. No. 2011-10; Ord. No. 2012-15]
§ 2623 GENERAL § 2623
BH1:167
a. No more than 6 guest rooms or suites shall be permitted.
b. No expansion of the existing dwelling shall be permitted.
c. Off-street parking equal to one for each guest room or suite
shall be required. Off-street parking may be accommodated offsite
provided that the location is within 600 feet of the subject
site and an adequate guaranty subject to the approval of the
Board Attorney that establishes a right to the use of the offtract
parking is secured.
d. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
e. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served
food and drink on the premises.
f. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or
suites.
g. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of
30 days.
2. Corporate offices conforming to the following criteria. [Ord. No.
2011-10; Ord. No. 2012-15]
a. Properties shall front on Route 12 with direct access to the
State highway.
b. Corporate offices may be permitted only if they constitute at
least 7,500 square feet of an existing building.
c. Corporate offices include companies who are engaged in
business, service, education, industry or finance, including
professions such as accounting, law or medicine or related
fields. Such offices may include ancillary services for office
workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop or newspaper stand.
d. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.25.
e. Minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet.
f. Parking shall comply with § 2629 Parking.
g. Signs shall comply with § 2631 Signs.
3. Artisan manufacturing. [Ord. No. 2012-15]
a. Minimum setback from any residential use or residential zone
shall be 30 feet.
b. Such uses may only be located on Fulper Street, Central
Avenue and Stangle Road.
c. Any noxious odors or fumes, or hazardous chemical substances
shall be properly vented or contained as warranted.
§ 2623 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2623
BH1:168
d. Parking shall comply with § 2629 Parking.
e. Signs shall comply with § 2631 Signs.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to the VAS District.
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Retail,
Service
and Office
Uses
65,000 sf 150' 200' 35' 15' 50' 35'(1) .80(2)
Accessory
Building(3)
NP 15' 30' 18'
Municipal 2,000 sf 20' 50' 25' 5' 10' 45' .80
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less. The height may be increased to 50 feet or 4 stories, whichever is
less, when the building is greater than 200 feet from a residential district.
(2) – Maximum lot coverage may be increased to .82 if additional landscaped areas are provided with
trees, shrubs and proper ground cover treatment.
(3) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26.
F. Additional Regulations for Office Retail and Service Uses.
1. All equipment stored on the site shall be placed within an enclosed
building.
2. Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each outdoor dining area shall first be reviewed
and approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the outdoor dining area.
b. All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least 8 feet of passage
between tables and chairs and the curb.
c. All outdoor dining areas shall allow at least 6 feet of
unobstructed access to building entrances and exits.
d. No outdoor dining area shall be located in front of any
driveway, parking lot entrance, alley, or other vehicular
§ 2623 GENERAL § 2623
BH1:169
thoroughfare nor impede adequate sight distance for
motorists.
e. Outdoor dining areas may only be located in front of adjacent
to the building in which the restaurant operates. [Ord. No.
2014-5]
f. Food and drink served in outdoor dining areas shall be the
same as served in the restaurant.
g. No food or drink shall be prepared in the outdoor dining area.
h. Tables and chairs shall be placed and maintained in an orderly
fashion and shall not create a hazard.
i. Tables and chairs may be left out overnight, but other
accessories shall be removed when the establishment is closed.
j. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor dining
areas for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
Ordinance or other rule or regulation. Nothing herein shall be
construed to vary, alter, or amend any rule or regulation
relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
3. Outdoor Display. Outdoor displays shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. The location of each display area shall first be reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Officer for conformance with the
provisions of this section. Upon satisfactory review, a zoning
permit or other suitable document shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer for the display area.
b. All displays shall allow at least 5 feet of passage between the
display and the curb.
c. All displays shall allow at least 6 feet of unobstructed access to
building entrances and exits.
d. No display shall be located in front of any driveway, parking lot
entrance, alley, or other vehicular thoroughfare nor impede
adequate sight distance for motorists.
e. Displays may only be located adjacent to or in front of the
building in which the business displaying wares is located.
f. Displays shall not extend more than 4 feet from the facade of
the building.
g. The only merchandise which may be displayed is the
merchandise sold by the business.
h. No display may exceed 6 feet in height.
§ 2623 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2623
BH1:170
§ 2624. HIGHWAY RETAIL (HR) DISTRICT. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
i. Displays shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and shall not
create a hazard.
j. Displays may only be shown during daylight hours and when
the business is otherwise open to the public.
k. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize outdoor
displays for uses prohibited by the landowner or by this
Ordinance or other rule or regulation.
4. There shall be no retail sales activities open to the public for the
purpose of selling any goods or services in any basement, cellar, or
attic, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the use of such areas for storage or the basement or cellar
for public restrooms.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Highway Retail (HR) District is to
encompass existing highway oriented retail development concentrated
around Rt. 31 and Rt. 202. This district contrasts with the more
pedestrian- and destination-oriented shopping of the Downtown
Business and Village Shopping Zones. The district is also intended to
include more intensive office uses than permitted by the Professional
Office Zone.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Highway Retail Zone, no lot shall be
used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any
purpose except as herein described. Commercial uses shall be defined
in accordance with their SIC Code number where shown with a number
in parentheses (thus). The following establishments or uses shall be
permitted:
1. Plumbing, heating and air conditioning contracting (1711),
however, no outside storage is permitted.
2. Paint, glass and wallpaper sales and service (523).
3. Hardware store (525).
4. Lawn and garden center (5261).
5. Department stores (531).
6. Variety store (533).
7. General merchandise store (539).
8. Grocery (541) and convenience (5411) stores.
9. Meat and fish markets, including frozen food purveyors (542).
10. Fruit and vegetable market (543).
§ 2623 GENERAL § 2624
BH1:171
11. Candy, nut and confectionery store (544).
12. Dairy products sales (545).
13. Retail bakery (546).
14. Other food stores (549).
15. New car and automotive dealers (55), including sales of parts
related to motor vehicles.
16. Motor vehicle supplies and new parts (5013).
17. Apparel and accessories store (56).
18. Furniture and accessories store (57).
19. Restaurants (581).
20. Drug and proprietary stores (591).
21. Liquor stores (592)
22. Second hand shops (593).
23. Jewelry, hobby, camera, gift, luggage, leather, dry goods, sewing,
and similar shops (594).
24. Opticians and optical goods (5995).
25. Art and drafting supply, gallery, auction room, antique store,
cosmetics, pets and pet supply store, picture framing, philatelist
shop, awning shop, and other miscellaneous retail uses (5999).
26. Offices for finance, insurance, and real estate services (60-65, 67).
27. Dry cleaners and coin-operated laundry services (7219).
28. Photographic and portrait studio (7221).
29. Beauty (7231) and barber (7241) shops.
30. Shoe repair and shoeshine services (7251).
31. Funeral home and crematorium (7261).
32. Tax return preparation (7291), babysitting bureaus, bartering
services, buyer's clubs, clothing and costume rental excluding
industrial laundering and linen supply, vending machine operators,
dating service, debt and diet counseling, hair replacement or
removal, tanning salon, shopping services for individuals,
locksmith, and other similar personal services (7299).
33. Advertising, credit reporting, reproduction, computer
programming, data processing, building services, and similar
business services (73).
§ 2624 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2624
BH1:172
34. Engineering, surveying, architectural, accounting, auditing,
bookkeeping, research and development, management, public
relations and similar services (87).
35. Legal services (8111).
36. Repair of appliances, electronic equipment, watches and jewelry,
furniture and upholstery, antiques including automobiles, optical
goods, cameras, precision instruments, leather goods including
luggage and tack, musical instruments including tuning, office
equipment and similar repair services but not to include
automobile repair (7699).
37. Bowling alleys (793)
38. Physical fitness centers (7991).
39. Medical and dental offices (801, 802, 803, 804).
40. Shopping centers incorporating any preceding use.
41. Municipal use.
42. Painting and paper hanging (172).
43. Electrical work (173).
44. Garment pressing & agents (7212).
45. Coin operated laundries, etc. (7215).
46. Miscellaneous repair (75).
47. Dance studios (791).
48. General contractors (15).
49. Optical goods stores (5995).
50. Senior citizens.
51. Farmer's market.
52. Commercial agriculture. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Off-street parking.
2. Drive-thru and drive-in facilities.
3. Private garages for commercial vehicles used in conjunction with
the principal use.
4. Fences and walls.
§ 2624 GENERAL § 2624
BH1:173
5. Signs, § 2631.
6. Storage and maintenance buildings.
7. Solar facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
8. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board:
1. Service stations (5541) conforming to the following criteria:
a. Service stations shall be permitted only 2 entrances and exits
on one street frontage and 3 per lot.
b. All equipment, work pits, storage areas and trash facilities
other than gasoline filling pumps or air pumps shall be within a
building or roofed structure.
c. Fuel pumps and air pumps shall be no closer than 25 feet to
any existing or future street line and 50 feet from a rear
property line. Fuel pumps shall not be located closer than 25
feet from a side property line.
d. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be performed in
a fully enclosed building and no dismantled parts shall be
displayed outside of an enclosed building.
e. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, or such vehicles
incapable of normal operation upon the highway, shall be
permitted on the premises of the repair garage, except as
noted herein. A maximum of 11 vehicles shall be permitted to
await repair or disposition at the repair garage, with no more
than 3 inoperable vehicles permitted in an enclosed building
and no more than 8 inoperable vehicles permitted outside the
building. If more than 8 such vehicles on the property are
awaiting repairs, they shall be enclosed in a fenced area,
screened from view from adjacent properties and public
streets.
f. In addition to landscaping that is otherwise required pursuant
to the provisions of this Ordinance, a minimum of 25 percent of
the front yard shall consist of landscape screening of the
building and front yard parking.
g. No exterior display of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles,
boats, other forms of transportation, or equipment for sale
shall be permitted.
2. Hotels and motels (701) subject to the following criteria:
a. Any such use shall contain a minimum of at least 20 units of
accommodation not including any on-site superintendent's
§ 2624 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2624
BH1:174
living quarters. The minimum number of units of
accommodation in any single building shall be 10.
b. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor
area of 250 square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of 8 feet
in height.
c. There shall be a residency limitation on all guests of 30 days
maximum. The residency limitation shall not apply to an
employee living on the premises.
3. Automotive body repair (7532) subject to the following criteria:
a. Such uses shall only be in conjunction with an automobile
dealership selling new cars.
b. Body panels and parts shall be stored in a completely enclosed
building.
c. No repair work shall take place out-of-doors.
4. Communication towers (4812) subject to the following criteria:
a. The applicant shall first demonstrate that no other existing
tower or structure may be used for the subject application.
Such demonstration may include but not be limited to expert
reports and responses to bona fide inquiries to existing tower
owners concerning the availability of space.
b. The height of the tower shall be the lowest feasible for the
intended purpose.
c. The free-standing tower shall be set back from any property
line a minimum of 110 percent of the tower's height.
d. Towers shall be of monopole construction if less than 250 feet
in height.
e. Any communications tower shall comply with the promulgated
radiation emissions standards of the Federal Communications
Commission.
f. A landscape buffer visually impervious after 5 years of maturity
shall be installed to screen the base of the tower, equipment
building and parking. The minimum height of buffer materials
shall be 6 feet at the time of installation.
g. At least 2 and no more than 5 parking spaces for maintenance
use shall be provided.
h. Accessory buildings for communications/electronic equipment
not exceeding 1,000 square feet in area nor one-story or 15
feet in height, whichever is less, shall be permitted.
§ 2624 GENERAL § 2624
BH1:175
i. Any approval shall be so conditioned as to allow additional
communications operators to lease space on the subject tower.
j. To the extent feasible, communications towers shall be painted
or disguised to minimize contrast with the natural
environment.
k. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no
communications tower shall be located in an historic district as
designated in the Historic Preservation Element of the Master
Plan.
5. All other parts of this Ordinance not modified herein shall apply.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all HR Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Floor
Area
Ratio
Retail and
Service Uses
65,000 sf 150' 200' 35' 25' 50' 35'(1) .70 .20
Accessory
Building(5)
NP 15' 30' 18'
Office 30,000 sf 100' 200' 35' 25' 35' 35'(2) .70 .25
Accessory
Building(5)
NP 15' 30' 18'
Hotel and
Motel
2 acres 200' 200' 50' 35' 50' 35'(3) .60 .22
Shopping
Center
3 acres 300' 200' 75' 50' 50' 25'(1) .70 .20
Accessory
Building(5)
NP 25' 30' 18'
Senior
Citizen
Housing
2 acres 200' 200' 35' 25' 50' 48'(4) .70 NA
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Or 2 stories, whichever is less.
(2) – Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(3) – The height may be increased to 45 feet or 4 stories, whichever is less, when the building is greater
than 200 feet from a residential district.
(4) – Or 3 stories, not to exceed 3 stories.
(5) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26.
§ 2624 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2624
BH1:176
§ 2625. PUBLIC SCHOOL AND PARKS (PS/P) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
F. Additional Regulations for Retail and Service Uses.
1. All equipment stored on the site shall be placed within an enclosed
building.
2. There shall be no retail sales activities open to the public for the
purpose of selling any goods or services in any basement, cellar, or
attic, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the use of such areas for storage or the basement or cellar
for public restrooms.
3. Minimum buffer with residential uses or zones is 75 feet.
A. Purpose. The zone is established to recognize 2 areas in the Borough
used for public purpose. These include the Reading-Fleming Middle
School, Tuccamirgan Park, Green Acres Park, and the Flemington Swim
Club, and Memorial Park on the east side of town.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the PS/P Zone, no lot shall be used and no
structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except
the following:
1. Public schools.
2. Government use, including parks and recreation.
3. Private swim clubs.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Storage sheds.
2. Signs, § 2631.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Solar facilities.
5. Shelters and fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals. [Ord.
No. 2012-01]
6. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all PS/P Districts;
§ 2624 GENERAL § 2625
BH1:177
§ 2626. SUPER SHOPPING (SS) OVERLAY DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
2012-01]
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Max.
Building
Coverage
Parks &
Community
Pools
43,560 sf 100' 200' 25' 25' 35' 80'(1) .50 .25
Accessory
Building
(2,3)
NP 15' 15' 28'
Public
School
3 acres 150' 350' 50' 25' 50' 45' .75 .50
Accessory
Building
(2,3)
NP 15' 30' 25'
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – The ridgeline of the main roof shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
(2) – No more than 2 accessory structures or buildings for lots 15,000 sf; no more than 3 accessory
structures or buildings for lots > 15,000 sf.
(3) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Super Shopping (SS) Overlay District is to
provide for the redevelopment of a portion of the Highway Retail Zone
that is characterized by small lots or abandoned and vacant land. The
overlay district provides an optional set of development regulations that
permits an added intensity of development as an incentive to assemble
substandard lots.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. In the Super Shopping Overlay Zone, no lot
shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except for a shopping center incorporating any permitted
use in the Highway Retail District.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted
when used in conjunction with a permitted principal use:
1. Off-street parking.
2. Drive-thru and drive-in facilities.
3. Private garages for commercial vehicles used in conjunction with
the principal use.
4. Fences and walls.
§ 2625 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2626
BH1:178
5. Signs, § 2631.
6. Storage and maintenance buildings.
7. Solar facilities.
8. Community gardening. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when
authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board:
1. Hotels and motels (701) subject to the following criteria:
a. Any such use shall contain a minimum of at least 20 units of
accommodation not including any on-site superintendent's
living quarters. The minimum number of units of
accommodation in any single building shall be 10.
b. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor
area of 250 square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of 8 feet
in height.
c. There shall be a residency limitation on all guests of 30 days
maximum. The residency limitation shall not apply to an
employee living on the premises.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise
modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all SS Districts:
Principal
Use and
Accessory
Buildings
Min. Lot
Area
Min.
Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Min.
Front
Yard
Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
Max.
Imperv.
Surface
Ratio
Floor
Area
Ratio
Shopping
Center:
Tract 15 acres 500' 500' 150' 50' 25' 32'(1) .75 .22
Lot(2) 1 1/2
acres
100' 200' 75 N/A 50 30'(3)
Accessory
Building
(6)
NP 25' 30' 18'
Hotel and
Motel
2 acres 200' 200' 50' 35' 50' 45'(4) .60 .25
NP = Not Permitted.
(1) – Or 3 stories, whichever is less, however, the maximum height for 33 percent of the front facade may
be 36' if used to accommodate a front elevation with a pediment or similar structure.
(2) – These regulations only pertain to lots within the overall tract area and is intended for use with pad
sites approved as part of the shopping center plan.
§ 2626 GENERAL § 2626
BH1:179
§ 2627. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS.
[Ord. No. 2012-01]
(3) – Or 1 1/2 stories, whichever is less
(4) – Or 4 stories, whichever is less.
(5) – Roof mounted appurtenances such as heating and air conditioners (HVAC), communications
antennae and other equipment shall be concealed by a parapet wall from surrounding land uses. The
parapet wall cannot exceed the allowable height.
(6) – Properties must also meet standards for particular accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including but not limited to solar facilities, in Chapter 26.
F. Additional Regulations for Retail and Service Uses.
1. All equipment stored on the site shall be placed within an enclosed
building.
2. There shall be no retail sales activities open to the public for the
purpose of selling any goods or services in any basement, cellar, or
attic, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the use of such areas for storage or the basement or cellar
for public restrooms.
3. Minimum buffer with residential uses or zones is 75 feet.
A. Community Shelters. Community residences for the developmentally
disabled, community shelters for victims of domestic violence, and
community residences for persons with head injuries shall be allowed in
any residential district permitting single family detached housing,
provided that:
1. No more than 15 persons, excluding resident staff, shall occupy the
premises except as permitted herein.
2. The facility is duly licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq. for
community residences for the developmentally disabled, N.J.S.A.
30:14-1 et seq. for community shelters for victims of domestic
violence, and N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq. for community residences
for persons with head injuries.
3. The residential character of the building shall remain unchanged.
4. All other applicable regulations of this Ordinance shall apply.
B. Decks. Decks shall not be attached to any floor higher than the second
floor of a dwelling. Decks for which railings are required shall be
located no closer to a side or rear lot line than permitted by the
principal building setback requirement. Lower decks may be located to
within the required setbacks for accessory buildings but in no instance
closer than 5 feet to a property line, excepting fee simple townhouses.
Decks for which railings are required shall not be permitted in the front
yard. Decks attached to fee simple townhouses may be located on a side
§ 2626 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2627
BH1:180
property line provided the townhouse is attached to another townhouse
along such property line. Fee simple townhouse decks closer than 5
feet to the side property line shall have a decorative screen at least
60 percent visually opaque attached to its side edge and 6 feet tall
measured from the deck surface.
C. Exterior Equipment. All ground-based utility meters or boxes, air
compressors, heat pumps, or other exterior equipment shall be located
at the side or rear of buildings and shall be screened by architectural
elements or landscape plantings. Roof-based equipment shall be
screened by architectural elements.
D. Family Day Care. Family day care shall be allowed as a home
occupation, as regulated in this Ordinance, in any residential district,
provided that no operator shall provide child care for more than 5
children at any one time not including children legally related to the
care provider nor children being cared for under a cooperative
agreement with their parents for which no payment is received. In agerestricted
developments, deed restrictions or bylaws may prohibit
family day care homes from being a permitted use. All other applicable
regulations of this Ordinance shall apply.
E. Fences and Walls. The following regulations shall apply to fences and
walls:
1. Fences and walls may be placed with the finished side (without
supports) located on the property line. All permitted fences shall be
situated on a lot in such a manner that the finished side shall face
adjacent properties.
2. No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, topped with metal spikes,
broken bottles and glass, nor constructed of any material or in any
manner which may be dangerous to persons or animals.
3. On any lot in any district, no wall or fence shall be erected or
altered so that said wall or fence shall be over 4 feet in height in
front yard areas and 6 feet in height in side and rear yard areas
except:
a. A dog run or privacy area may have fencing a maximum of 7
feet in height provided such area is located in rear yard areas
only and is set back from any lot line at least 15 feet.
b. A tennis court area, located in rear yard areas only, may be
surrounded by a fence a maximum of 15 feet in height; said
fence to be set back from any lot line the distances required for
accessory buildings in the zoning district as stipulated in this
Article.
c. No fence shall exceed 5 feet in height in a rear yard of a
reverse frontage lot.
§ 2627 GENERAL § 2627
BH1:181
d. On corner lots, no fences or walls may be placed within the
sight triangle. Fences or walls shall not exceed 2 feet in height
on corner lots in the front yard setback.
4. A private residential swimming pool area shall be surrounded by a
fence at least 4 feet, but no more than 6 feet, in height.
5. Nonresidential uses may be permitted a fence of up to 8 feet in
height when located behind the front yard provided the specific
size, type, and location is approved by the Planning Board.
Deviations from this subsection shall be considered as waivers from
the Ordinance standards.
F. Garage Sales. Garage sales shall be subject to the following
regulations:
1. License Regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a
garage sale in the Borough of Flemington without first filing with
the Clerk the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from
said Clerk a license to do so, to be known as a "garage sale license".
Any bona fide charitable, nonprofit, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization shall be required to obtain
a license. The burden of establishing the exemption from the
payment of a license fee shall be on the organization or institution
claiming such fee exemption.
A license shall be issued for each lot as shown on the official
Borough of Flemington tax map only twice within a 12-month
period. No license shall be issued for more than 2 consecutive
calendar days. Under special circumstances, and for special
reasons, more than 2 licenses may be issued in connection with
each parcel of property with the approval of the Common Council.
Each license issued under this section shall be prominently
displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted
throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
2. License Information to Be Filed. The information to be filed with
the Borough Clerk, pursuant to this subsection shall be as follows:
a. Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association, or
organization conducting the sale.
b. Name of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be
conducted, and consent of owner if applicant is other than the
owner.
c. Location at which the sale is to be conducted.
d. Number of days of the sale.
e. Date, nature of any past sale.
§ 2627 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2627
BH1:182
f. Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any
other person, conducting a sale and the date or dates of such
sale.
g. Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's
license by any local, State, or Federal agency.
h. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true.
3. Hours of Sale. All garage sales shall be conducted between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. only, and no sale shall be
conducted on a Sunday.
4. Signs. No person shall make, cause to be made or erected signs
other than those signs provided by the Borough. These signs shall
be made available by the Borough and shall be a uniform size and
form (12" x 12") and must be purchased from the Borough. The
signs shall have a space allotted to place the name and address of
the person running the sale and the signs shall be removed within
48 hours after the completion of the sale.
5. Persons and Sales Excepted. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to or affect the following persons or sales:
a. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
c. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or described in
the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed 5 in
number.
d. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or
other communication media who publishes or broadcasts in
good faith without knowledge of its false, deceptive, or
misleading character or without knowledge that the provisions
of this section have not been complied with.
6. Conduct of Sale. The person to whom such license is issued and the
owner or tenant of the premises on which the sale or activity is
conducted shall be responsible for the maintenance of good order
and decorum on the premises during all hours of the sale or
activity. No person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on
the premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic
on any roads or streets in the area of the premises.
G. Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be subject to the following
regulations:
§ 2627 GENERAL § 2627
BH1:183
1. The use is limited solely to office use;
2. The use is operated by or employs in the residence only a resident
or residents who are permanent full-time residents of the dwelling
unit, and no other persons;
3. No nonresident employees, customers, or business invitees or
guests shall visit the dwelling unit for business purposes;
4. The use shall be located in only one room of the dwelling unit,
which shall not be served by an entrance separate from the
household;
5. Interior storage of materials shall consist only of office supplies;
6. There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or structures
because of the use, and no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, storage, signs, or lights;
7. The use operates no equipment or process that creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic
interferences, including interference with telephone, radio or
television reception, detectable by neighboring residents;
8. The use does not require any increased or enhanced electrical or
water supply;
9. The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as other
residential uses in the zone district;
10. The capacity and quality of effluent is typical of normal residential
use, and creates no potential or actual detriment to the sanitary
sewer system or its components;
11. Delivery trucks shall be limited to U.S. Postal Service, United Parcel
Service, Federal Express, and other delivery services providing
regular service to residential uses in the zone district;
12. All vehicular traffic to and from the home office use shall be limited
in volume, type and frequency to what is normally associated with
other residential uses in the zone district.
H. Off-Street Parking and Private Garages. Off-street parking and private
garages for residential districts shall conform to the following
requirements:
1. Garages shall conform to the setback requirements as otherwise
established in this Ordinance.
2. No driveway shall be located closer than 5 feet in the front setback
area to a side or rear property line, except for the driveway access,
which can be on the line.
§ 2627 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2627
BH1:184
3. That portion of a driveway from the street to a parking apron
located directly in front of the dwelling shall not exceed 12 feet in
width.
4. No curb cut to a single family or two-family dwelling shall exceed
22 feet in width.
5. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
6. Commercial vehicles cannot be parked or stored on any site in any
residential zone district.
Deviations from Subsections F2 — F4 shall be considered as
waivers from the Ordinance standards.
I. Recreational Vehicle Storage. The following requirements apply to
recreational vehicle storage:
1. Trailers, boats or boat trailers which are 21 feet or more in length
as measured from outside dimensions, shall be parked or stored
inside the confines of a building only.
2. All trailers, boats or boat trailers shall be stored in side or rear yard
areas only; no trailer, boat, or boat trailer shall be parked or stored
in the front yard area of a lot.
3. Each occupied single family residential property may have outside
parking or storage upon it for 2 recreational vehicles or trailers, in
safe and effective operating condition. All recreational vehicles and
trailers shall display thereon a current State license and/or
registration. No self-propelled recreational vehicle stored on the
property shall exceed 40 feet in length unless within the confines of
a building.
4. At no time shall any recreational vehicle parked or stored on any lot
be used for living or housekeeping purposes.
J. Residential Swimming Pools and Cabanas. The following requirements,
after application for a permit, apply to private residential swimming
pools, hot tubs, and pool cabanas:
1. No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or
installed on any lot unless the lot contains a residential building.
Pools shall be considered impervious surface, which shall not
exceed the impervious surface ratio of the zone when included with
other impervious surfaces. Pools shall be located in rear or side
yard areas only. No swimming pool or elevated pool deck shall be
closer than 10 feet to any lot line. No pool apron shall be located
closer than 5 feet to any lot line.
2. Cabanas shall not exceed 150 square feet in area and 15 feet in
height. Any cabana shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any lot
§ 2627 GENERAL § 2627
BH1:185
line unless a greater setback for an accessory structure is
otherwise required.
K. Residential Shed. Private residential sheds shall comply with the
following regulations:
1. No shed shall exceed 160 square feet in floor area.
2. No shed shall exceed 12 feet in height.
L. Satellite Dish and Television Antennas. Satellite dish and television
antennas in single and two-family districts shall conform to the
following requirements:
1. To the greatest extent feasible, consistent with the unimpeded
reception of broadcasts, antennas are to be located in a rear yard
or the rear slope of a roof.
2. An antenna that is in excess of one meter (39.37 inches) but no
larger than 2 meters (78.74 inches) in diameter shall conform to
the setback requirements for accessory uses and structures in the
zoning district in which it is located.
3. An antenna that is in excess of 2 meters (78.74 inches) shall
conform to the rear yard setback requirements for accessory uses
and structures in the zoning district in which it is located.
4. The Administrative Officer shall have the power to waive the
enforcement of this subsection upon certification from a qualified
installer that conformance with these requirements will materially
limit the reception of broadcasts from communications satellites.
M. Animal Shelters and Fencing.
1. The area which animals are kept as measured by the fenced area
and the floor area of the shelter shall not exceed 5 percent of the
rear yard or a maximum of 150 square feet, whichever is lesser. The
percent of yard area shall be calculated based on the rear yard
area.
2. Animal shelters and their fenced enclosures shall be located a
minimum of 15 feet from all property lines and a minimum of 25
feet from any structure used for human habitation, occupation or
assembly and owned by anyone other than the owner of the subject
property. Notwithstanding, in no case shall animal shelters and
their fenced enclosure be located closer to the principal residence
of a neighboring property than the principal residence of the
subject property.
3. The maximum height of any animal shelter shall be 8 feet.
4. Additional regulations for the keeping of animals can be found in
Chapter 6, Animals, of the Borough Code.
§ 2627 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2627
BH1:186
§ 2628. BUS STOPS.
Bus Stops are conditional uses, subject to Planning Board approval
including site plan approval and subject to the following requirements:
§ 2629. PARKING: NUMBER OF SPACES. [N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14; Ord.
No. 2012-01]
N. Solar facilities shall meet the requirements in Section 2639, Solar
Energy Facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
1. Adequate circulation and stopping/drop off/and pickup area for the bus
shall be provided. Turning radius for a AASHTO B-40 design vehicle
shall be provided where necessary.
2. The bus drop/off pickup area ("bus area") shall utilize an existing
parking area in a commercial zone containing at least 100 parking
spaces. The use of the existing parking area is not to be a deduction
from parking presently credited to the principal use.
3. The bus area shall be a minimum of 75 feet from any adjoining
residential use or zone.
4. A bus shelter, not exceeding 250 square feet, may be permitted if it is a
roofed structure without heat or air conditioning.
5. In cases where the bus area or associated automobile parking abuts a
residential property or zone, there shall be a landscaped buffer strip
along the perimeter of the property or zone. Such buffer strip shall be at
least 8 feet in width or depth measured from the residential property
line. The 5 feet of such buffer strip nearest the residential property line
shall be used as a planting strip on which shall be placed a fence or
plant material, trees, shrubs, plants or both, the minimum height being
6 feet. Such fence or planting strip shall be of sufficient density to
provide adequate screening during all seasons of the year.
A. An adequate number of on-street and off-street parking spaces shall be
required in all developments to accommodate residents and visitors.
For projects containing dwelling units required by the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code's Barrier Free Subcode (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) to
be accessible, accessible parking spaces for people with disabilities
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Barrier
Free Subcode and shall be considered part of the total number of
required spaces.
B. For residential developments, off-street parking space shall be
provided, as set forth in Table 26.1 below. If applicant does not specify
the number of bedrooms per unit, note "3" for each category in Table
26.1 shall apply for the parking requirement.
C. For nonresidential developments, off street parking space shall be
provided. See Chapter 26, Table 26.2 in this section.
§ 2627 GENERAL § 2629
BH1:187
D. Alternative parking standards to those shown in Table 26.1 shall be
accepted if the applicant demonstrates these standards better reflect
local conditions. Factors affecting minimum number of parking spaces
include household characteristics, availability of mass transit, urban
versus suburban location, and available off-site parking resources.
Table 26.1 Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses(1)
Housing Unit Type/Size(2) Parking Space Requirement
Single-Family Detached
2 Bedroom 1.5
3 Bedroom 2.0
4 Bedroom 2.5(3)
5 Bedroom 3.0
All other housing unit parking space requirements shall comply with
the requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(NJAC 5:21).
Notes, Table 26.1:
(1) When determination of the required number of parking spaces
results in a fractional space for the entire development, any
fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in
excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
(2) Requirements for attached units (apartment/ condominium/
townhouse) include provisions for quest parking. Guest parking
shall not be concentrated in any one parking area but shall be
distributed so as to provide easy access to the affordable rental
residences.
(3) If applicant does not specify the number of bedrooms per unit, this
off-street parking requirement shall apply.
SOURCE: Modified and adapted from U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of the Census, Public Use File — New Jersey (cross-tabulation of
vehicles by housing unit for units constructed 1975 to 1980).
Table 26.2 Off-Street Parking Space Requirements for
Nonresidential Land Uses
Nonresidential Land
Principal Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces Per Indicated Area
Taverns/Bar 1 per 2 seats
House of Worship 1 per 3 seats
Bed and Breakfast 1 per guest bedroom, and 1 per
employee
§ 2629 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2629
BH1:188
Table 26.2 Off-Street Parking Space Requirements for
Nonresidential Land Uses
Nonresidential Land
Principal Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces Per Indicated Area
Banks 1 per 300 sf GFA
Hotels 1 per room plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Library 1 per 300 sf GFA
Health or Athletic Club 1 per 100 sf GFA
Manufacturing 1 per 1,000 sf GFA
Fire & Rescue 1/300 sf GFA
Medical & Dental Office 1 per 150 sf GFA
Convenience Store 6 per 1,000 GFA
Shopping center 1 per 200 sf GFA
Offices 3.5 per 1,000 sf GFA
Mortuary 10 per viewing room/chapel
Research 1 per 1,000 sf GFA
Restaurant 1 per 3 seats
Retail use 1 per 250 sf GFA (4 per 1,000 GFA)
Schools:
Elementary 2 per classroom; but not less than 1
per teacher & staff
Intermediate 1.5 per classroom; but not less than 1
per teacher & staff
Secondary 2.5 per classroom; but not less than 1
per teacher & staff
Service station 4 per bay & work area
Theater 1 per 3 seats
Notes: GFA = Gross floor area
GLA = Gross leasable area
E. A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 2.0 off-street
parking spaces, provided the driveway measures a minimum of 18 feet
in length between the face of the garage door and the right-of-way. A
two-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 3.5 off-street
parking spaces, provided a minimum parking area width of 20 feet is
provided for a minimum length of 18 feet as specified for a one-car
garage and driveway combination.
§ 2629 GENERAL § 2629
BH1:189
§ 2630. OFF-STREET LOADING.
F. When housing is included in mixed-use development, a shared parking
approach to the provision of parking shall be permitted, provided
however the applicant demonstrates the adequacy of parking for the
development in accordance with best design practice.
G. When, in the judgment of the local approving authority, on-street
parking is available, then only that proportion of the parking
requirement which is not available on the street shall be provided in offstreet
parking facilities. A length of 23 feet per on-street parking space
shall be used in calculating the number of available on-street parking
spaces.
H. Shared Parking. Where an applicant persuasively demonstrates that 2
or more parking generators have complementary parking demand as
demonstrated using accepted shared parking analyses, the approving
authority may permit an appropriate reduction in the required total
number of parking spaces.
A. Off-street loading shall be required for every retail, industrial,
institutional and governmental use for the loading and unloading of
material or merchandise. Office uses in excess of 20,000 gross square
feet in either a single building or in a combination of buildings as part of
an office park shall also be required to provide off-street loading. Offstreet
loading shall be as required:
1. Retail uses of 5,000 sf. or less shall provide one loading space 12' x
35'. Retail uses singularly or in combination shall provide one
loading space 15' x 60' for each 25,000 sf. up to 100,000 sf., plus
one space for each additional 100,000 sf. up to 500,000 sf., plus one
additional space for each 250,000 sf. thereafter.
2. Industrial uses shall provide one loading space 15' x 60' for each
20,000 sf. or part thereof.
3. Institutional uses shall provide one loading space 15' x 60' for each
50,000 sf. or part thereof.
4. Governmental uses shall provide one loading space 12' x 35' for
each 100,000 sf. or part thereof.
5. Office uses greater than 20,000 sf. shall provide one loading space
12' x 35' for each 50,000 square feet or part thereof.
B. Additional loading spaces may be necessary and required dependent
upon the specific activity.
§ 2629 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2631
BH1:190
§ 2631. SIGNS.6 [Ord. No. 2012-06; Ord. No. 2012-15; Ord. No.
2016-12; Ord. No. 2013-14; amended 6-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-12]
A. Signs—Permitted in All Districts.
1. The following signs are permitted in all districts in the Borough:
a. A non-illuminated nameplate, with the name of the principal
occupant and the street number and name of a private dwelling
or both, with an area of not more than 144 square inches.
b. A sign, illuminated or not, for a church, educational institution
or public or quasi-public building or use, with an area of not
more than 16 square feet.
c. The following non-illuminated temporary signs:
(1) A single sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the premises
upon which it is placed, with an area of not more than 8
square feet; provided, that such sign shall be removed
within 7 days after the consummation of a lease or sale of
the premises.
(2) Signs for a building, premises or part thereof, under
construction or renovation, with the street number of a
building and the name of the architect, engineer,
landscaper, the general contractor and subcontractors,
and the project title during construction on the premises.
Such signs shall be located at the principal entrance and
within the street line and lot lines of the premises and shall
be removed within 7 days after the completion of the
construction work. The total area of such signs on a lot
shall not exceed 8 square feet.
(3) Signs announcing or advertising any political, educational,
religious or like campaign, drive or event; provided that
the total area of all such signs on a lot shall not exceed 8
square feet.
(4) Temporary banners.
The zoning officer may issue a permit for a banner that
meets the following conditions:
(a) (Reserved);
(b) Promotes a one-time event such as a grand opening,
holiday sale, or fund raising event;
(c) Will be used for no more than 14 days;
6. Editor's Note: Flemington Borough - Summary of Sign Regulations is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 2631 GENERAL § 2631
BH1:191
(d) Will be used (1) at the standard location across Main
Street between the Historic Courthouse and the Union
Hotel or (2) at the location of the business or event
being advertised and up to three additional locations
in the Borough, providing that the requesting party
provides written permission from the owner of any
location other than his or her own where the banner is
to be placed.
(5) Default Banner.
A banner (designated by the FCP or its equivalent and
reviewed/approved by the SRC) may be displayed across
Main Street at a location(s) approved by the Council,
provided the structural stability has been confirmed by
the Construction Official, for the first available one-week
period every month when no other banner has been
approved pursuant to Subsection A1c(4) above and, in the
discretion of the Zoning Officer, it is safe to display it.
Requests for other banners shall be submitted to Borough
Council for approval.
The zoning officer at his sole discretion may refer a banner
request that meets the conditions listed above to Council
for approval regarding concerns of colors, size, public
safety, or frequency of placement. [Ord. No. 2016-12;
amended 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12]
d. Directional signs, not to exceed 2 square feet.
B. Permitted Signs. [Ord. No. 2012-15; amended 6-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-12]
1. The following sign regulations are supplemented by the Table of
Sign Regulations contained herein.7 Where a conflict arises, the
document with more specificity shall prevail.
2. The following business signs are permitted for each business
building in the CB, TC, DB, DB II, PO, VAS, and HR/OSS Districts.
a. Facade (wall) signs.
(1) A facade sign may be located on the wall surface of the
principal facade of the area occupied by such business and
extending not more than four inches from such wall. A
business use, if located on a corner lot or abutting a
parking lot containing five or more parking spaces and
that provides building access to a location other than that
facade facing the public street, may have a second sign
7. Editor's Note: The Table of Sign Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 2631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2631
BH1:192
located on the wall facing the other street or parking lot.
The total length and area of each sign shall not exceed
50% of the linear length of the building facade (including
window and door areas) to which the sign is affixed if one
business or the portion of the building facade occupied
by the business (demising wall to demising wall).
Notwithstanding, no sign shall exceed 50 square feet
except for the HR/OSS District, which sign(s) shall not
exceed 100 square feet. Facade signs, excluding those in
the HR/OSS district, shall not exceed two feet in height.
If a shared space, the multiple tenants shall be allowed
exterior signage but the total signage area for all tenants
shall not exceed the area limitations herein.
(2) Business uses without street frontage (defined as those
located only in the building rear, on the upper floors, or the
basement) may have one additional facade sign to be
shared by all such uses on the premises. To the extent
practical, it shall be located on a wall surface immediately
adjacent to the main entrance to such uses and may extend
not more than four inches from such wall. The total area of
such sign shall not exceed eight square feet. Such
businesses may, in addition, have one sign to be shared by
all such businesses on or immediately adjacent to the door
serving as the main entrance to such uses. The total area
of such painted sign shall not exceed two square feet.
b. Freestanding signs.
(1) Freestanding signs, where permitted, shall be located
between the principal structure and the public street and
may be located in the front yard setback. The business use,
if located on a corner lot, may have a second sign located
between the second side of the building facing a public
street and the street.
(2) Businesses with a minimum of 500 feet on a state highway
and two or more access points may have up to two signs on
such frontage.
(3) Monument signs are considered freestanding signs for
purposes of determining the number or quantity
permitted. Either a monument sign or a freestanding sign
shall be permitted, but not both.
(4) Notwithstanding the required setback from curb, no sign
shall be located in the public right-of-way.
c. Blade signs and canopy/awning signs.
(1) A blade sign and/or a canopy/awning sign is permitted in
addition to a facade sign.
§ 2631 GENERAL § 2631
BH1:193
(2) The total area of the canopy/awning sign and the facade
sign shall not exceed the area of that which is permitted
for the facade sign(s) on the building facade to which each
sign or set of signs is affixed.
(3) Blade signs shall be no larger than six square feet. The
signs shall be placed at a height as to not obstruct
pedestrians or impair vehicular sight lines, as determined
by the Zoning Officer. Where located above a pedestrian
way, the bottom of the sign shall provide not less than
eight feet of clearance.
3. One canopy/awning sign and one blade sign is permitted on the
principal building facade.
a. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) Signs on windows, and doors. Each business located at the
street level may have the following signs, for the name,
street, number or type of business or any combination
thereof:
(a) Two signs, with a total area not to exceed six square
feet, painted or applied as a decal(s) on the windows
or doors, or both, but with not more than one such
sign on any window or door; except that an
establishment serving food may post its menu and
hours or service on the first floor facade in reasonable
proximity to the front entry. Such menu sign may be
no more than six square feet and may be in addition to
the two signs permitted herein.
(2) A frame sign. An A-frame sign for retail establishments in
the VAS, DB and DB II Zones conforming to the following:
(a) (Reserved)
(b) A temporary freestanding advertisement or menu sign
(A-frame sign or sandwich-board sign) may be
displayed, provided only one such sign be installed per
street level business establishment not to exceed six
square feet in size per side. Such sign shall be placed
so that a minimum of three feet of an unobstructed
sidewalk width is provided.
(c) The sign shall consist of a framed chalkboard, tack
board, or similar for the listing of daily specials and
hours of operation, only.
(d) The location of the sign shall not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, as determined by the
Zoning Officer.
§ 2631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2631
BH1:194
b. Directory signs.
(1) A directory sign for any business building; provided, that a
directory sign is minimally set back at the existing building
front facade. Each side of a directory such sign may have
the names of all principal tenants of the building. The area
of a directory sign devoted to each tenant shall not exceed
72 square inches. The total area of such signs shall not
exceed 16 square feet.
c. Menu board signs for uses with a drive-through are permitted.
The sign area of each menu board sign shall not exceed 20
square feet and shall be located adjacent to the drive-through
lane. It may be internally illuminated.
d. Special signs. Special signs serving the public convenience,
such as "Notary Public," "Public Telephones," "Public Rest
Rooms" or words or directions of similar import. The area of
such sign shall not exceed 72 square inches. Only one sign of
each type shall be displayed.
e. Temporary paper signs. Temporary signs placed on glass which
are made out of paper or similar material and containing
extraordinary information pertaining to matters of limited
duration, such as sales, product promotion, community,
cultural, or other public events, and employment
opportunities. Such signs shall not have an area exceeding
10% of the total square footage of the glass frontage of the
establishment.
f. Parking rate sign. Operators of parking garages and open lots
shall post a sign setting forth all pertinent rate information.
Such information shall be readily visible to potential patrons
before they pull into the entryway. Such rate sign may be no
more than 10 square feet and may be in addition to such other
signage as is permitted herein.
g. All deviations from the sign ordinance shall be considered "c"
variances, with the exception of signs which are principal uses,
including but not limited to billboards.
4. Prohibited signs.
a. The following signs or artificial lighting are prohibited:
(1) Billboards.
(2) Flashing signs or moving signs, including any sign or
device or which the artificial light is not maintained
stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
when in use.
(3) Neon or neon-like signs.
§ 2631 GENERAL § 2631
BH1:195
§ 2632. AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.
[Ord. No. 2009-4]
(4) Signs which compete for attention with, or may be
mistaken for, a traffic signal.
5. Location.
a. Except as otherwise provided in the subsection, no sign shall
project into a required yard or beyond the lot or street line.
b. No sign shall be placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof,
or upon any structure which extends above the roof, of any
building, except such directional devices as may be required by
federal or state aeronautical authorities.
c. No sign shall be so placed as to interfere with the opening of an
exit door or to obstruct any window opening of a room which is
used for dwelling purposes.
d. No part of any business sign shall project above the top or
beyond the ends of the wall surface upon which it is placed.
6. Lighting.
a. Permitted lighting for illuminated signs shall be limited to that
concentrated upon the face of the sign. If any such sign is
situated within 20 feet of a street, the direct source of light
shall not be visible from the street or any neighboring lots or
uses.
A. Intent.
This section of the Borough Code sets forth regulations regarding the
low- and moderate-income housing units in the Borough consistent
with the provisions of the Substantive Rules of the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq., the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. and the Borough's
constitutional obligation to provide a fair share of affordable housing
for low- and moderate-income households. These regulations are also
intended to provide assurances that low- and moderate-income units
(the "affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over
time and that low- and moderate-income people occupy these units.
These regulations shall apply except where inconsistent with applicable
law. [Ord. No. 2017-9 § 2]
B. Proportion of Low and Moderate Income Units by Sale, Rental and by
Number of Bedrooms.
Except for affordable housing developments constructed pursuant to
low income tax credit regulations:
§ 2631 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2632
BH1:196
1. At least half of the "for sale" affordable units within each affordable
housing development shall be affordable to low income households.
2. At least half of the "rental" affordable units within each affordable
housing development shall be affordable to low income households.
3. At least half of the affordable units in each bedroom distribution
within each affordable housing development shall be affordable to
low income households.
C. Bedroom Distribution of Affordable Units.
1. Affordable housing developments which are not limited to agerestricted
households shall be structured in conjunction with
realistic market demands so that:
a. The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is no
greater than 20 percent of the total number of affordable units;
b. At least 30 percent of all affordable units shall be two-bedroom
units.
c. At least 20 percent of all affordable units shall be threebedroom
units.
2. Affordable housing developments that are limited to age-restricted
households shall at a minimum have a total number of bedrooms
equal to the number of age-restricted affordable units within the
affordable housing development. The standard may be met by
creating all one-bedroom units or by creating a two-bedroom unit
for each efficiency unit.
D. Establishing Median Income by Household Size.
1. Median income by household size shall be established using a
regional weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD computed as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93 or as
established by the Court.
2. Annual increases in income limits of affordable units shall be
established as identified in the Affordable Housing Administrative
Agent Policies and Procedures Manual for the Administration of
Affordable Units. [Ord. No. 2017-9 § 2]
E. Establishment of Rents and Prices of Units as Related to Household
Size and Number of Units.
1. In conjunction with realistic market information the following shall
be used to determine maximum rents and sales prices of the
affordable units:
a. Efficiency units shall be affordable to one-person households.
§ 2632 GENERAL § 2632
BH1:197
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one- and one-half
person household.
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household.
d. A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four- and one-half
person household.
e. A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
2. For assisted living facilities the following standards shall be used:
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household.
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one- and one-half
person household.
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two, one-person households.
3. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying
the unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
a. Provide an occupant for each unit bedroom;
b. Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
c. Prevent more than 2 persons from occupying a single bedroom.
F. Establishing Average Rents of Affordable Units.
1. The maximum rent of affordable units within each affordable
housing development shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 60 percent of median income. The average rent for lowand
moderate-income units shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 52 percent of median income. Restricted
rental units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type
for all low and moderate income units provided at least 13 percent
of all low- and moderate-income units are affordable to households
earning no more that 35 percent of median income. [Ord. No.
2017-9 § 2]
2. Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the same heating
source as market units within an inclusionary development.
3. Gross rents including an allowance for utilities shall be established
for the various size affordable units at a rate not to exceed 30
percent of the gross monthly income of the appropriate household
size. The allowance for utilities shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by NJDCA for use in its Section 8 Program.
§ 2632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2632
BH1:198
4. No affordable rental units included in the COAH requirement shall
be subject to a rent control ordinance which may be adopted or in
place in the Borough of Flemington during the time period in which
affordable housing COAH controls are effective.
5. Annual increases in rents of affordable units shall be established as
identified in the Affordable Housing Administrative Agent Policies
and Procedures Manual for the Administration of Affordable Units.
[Ord. No. 2017-9 § 2]
G. Establishing Average Sales Prices of Affordable Units.
1. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70 percent of median income. Each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55 percent
for restricted ownership units. Moderate income ownership units
must be available for at least 3 different prices for each bedroom
type and low-income ownership units must be available for at least
2 different prices for each bedroom type.
2. Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the same heating
source as market units within an inclusionary development.
3. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying costs of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95
percent of the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of
interest), taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28
percent of the eligible monthly income of an appropriate household
size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4; provided, however,
that the price shall be subject to the affordability average
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3.
4. Annual increases in resale prices of affordable units shall be
established as identified in the Affordable Housing Administrative
Agent Policies and Procedures Manual for the Administration of
Affordable Units. [Ord. No. 2017-9 § 2]
H. Affordable Housing Units: Condominium or Homeowners Association
Fees.
1. If an affordable housing unit is part of a condominium association
or homeowner's association, the Master Deed shall reflect that the
assessed affordable homeowner's fee be established at 100 percent
of the market rate fee. This percentage assessment shall be
recorded in the Master Deed.
I. Reservation of Units.
§ 2632 GENERAL § 2632
BH1:199
1. Very low income housing units shall be reserved for households
with a gross income equal to or less than 30 percent of the median
income approved by COAH.
2. Low income housing units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income equal to or less than 50 percent of the
median income approved by COAH.
3. Moderate income housing units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income in excess of 50 percent but less than
80 percent of the median income approved by COAH.
J. Reoccupancy Certificates.
1. Upon resale of an affordable unit, a Certificate of Reoccupancy
shall be required in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
K. Phasing Of Construction.
1. Final site plan or subdivision approval shall be contingent upon the
affordable housing development meeting the following phasing
schedule for low- and moderate-income units whether developed in
one stage or in 2 or more stages.
Minimum Percentage of Low
& Moderate Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
L. Control Period for Affordable Housing.
1. Any conveyance of a newly constructed low or moderate income
sales unit shall contain the restrictive covenants and liens that are
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
M. Time Period For Controls.
1. Newly constructed low and moderate income "rental" units shall
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a
period of at least 30 years.
2. Newly constructed low and moderate income "for sale" units shall
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a
period of at least 30 years.
§ 2632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2632
BH1:200
3. Rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing units that are
improved to code standard shall be subject to affordability controls
for 10 years.
4. Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard shall be subject to affordability controls for at least
10 years.
5. Housing units created through conversion of a nonresidential
structure shall be considered a new housing unit and shall be
subject to affordability controls for new housing units as
designated in items 1 and 2 above.
6. Affordability controls for units in alternative living arrangements
shall be for a period of 30 years.
7. Market to affordable units shall remain affordable to low and
moderate income households for a period of at least 30 years.
8. Extension of control units shall remain affordable to low and
moderate income households for a period of at least 30 years.
N. Selection of Occupants of Affordable Units.
1. The administrative agent shall use a random selection process to
select occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
2. A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be maintained in
accordance with the provisions contained in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
O. Adaptable and Accessible Units.
1. The first floor of all townhouse dwelling units and of all other
multistory dwelling units which are affordable to low or moderate
households shall be subject to the technical design standards of the
Barrier Free Subcode (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7).
2. Each affordable townhouse unit or other affordable multistory
dwelling unit that is attached to at least one other dwelling unit
shall have the following features:
a. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(1) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
b. An accessible route of travel;
(1) An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories.
c. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
d. Accessible Entranceways.
§ 2632 GENERAL § 2632
BH1:201
(1) The developer shall provide an accessible entranceway as
set forth at P.L.2005, c. 350 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.)
and the Barrier Free Subcode (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) for each
affordable townhouse unit or other affordable multistory
dwelling unit and is attached to at least one other dwelling
unit; or
(2) The developer shall provide funds sufficient to make 10
percent of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible as set forth at P.L.2005, c. 350 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode
(N.J.A.C. 5:23-7).
e. The developer of the project shall submit a conversion plan
indicating the steps necessary to convert the unit from being
adaptable to accessible. Said plan shall be submitted at the
time of issuance of a building permit.
f. Where the developer will provide funds sufficient to make 10
percent of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible, the developer of the project shall submit the
following to the Borough, at the time of issuance of the
building permit, in order to determine the required funds:
(1) Funds sufficient to make 10 percent of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible; and
(2) A cost estimate for conversion of 10 percent of the
adaptable entrances in the development to accessible.
g. In the case of an affordable unit or units which are constructed
with an adaptable entrance, upon the request of a disabled
person who is purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed by the Borough.
P. Administration of Affordable Housing Program.
1. Flemington Borough is ultimately responsible for administering the
affordable housing program, including affordability controls and
the Affirmative Marketing Plan in accordance with the regulations
of the Council on Affordable Housing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93 et
seq. and the New Jersey Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
2. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison Position and
compensation; powers and duties.
a. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There
is hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison
for the Borough of Flemington.
b. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) or the Court, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
§ 2632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2632
BH1:202
appointed by the Governing Body and may be a full or part time
municipal employee.
c. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for
oversite and administration of the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Flemington, including the following
responsibilities which may not be contracted out, exclusive of
item (6) which may be contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Borough of Flemington's primary point of
contact for all inquiries from the State, affordable housing
providers, Administrative Agents, and interested
households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough
of Flemington's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH or the Court;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers
and Administrative Agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing as offered or approved by COAH or
the Court;
(6) If applicable, serving as the Administrative Agent for some
or all of the restricted units in the Borough of Flemington
as described in Subsection 3 below.
d. Flemington Borough will contract with or authorize a
consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the Governing Body, which entity shall have the responsibility
of administering the affordable housing program of the
Borough of Flemington, except for those responsibilities that
may not be contracted out pursuant to Subsection c above. If
the Borough of Flemington contracts with one or more
administrative agents to administer some or all of the
affordable housing program, including the affordability
controls and/or the Affirmative Marketing Plan the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting Administrative
Agent.
e. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Governing
Body at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
3. Administrative Agent. The Borough of Flemington intends to
contract with an administrative agent to administer the sale and
rental of all new affordable housing. The Administrative Agent will
§ 2632 GENERAL § 2632
BH1:203
oversee and administer income qualification of low- and moderateincome
households; place income eligible households in low- and
moderate-income units upon initial occupancy; place income
eligible households in low- and moderate-income units as they
become available during the period of affordability controls and
enforce the terms of the required deed restrictions and mortgage
loans. The administrative agent will specifically administer and
implement:
a. An administrative plan and program, and related monitoring
and reporting requirements as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15
et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:93.
b. A plan for certifying and verifying the income of low- and
moderate-income households as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16
c. Procedures to assure that low- and moderate-income units are
initially sold or rented to eligible households and are thereafter
similarly re-sold and re-rented during the period while there
are affordability controls as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
d. The requirement that all newly constructed low- and moderateincome
sales or rental units contain deed restrictions with
appropriate mortgage liens as set forth in Appendices in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
e. The several sales/purchase options authorized under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq. except that the Borough retains the right to
determine by resolution whether or not to prohibit, as
authorized under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq., the exercise of the
repayment option.
f. The regulations determining 1) whether installed capital
improvements will authorize an increase in the maximum sales
price; and 2) which items of property may be included in the
sales price as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.9.
4. The developers/owners of any inclusionary site shall be responsible
for the administrative fee, affirmative marketing and advertising
and such shall be a condition of Planning or Zoning Board approval.
5. Flemington Borough reserves the right to replace the
administrative agent with another municipal authority or other
agency authorized by COAH to carry out the administrative
processes outlined above. [Ord. No. 2017-9 § 2]
Q. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
1. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an Owner, Developer or Tenant the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal
§ 2632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2632
BH1:204
fines, a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of
all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent
further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and
specific performance.
2. After providing written notice of a violation to an Owner, Developer
or Tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the
Owner, Developer or Tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the Owner,
Developer or Tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
a. The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the Owner, Developer
or Tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the Owner,
Developer or Tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, a fine of not more than $2,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both. Each and every day that the violation continues or
exists shall be considered a separate and specific violation
of these provisions and not as a continuing offense;
(2) In the case of an Owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Flemington Borough Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the
gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(3) In the case of an Owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the court.
b. The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of
the Owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of
a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the lowand
moderate-income unit.
3. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating Owner
shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount
necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any First Purchase Money
§ 2632 GENERAL § 2632
BH1:205
Mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the enforcement
proceedings incurred by the municipality, including attorney's fees.
The violating Owner shall have the right to possession terminated
as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
4. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating Owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the Owner
and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years
or until such earlier time as the Owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the Owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture
of such balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned
on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be
paid to the Owner or forfeited to the municipality.
5. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing units
as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. The Owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were
taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any
right of redemption.
6. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage and
any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner
with an amount equal to the difference between the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for
which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
§ 2632 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2632
BH1:206
§ 2633. AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING PROCEDURES. [Ord. No.
2009-4]
which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
7. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the
Owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the Owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
8. The Owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the Owner.
[Ord. No. 2017-9 § 2]
A. Affirmative Marketing Plan.
1. Flemington Borough shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of COAH, compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
2. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The affirmative marketing plan is also intended
to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs all marketing activities toward COAH Housing Region
3 and covers the period of deed restriction.
3. The administrative agent designated by the Flemington Borough
shall assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units
consistent with the affirmative marketing plan for the municipality.
4. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law.
5. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least 4 months prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
§ 2632 GENERAL § 2633
BH1:207
§ 2634. AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FEES. [Ord. Nos.
13A-2000, 2001-7, 1-2002, 2005-7, 2005-22, 2008-9, 2008-13 and
2009-3]
6. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by Flemington Borough.
A. Purpose.
1. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
2. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and
the Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
3. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c.46, Sections 8 and
32 through 38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used
for the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income
housing. This section shall be interpreted within the framework of
COAH's rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
B. Basic Requirements.
1. This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
2. Flemington Borough shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
C. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
§ 2633 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2634
BH1:208
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100 percent affordable development.
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning consideration in the State.
DEVELOPMENT — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential Development Fees.
1. Imposed Fees.
a. All residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of
1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development provided no increased density is permitted.
b. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may
be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
2. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Residential Development.
§ 2634 GENERAL § 2634
BH1:209
a. Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
b. Development fees shall not be imposed where reconstruction
results from fire, flood or natural disaster.
c. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
d. Expansion of a residential building, where no new units is
constructed, shall be exempt from development fees.
e. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use or
is demolished and replaced if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
E. Nonresidential Development Fees.
1. Imposed Fees.
a. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
b. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
c. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
§ 2634 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2634
BH1:210
2. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
a. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the 2.5%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
b. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to any increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
c. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/ Exemption" Form. Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by
that developer.
d. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46
shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption
no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
e. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by Flemington Borough as a lien against
the real property of the owner.
F. Collection Procedures.
1. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
2. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify
§ 2634 GENERAL § 2634
BH1:211
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
3. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
4. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Tax Assessor, based on
the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed
value of the development.
5. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the Tax Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
6. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously
estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of the
development, calculate the development fee, and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
7. Should Flemington Borough fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008,
c.46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
8. Fifty (50%) percent of the development fee shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall
be collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
9. Appeal of Development Fees.
a. A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by Flemington Borough. Appeals from a determination
of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
b. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
§ 2634 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2634
BH1:212
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of
the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interestbearing
escrow account by Flemington Borough. Appeals from
a determination of the Director may be made to the tax court
in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
1. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose
of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
2. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
a. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
b. Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
c. Rental income from municipally operated units;
d. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
e. Recapture funds;
f. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
g. Any other funds collected in connection with Flemington
Borough's affordable housing program.
3. Within 7 days from the opening of the trust fund account,
Flemington Borough shall provide COAH with written
authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement
between the municipality, the bank and COAH to permit COAH to
direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.13(b).
4. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
H. Use of Funds.
1. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may
be used for any activity approved by COAH to address Flemington
§ 2634 GENERAL § 2634
BH1:213
Borough's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant
or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not
limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation,
new construction of affordable housing units and related costs,
accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and
specified in the approved spending plan.
2. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Flemington Borough for
past housing activities.
3. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third (1/3) of the affordability
assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or
less of median income by region.
a. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
b. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income. The use of development fees in this manner
shall entitle Flemington Borough to bonus credits pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.7.
c. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
4. Flemington Borough may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
§ 2634 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2634
BH1:214
5. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from the development
fees shall be expended for such administrative expenses.
Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other
fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible
uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
I. Monitoring.
1. Flemington Borough shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to
the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other
funds collected in connection with Flemington Borough's housing
program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring
reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
J. Ongoing Collection of Fees.
1. The ability for Flemington Borough to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification
unless Flemington Borough has filed an adopted Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification, and has received COAH's approval of its development
fee ordinance. If Flemington Borough fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of
substantive certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all
funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L.
1985, c.222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Flemington Borough shall not
impose a residential development fee on a development that
receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration
of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall
Flemington Borough retroactively impose a development fee on
such a development. Flemington Borough shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance.
§ 2634 GENERAL § 2635
BH1:215
§ 2635. AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCLUSIONARY ZONING SETASIDE.
[Ord. No. 2009-15; Ord. No. 2017-10]
A. All residential multi-family or single-family attached residential
development, including the residential portion of a mixed-use project,
that is "approvable," "suitable," and "developable," as defined at
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3, at a gross residential density of 6 units to the acre,
shall require that an appropriate percentage of the residential units be
set aside for low- and moderate-income households.
B. This requirement shall apply beginning with the effective date of this
ordinance to any multi-family or single-family attached residential
development, including the residential portion of a mixed-use project,
which consists of 5 or more new residential units, whether permitted by
a zoning amendment, a variance granted by the Planning Board, or
adoption of a Redevelopment Plan or amended Redevelopment Plan in
areas in need of redevelopment or rehabilitation.
C. For any such development for which the Borough's land use ordinances
(e.g. zoning or an adopted Redevelopment Plan) already permitted
residential development as of the effective date of this Ordinance No.
2017-10, adopted August 14, 2017, this requirement shall only apply if
the Borough permits an increase in the approvable and developable
gross residential density to at least twice the permitted approvable and
developable gross residential density as of the effective date of this
Ordinance.
D. For inclusionary projects in which the low- and moderate-units are to be
offered for sale, the set-aside percentage should be 20 percent; for
projects in which the low- and moderate-income units are to be offered
for rent, the set-aside percentage should be 15 percent.
E. The developer shall provide that half of the low- and moderate-income
units constructed be affordable by low-income households and that the
remaining half be affordable by moderate-income households. At least
13 percent of all restricted units shall be very low-income units
(affordable to a household earning 30 percent or less of median
income). The very low-income units shall be counted as part of the
required number of low-income units within the development.
F. Subdivision and site plan approval shall be denied by the board unless
the developer complies with the requirements to provide low- and
moderate-income housing pursuant to the provisions of this section. A
property shall not be permitted to be subdivided so as to avoid meeting
this requirement. The Board may impose any reasonable conditions to
ensure such compliance.
G. Nothing in this subsection precludes the Borough from imposing an
affordable housing set aside in a development not required to have a
set-aside pursuant to this subsection consistent with N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311(h) and other applicable law.
§ 2635 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2635
BH1:216
§ 2636. SOLID WASTE. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
§ 2637. IMPERVIOUS COVER. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
H. This requirement does not create any entitlement for a property owner
or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption of a
Redevelopment Plan or amended Redevelopment Plan in areas in need
of redevelopment or rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular
proposed project.
I. This requirement does not apply to any sites or specific zones otherwise
identified in the Fair Share Plan, for which density and set-aside
standards shall be governed by the specific standards set forth therein.
A. All buildings shall provide for adequate solid waste disposal, including
provisions for recycled materials.
B. A separate space for recycling shall be provided in any location where
waste facilities are provided, such as dumpster areas or receptacles in
public areas.
A. Green roofs shall not contribute toward impervious cover calculations.
B. With the exception of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle circulation routes,
impervious surfaces shall be disconnected, such that the contributing
flow path is no more than 75 feet.
C. The impervious cover limits for all commercial and multi-family
developments which disturb 2,000 square feet or more or proposes to
increase impervious cover by 200 square feet or more shall be subject
to the following:
1. The permitted impervious cover shall be 20 percentage points
below that which is permitted from the maximum identified in the
zone district unless the following conditions are met:
a. The development shall meet the stormwater management
requirements for major development pursuant to Section 21-4
of Flemington Borough Ordinances. Such developments shall
only rely upon the following stormwater management
compliance strategies:
(1) Non-structural strategies
(2) Bioretention basins
(3) Constructed stormwater wetland
(4) Porous pavement, stabilized turf and permeable pavers
(5) Vegetative filter strips
(6) Infiltration basin
§ 2635 GENERAL § 2637
BH1:217
§ 2638. LOCAL FOOD. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
§ 2639. SOLAR ENERGY FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 2012-01]
(7) Dry well
A. Community gardening where permitted shall be exempt from site plan
approval. Community garden structures and uses shall not be required
to meet the setback requirements of the zone district but instead shall
have a minimum setback of 5 feet from all property lines.
1. Site users must have an established set of operating rules
addressing the governance structure of the garden, hours of
operation, maintenance and security requirements and
responsibilities; a garden coordinator to perform the coordinating
role for the management of the community gardens and to liaise
with the Borough; and must assign garden plots in a fair and
impartial manner according to the operating rules established for
that garden. The name and telephone number of the garden
coordinator and a copy of the operating rules shall be kept on file at
the Borough Clerk's office.
2. The site shall be designed and maintained so that water will not
drain onto adjacent properties.
3. There shall be no retail sales on site, except for whole fresh
products grown on the site, such as fruit, vegetables and flowers.
4. No building or structures shall be permitted on the site with the
exception of storage sheds, greenhouses that consist of buildings
made of glass, plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated,
benches, bike racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost or
waste bins, picnic tables, seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art,
rain barrel systems, and children's play areas shall be permitted.
The combined area of all buildings or structures shall not exceed 15
percent of the garden areas.
5. Any signs and fences shall comply with applicable Borough
ordinances.
B. Outdoor planters and rooftop gardens shall be exempt from setback
requirements and site plan approval.
A. Solar facilities shall be permitted to be accessory uses which may be
ground mounted and mounted to principal and accessory structures
and buildings. Facilities which constitute principal uses, pursuant to
Section 1201, shall be prohibited.
B. Applicants are encouraged to enter into solar easements with
neighboring property owners in order to ensure continuing access to
sunlight for a solar facility.
§ 2637 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2639
BH1:218
C. Solar facilities do not count in the calculation of maximum lot coverage
or maximum impervious cover, unless the area under the system
(excluding the footings) consists of an impervious material, such as
pavement. Nevertheless, the design of the systems shall comply with all
Borough stormwater, grading, and soil disturbance regulations.
D. A zoning permit must be issued for all systems.
E. Ground systems shall meet the side and rear yard setback standards for
accessory structures in the zone which the structure is located.
F. Ground systems shall not be located in the front yard.
G. Ground mounted facilities greater than 1,000 square feet shall meet the
following:
1. One or more of the following must be provided beneath the
structures: meadow, grass, agricultural area for crops, or parking
spaces.
2. Site disturbance including but not limited to, grading, soil removal,
excavation, and soil compaction, including beneath a ground
mounted system, shall be minimized to the extent practical.
3. Mounting of the solar structures shall minimize impervious
surfaces except for concrete footings or other support systems.
4. Ground systems shall have a solid screen of evergreen plantings
and/or a fence shall be provided along property lines shared with a
residential zone district and rights-of-way.
5. The minimum height of the screening shall be 8 feet when planted.
6. Existing vegetation shall be retained to the extent practical.
H. All electrical control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
I. There shall be no signs that are visible from any public road posted on a
solar facility or any associated building or structure, except for the
manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs,
or owner identification.
J. Roof mounted systems shall be mounted parallel to the roof angle and
shall not exceed a height of 18 inches above the roofline.
Notwithstanding, systems shall not exceed the maximum building
height in the zone district.
K. The following standards apply to properties within the Borough's
historic district where the solar panels will be visible from a public
right-of-way within the historic district:
1. Installation of solar panels shall not alter significant or characterdefining
features of a historic resource, such as altering existing
§ 2639 GENERAL § 2639
BH1:219
roof lines or dormers. Installations that obstruct views of
significant architectural features (such as overlaying windows or
decorative detailing) or intrude on views of neighboring historic
properties in an historic district shall be prohibited.
2. Roof mounted systems shall be mounted parallel to the roof angle
and shall not exceed a height of 6 inches above the roofline.
Notwithstanding, systems shall not exceed the maximum building
height in the zone district.
3. On flat roofs, solar panels shall be set back from the edge so that
they are not visible from the public right-of-way.
4. Solar panels should be located on one roof plane (as opposed to
scattered among several roofs) and arranged in a pattern that
matches the general shape and configuration of the roof upon
which they are mounted.
5. Ensure that solar panels, support structures, and conduits blend
into the surrounding features of the historic resource. The overall
visibility and reflectivity of solar panels and their support
structures can be substantially reduced if elements of the solar
installation match the surrounding building fabric in color.
6. Solar panel installations should be reversible. The use of solar roof
tiles, laminates, glazing, and other technologies that require the
removal of intact historic fabric or that permanently alter or
damage such fabric should be avoided. Consider the type and
condition of the existing building fabric for which solar panels
installation is proposed, as well as the method of attachment and
future removal. Minimizing the number of points of attachment,
including the use of brackets, will avoid damaging historic fabric.
L. A permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall expire if:
1. The solar or photovoltaic facility is not installed and functioning
within 24 months from the date the permit is issued; or
2. The solar or photovoltaic facility is out of service or otherwise
unused for a continuous 18-month period.
3. A solar or photovoltaic facility that is out-of-service for a continuous
12 -month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
4. The Borough may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of a
solar or photovoltaic facility that is deemed to have been
abandoned. The notice shall be sent return receipt requested.
5. The owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of
Abandonment within 30 days from notice receipt date.
6. If the owner provides information that demonstrates the solar or
photovoltaic facility has not been abandoned, the Borough shall
§ 2639 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2639
BH1:220
§ 2640. REDEVELOPMENT OFFICE/SENIOR HOUSING OVERLAY
DISTRICT. [Ord. No. 2011-26]
withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and notify the owner that the
notice has been withdrawn.
7. If the Borough determines that the solar or photovoltaic facility has
been abandoned, the owner of the solar or photovoltaic facility
shall remove the photovoltaic panels, inverters, interconnection
hardware, substations, racking or mounting structures, fencing,
and all other structures and equipment at the owner's sole expense
within 6 months after the owner receives the Notice of
Abandonment.
8. If the owner fails to remove the equipment in the time allowed
under Subsection L7 above, the Borough may pursue legal action to
have the solar or photovoltaic facility removed at the owner's
expense.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Redevelopment Office/Senior Housing
Overlay Zone is to provide alternative uses for the area generally
bounded by portions of the following roads: Walter Foran Boulevard,
Hopewell Avenue, and Park Avenue as depicted on the Zoning Map, and
also known as Block 5, Lots 1 and 2; Block 13, Lots 15 and 16; Block 14,
Lots 1, 2, 3, 18, 19, 19.89, 19.87, 19.85, 19.83 and 19.81.
1. Promote development of compact, pedestrian-oriented mixed uses
including assisted living senior citizen residential with retail, office
and open space;
2. Encourage pedestrian-oriented development within walking
distance of transit opportunities at densities and intensities that
will help to support transit usage, and town center businesses;
3. Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging
physical activities and greater social interaction.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Assisted living housing.
2. Senior housing.
3. Retail sales and services limited to the following:
a. Convenience store.
b. Restaurants (excluding fast food or drive-in).
c. Opticians and optical goods.
d. Physical fitness centers.
e. Medical and dental offices.
§ 2639 GENERAL § 2640
BH1:221
f. Beauty and barber shops.
C. Accessory Uses.
1. Community gardens, including garden structures such as gazebos,
and public open space (parks).
2. Parking, either surface or in structures.
3. Outdoor dining.
4. Fences and walls.
5. Signs, pursuant to § 2631.
6. Storage and maintenance buildings.
7. Solid waste and recycling containers.
8. Solar facilities.
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage.
1. Minimum lot size shall be 3 acres.
2. Build-to-line shall be 12 feet from the right-of-way.
3. Building height shall not exceed 4 stories. Stories may not exceed
14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for
the first floor commercial function, which shall be a minimum of 11
feet with a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level exceeding 14
feet, or 25 feet at ground level, shall be counted as 2 stories.
Mezzanines extending beyond 33 percent of the floor area shall be
counted as an additional story. In a parking structure or garage,
each above-ground level counts as a single story regardless of its
relationship to habitable stories.
4. Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) shall not exceed 0.80 ISR.
5. Maximum square feet of retail, sales and services shall not exceed
30,000 sf.
6. Maximum square feet of medical and dental offices shall not exceed
50,000 sf.
E. Architectural Requirements.
1. The following shall not face a public street:
a. Window and wall air conditioners.
b. Electrical utility meters.
c. Air-conditioning compressors.
d. Irrigation and pool pumps.
§ 2640 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2640
BH1:222
e. Solid waste and recycling containers.
2. The following shall be located in rear yards only:
a. Antennas.
b. Permanent barbeques.
c. Satellite dishes.
d. Clotheslines.
3. The following are prohibited.
a. Undersized shutters (the shutter or shutters must be sized to
as to equal the width that would be required to cover the
window opening).
b. Reflective and/or bronze tint glass.
c. Backlit awnings.
d. Glossy-finish awnings.
e. Exposed cell phone towers.
f. Fences made of chain link, barbed wire, vinyl, plain wire mesh,
or coated chain line concealed by hedges or other landscaping
may be permitted by special approval only.
4. The existing historic train depot identified on Block 14, Lots 1 and 2
shall be retained and preserved in accordance with Secretary of
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. Review and
recommendation shall be made by the Flemington Historic
Preservation Commission.
5. A minimum area of 5,000 sf shall be devoted to public open space,
which shall be located at a strategic location where it can be seen
by the traveling public and accessed by residents of the
neighborhood.
6. No parking shall be permitted fronting on public streets but shall
be located internal to the site and screened with landscaping
including trees and shrubs.
7. Signs shall be located and designed meeting the following
requirements of § 2631.
F. Solar Design Features.
1. The building should provide south shading with properly sized
overhangs or building appurtenances on south facing glazing to
provide shade in the summer and allow light to penetrate in the
winter.
§ 2640 GENERAL § 2640
BH1:223
Chapter 28
FEES, GUARANTEES, INSPECTIONS AND OFF-TRACT
IMPROVEMENTS
Former Chapter 28, Miscellaneous Fees was relocated and renumbered as
Chapter 33 by Ordinance No. 2011-27.
§ 2800. APPLICATION AND ESCROW FEES.
2. Windows should be oriented to make the best use of passive solar.
3. The primary roof façade should face as close to solar south as
possible to allow for installation or retrofit with solar panels.
A. Fee Schedule. Every application for development shall be accompanied
by a check payable to the municipality in accordance with the following
schedule:
Subdivisions
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Minor Subdivision $250.00 $500.00
Preliminary Major
Subdivision
$500.00 $1,000.00
Final Major Subdivision $200.00 $75.00 per lot
Boundary Line Adjustment. $200.00 $200.00
Site Plans
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Minor Site Plan $400.00 $600.00
Minor Site Plan for Signs $25.00 $100.00
Preliminary Site Plan $500.00 See § 2800 A1
Final Plan $250.00 See § 2800 A1
1. Fees to Site Plan Review Escrow. The engineering fees for site plan
review escrow shall be based on the costs of improvements
exclusive of buildings, including, but not limited to construction
and installation costs of grading, pavement, surveyors, monuments,
drainage structures, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains,
fire protection features, streets, gutters, sidewalks, culverts, street
lighting, shade trees and landscaping, parking areas, street signs,
sedimentation and erosion control devices, public improvements of
open space and any other on-tract improvements. Said fees are as
follows:
a. Application Review Fees:
§ 2640 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2800
BH1:224
(1) $0 to $3,000.00 25.0% of the total cost
(2) $3,001.00 to $5,000.00 $750.00 plus 18.0% of the
amount over $3,001.00
(3) $5,001.00 to $15,000.00 $1,110.00 plus 8.5% of the
amount over $5,001.00
(4) $15,001.00 to
$50,000.00
$2,810.00 plus 6.5% of the
amount over $15,001.00
(5) $50,001.00 to
$100,000.00
$4,435.00 plus 4.5% of the
amount over $50,001.00
(6) $100,001.00 to
$250,000.00
$6,685.00 plus 3.0% of the
amount over $100,001.00
(7) $250,001.00 to
$500,000.00
$11,185.00 plus 2.0% of the
amount over $250,001.00
(8) $500,001.00 to
$750,000.00
$16,185.00 plus 2.0% of the
amount over $500,001.00
(9) $750,001.00 to
$1,000,000.00
$21,185.00 plus 2.0% of the
amount over $750,001.00
(10) $1,000,001.00 and over $26,185.00 plus 2.0% of the
amount over $1,000,001.00
b. Additional Escrow Fees:
(1) Planner - For any application for development except for
minor subdivision or minor site plan (preliminary or final) -
$500.00.
(2) Attorney
(a) For any application not requiring a public hearing -
$350.00
(b) For any application requiring a public hearing -
$750.00
c. The fees provided for in this section shall be preliminary fees
and shall not include any additional escrow fees which are
required to be paid from time to time as hereinafter provided.
The planning board or board of adjustment shall not act or
consider any plan until such time as the initial fees are paid in
full and no application shall be considered complete until such
time as the fees provided for in this section are deposited with
the Borough of Flemington.
2. Additional Fees. There shall be an additional fee due and owing
whenever the original fee paid into escrow is reduced by charges
against the account to 35 percent or less of the original fee. The
secretary of the planning board or of the board of adjustment shall
§ 2800 GENERAL § 2800
BH1:225
in writing require the applicant to provide an additional 65 percent
of the original fee which additional fee shall be payable within
seven days and prior to the planning board or board of adjustment
considering in any way or hold hearing on, or public or private
discussion of, any site plan, subdivision or other matter before
the planning board or board of adjustment. The planning board or
board of adjustment shall not discuss, consider, or in any way make
any recommendations for a proposed site plan at a regular meeting
or work session of the planning board or board of adjustment when
the additional fees have not been paid. Any preliminary discussion
of a site plan subdivision or any other matter to come before the
planning board or the board of adjustment shall be at a work
session of the board and no applicant shall request to be placed
on the agenda for a regular meeting unless formal application has
been made and fees paid. All informal discussion shall be at work
sessions. In the event the planning board or board of adjustment
must seek the advice of its professionals, either engineering, legal
or planning, the application shall no longer be considered informal
and the fees provided for herein must be paid prior to participation
of any professional advisors of the planning board or board of
adjustment.
Other Application and Escrow Fees
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Variances
Hardship (40:55D-70c) $250.00 $500.00 with
$250.00 for each
additional
variance.
Use (40:55D-70d) $250.00 $700.00 with
$350.00 for each
additional
variance.
Historic District
Applications
$25.00 $100.00
Hear and Decide Appeals $300.00
Conditional Uses $200.00
Interpretation of the
Zoning Map
$300.00
Sign Variance $100.00
Hardship or Other
Variance
$400.00
Use or Other Variance:
Residential $25.00 per
dwelling unit
§ 2800 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2800
BH1:226
Other Application and Escrow Fees
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Other Uses $250.00 per acre
for the portion
affected by the
proposed use.
Minimum $500.00
Maximum $8,000.00
Building Permit/Conflict
with Official Map
$400.00
Building Permit/Lot not
related to a street
$400.00
Application to the Board
of Adjustment/ Extension
of Meeting
$100.00/additional
meeting
Other Actions by Board of
Adjustment Appeals
(40:55D-70a)
$200.00 None
Interpretation
(40:55d-70b)
$200.00 $200.00
Appeals to Borough
Council
$400.00 None
Issuance of Permit for a
Building in Certain
Locations (40:55D-34b
and 35)
$150.00 $200.00
minimum
Zoning Historic District -
Residential
No Fee (included
with cost of Bldg.
Permit Fee)
Certificate of Occupancy $25.00
Non-Residential
Certificate of Occupancy
$50.00
Certified List of Property
Owners
$10.00 Not Applicable
Copy of Transcripts
[N.J.S.A. 2B:7-1]
$3.00 per page for
first copy plus $.50
per copy for each
additional copy
Not Applicable
Copy of Minutes or
Decisions
$.10 per page Not Applicable
Copy of Meeting Tapes $10.00/Tape Not Applicable
§ 2800 GENERAL § 2801
BH1:227
§ 2801. GUARANTEES AND INSPECTIONS.
A. No final plat shall be approved by the approving authority until all
improvements (onsite, offsite, and off-tract), for which a bond is
required in the public interest, have been installed, inspected, and
certified as approved and conforming to the requirements of this
Ordinance and any other applicable law, including the conditions of
preliminary approval by the Municipal Engineer and the approving
authority, and a maintenance guarantee has been filed and accepted by
the governing body in accordance with the requirements of this section,
or their installation shall have been provided for by a performance
guarantee accepted and approved by the governing body in accordance
with the requirements of this section. No maintenance guarantee shall
be accepted nor shall any partial facility be accepted for any item which
has further stages or work to be completed or which will need to be
altered or reworked in any manner due to the installation or connection
of any other facility.
B. The performance guarantee cost estimate shall be based on the cost of
the installation of all improvements required for final approval or for
the issuance of a zoning permit, as the case may be. In calculating such
estimate, allowance shall be made for the cost of any prevailing wage
determined pursuant to State or Federal law if such wage would have to
be paid by the Borough or party under contract with it were the
Borough to install the improvements on default of the obligor on the
guarantee. The performance guarantee cost estimates shall take into
account improvements installed prior to application for approval that
do not meet the standards of this Ordinance or other regulations.
C. A performance guarantee cost estimate shall be submitted to the
approving authority by the Borough Engineer as part of his report on
preliminary and final plat review. The approving authority may request
the Borough Engineer to review and update this estimate from time to
time, as required.
D. The proposed performance guarantee required for final plat approval
shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer and Borough Attorney for
recommendations as to accuracy and form and then to the governing
body for approval and acceptance by resolution.
1. The portion of the performance guarantee consisting of cash or
certified check shall be deposited with the Borough by payment to
the Borough Treasurer. The Borough Treasurer shall issue a receipt
for such deposits and shall retain the deposits as security for
completion of all requirements, to be returned to the developer on
completion of all required work or, in the event of default on the
part of the developer, to be used by the Borough to pay the costs of
completing the requirements. If the required improvements are not
completed or corrected in accordance with the performance
guarantee and the standards of the Borough within the stipulated
time, but not longer than 2 years, the obligor and surety for any
§ 2801 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2801
BH1:228
bond shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable
cost of the improvements not completed or corrected and, upon
authorization by the governing body, the Borough Attorney shall
take the necessary steps to obtain such cost from the obligor
and surety. The Borough may, either prior to or after receipt of
the process of the performance guarantee, complete such
improvements.
2. The total performance guarantee shall equal 120 percent of the
cost of installation to be determined by the Borough Engineer
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 and shall include a time limit, not
to exceed 2 years, for the proper and complete installation of the
improvements for which the guarantee is given. Ninety percent of
this total shall be in either cash, certified check, or surety bond, as
specified above. The remaining 10 percent shall be in cash and
shall be paid in like manner and under the same conditions as the
security aforesaid. In the event of default, the 10 percent cash fund
herein mentioned shall be first applied to the completion of the
requirements and the additional cash, certified check, or surety
bond shall thereafter be resorted to, if necessary, for the
completion of the requirements. The surety bond or document
submitted and approved with the cash or certified check may recite
the foregoing provision. The Borough Engineer's certification that
the principal has satisfactorily installed or has defaulted in meeting
the required standards of construction shall be the basis for
governing body action which accepts or rejects the improvements,
withholds approval, or extends the time allowed for installation of
the improvements.
E. The Borough Clerk shall immediately notify the approving authority and
the Borough Engineer when the performance guarantee has been
approved and accepted by the governing body.
F. Prior to beginning construction, the developer shall arrange for a
preconstruction conference between the developer, contractor, and
Borough Engineer. All improvements and utility installations shall be
inspected during the time of their installation by the Borough Engineer
or his representative to ascertain satisfactory completion. The Borough
Engineer shall be notified by the developer 5 days in advance of the
start of construction. The cost of said inspection shall be the
responsibility of the developer. The developer shall deposit a certified
check or bank money order with the Borough Clerk in the amount
stated below for the purpose of covering all reasonable inspection fees
to be paid to the Borough Engineer for the inspection of improvements.
1. The deposit shall be in addition to the amount of the performance
guarantee and all application fees and shall be computed as
follows:
2. The construction inspection fee deposit is to be calculated from the
following tabulation based on the estimated cost of constructing
§ 2801 GENERAL § 2801
BH1:229
the improvements (calculated in the same manner as a
performance guarantee cost estimate), which estimate is to be
prepared and submitted by the applicant's engineer and approved
by the Borough Engineer, with the concurrence of the approving
authority.
a. In addition to the performance guarantee provided for above,
the developer shall deposit with the borough treasurer in cash
or equivalent an amount equal to the following amounts to
defray the costs of inspection fees which shall be based on the
cost of construction estimate:
(1) $0 to $3,000.00 12.0% of the total.
(2) $3,001.00 to $5,000.00 $360.00 plus 11.5% of the
amount over $3,001.00
(3) $5,001.00 to $25,000.00 $590.00 plus 11.0% of the
amount over $5,001.00.
(4) $25,001.00 to
$50,000.00
$2,790.00 plus 10.25% of the
amount over $25,001.01.
(5) $50,001.00 -
$100,000.00
$5,352.50 plus 9.5% of the
amount over $50,001.00.
(6) $100,001.00 to
$250,000.00
$10,102.50 plus 6.0% of the
amount over $100,001.00.
(7) $250,001.00 to
$500,000.00
$19,102.50 plus 4.0% of the
amount over $250,001.00.
(8) $500,001.00 to
$750,000.00
$29,102.50 plus 3.75% of the
amount over $500,001.00.
(9) $750,001.00 to
$1,000,000.00
$38,477.50 plus 3.75% of the
amount over $750,001.01.
(10) $1,000,001.00 and over $47,852.50 plus 3.75% of the
amount over $1,000,001.00.
3. Improvement costs as estimated in this section shall include
construction and installation costs of grading, pavement, drainage
structures, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and other means of
sewage disposal and facilities, water mains, fire protection
features, streets, gutters, curbs, culverts, site lighting, shade trees,
parking areas, landscaping, street signs, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvement of open space,
and other required improvements.
G. The deposit shall be utilized to reimburse the Borough for all
reasonable inspection fees billed by the Borough Engineer for the
inspection of improvements. Prior to the utilization of any of such
deposit for the reimbursement of such fees, the developer shall be
notified in writing by the Borough Engineer. If the developer objects to
the amount of such fees as unreasonable, he shall notify the Engineer in
§ 2801 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2801
BH1:230
writing of such objection within 10 days of the giving of such notice,
otherwise he shall be deemed to have waived any right to object to the
amount of such fees. In the event the developer objects, his objections
shall be heard by the governing body who shall thereafter decide the
amount of the fee and authorize payment to the Borough Engineer. Any
of the deposit not required for the reimbursement of the inspection fees
shall be returned to the developer. The developer shall reimburse the
Borough, however, for the amount of such reasonable inspection fees
over and above the amount of the deposit.
H. Electrical, gas, telephone, and all other utility installations installed by
utility companies shall also be subject to the inspection requirements
contained herein.
I. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued only when the installation of
curbs, utilities, functioning water supply, and sewage treatment
facilities, necessary storm drainage to insure proper drainage of the lot
and surrounding land, rough grading of lots, soil stabilization, and base
course for the street and driveway are installed to serve the lot and
structure for which the certificate is requested. It is permissible that
streets not receive surface course paving until all heavy construction is
completed. Shade trees shall not be planted until grading and earth
moving is completed. Seeding of grass areas shall be in the final
operation.
J. Inspection by the Borough Engineer of the installation of improvements
and utilities shall not subject the municipality to liability for claims,
suits, or liability of any kind that may arise because of defects or
negligence, it being recognized that the responsibility to provide proper
utilities and improvements and to maintain safe conditions at all times
on all parts of the tract, whether construction is waiting to start, is in
progress, or is completed, is the responsibility of the developer, not the
Borough Engineer.
K. After completing the construction of the improvements covered by the
performance guarantee, the developer shall prepare 2 sets of plans of
the improvements and utility plans and the profiles amended to read "as
constructed," which shall be submitted to the governing body. Upon
substantial completion of all required utility improvements, and the
connection of the same to any public system, the obligor may notify the
governing body in writing by certified mail, addressed in care of the
Borough Clerk, of the completion of said improvements and shall send a
copy of such notification to the Borough Engineer. Thereupon, the
Borough Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements of which such
notice has been given and shall, within 30 days of completing the
inspection, report in writing to the governing body indicating either
approval, partial approval, or rejection of such improvements with a
statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the improvements, as
approved or rejected, shall be set forth.
§ 2801 GENERAL § 2801
BH1:231
L. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve, or reject
the improvements on the basis of the report of the Borough Engineer
and shall notify the obligor in writing by certified mail of the content of
said report and the action of said approving authority with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the required notice from
the obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial
approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements not yet
approved (provided that 30 percent of the amount of the performance
guarantee posted may be retained to insure completion of all
improvements). Failure of the governing body to send or provide such
notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute
approval of the improvements and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be
released from all liability pursuant to such performance guarantee for
such improvements.
M. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this
section, shall be followed.
N. The approval of any plat under this Ordinance by the approving
authority shall in no way be construed as acceptance of any street,
drainage system, or other improvement required by this Ordinance, nor
shall such plat approval obligate the Borough in any way to maintain or
exercise jurisdiction over such street, drainage system, or other
improvement. Acceptance of any street, drainage system, or other
improvement shall be implemented only by specific and appropriate
action by the governing body.
O. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120 percent
of the cost of installation as determined by the Borough Engineer
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
P. Maintenance Guarantee.
No improvement shall be accepted by the governing body unless and
until all of the following conditions have been met.
1. The Borough Engineer shall have certified in writing that all the
improvements are complete and that they comply fully with the
requirements of this Ordinance and of other applicable law.
2. Except where waived as hereinafter provided, a maintenance
guarantee shall have been posted with the governing body for a
period of 2 years after final acceptance of the improvements in an
§ 2801 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2801
BH1:232
§ 2802. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES REPEALED.
All ordinances or part of ordinances which are consistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency. Upon the adoption of this Ordinance, the following are
hereby repealed:
§ 2803. INTERPRETATION.
amount equal to 15 percent of the cost of improvement as
determined by the Borough Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4. The requirement for a maintenance guarantee may
be waived by the approving authority as to particular, or all,
improvements where the Borough Engineer has certified that such
improvements have been in continuous use and satisfactorily
maintained for some period of time, not less than one year from
the date that the Borough Engineer certified the completion of
such improvements to the approving authority, such use and
maintenance giving reasonable assurance that the maintenance
guarantee can be waived.
Q. Proviso.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be
installed or the improvements are covered by a performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no
performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be
required by the Borough for such utilities or improvements.
A. The Ordinance creating a Planning Board in the Borough of Flemington.
B. The Ordinance known as the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the
Borough of Flemington and all amendments and supplements thereto.
C. The Ordinance known as the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Flemington and all amendments and supplements thereto.
D. The Development Regulations Ordinance of the Borough of Flemington,
and all amendments and supplements thereto.
A. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum
requirements. If there are any inconsistencies within this Ordinance, or
if this Ordinance conflicts with any other ordinance, statute, rule or
regulation, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher
standards shall control.
B. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines,
streams, and lot or property lines unless otherwise indicated by
dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be in feet,
measured horizontally and measured from the street right-of-way line
even if the centerline of that street serves as a zoning district line. The
§ 2801 GENERAL § 2803
BH1:233
§ 2804. PERMITS.
location of any disputed zoning district line shall be determined by
the Board of Adjustment. Zoning district lines extend vertically in both
directions from ground level.
C. Where a zoning district line divides a lot, the zoning district line may be
modified by the owner by moving the zoning district line up to the
property line, provided the property line is within 50 feet of the zoning
district line as shown on the Zoning Map. A use or structure permitted
in the zoning district so extended shall thereafter be a permitted use or
structure in the extended area. A zoning district line shall be altered
only once by utilizing this section of the Ordinance after which the use
shall be governed by the district in which it is located after the
adjustment.
A. No site improvements such as, but not limited to, excavation or
construction of public or private improvements shall be commenced,
except in conformance with this Ordinance in accordance with
development approvals and the issuance of required permits.
B. Prior to any change in the use of any land or building where the
changed use is affected by the requirements of this Ordinance, the
developer or his authorized agent shall apply for a zoning permit,
except that no separate zoning permit shall be required in any case in
which the change in use will require a building permit. The application
for a zoning or building permit shall be on forms to be provided by the
Borough and shall contain such information, sketches, plans, and data
as may be required to determine compliance with this Ordinance. The
Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit, or endorse the building
permit, if he determines that the proposed use conforms with the
requirements of this Ordinance and any necessary subdivision, site plan
or conditional use approval has been granted. No building permit shall
be issued under the Borough Building Code unless and until the
Building Inspector has determined that the proposed use and building
conform fully to the provisions of this Ordinance and until any
necessary subdivision, site plan, or conditional use approval has been
granted. The applicant shall supply such sketches, maps, plans, deed
description, or such other information as may be necessary to
determine conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance.
C. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a file of all permits granted, together
with all applications, and shall make copies of the permits available to
the agencies and officials designated by the Borough Council.
D. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or
enlarged, wholly or in part, until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have
been issued by the Construction Official and no such certificate shall be
issued unless the land, building, and use thereof comply with this
Ordinance, all matters incorporated on the approved subdivision or site
§ 2803 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2804
BH1:234
§ 2805. VALIDITY.
If any section, paragraph, clause, or other provision "or application" of this
Ordinance shall be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such adjudication
shall apply only to the section, paragraph, clause, or provision so adjudged
and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and effective.
plan have been completed and certified by the Borough Engineer, and
the construction and applicable Board of Health Codes are complied
with.
E. Certificate of Occupancy.
1. With respect to any finally approved subdivision and/or site plan or
subsection thereof, a Certificate of Occupancy for each use within
the subdivision and/or site plan shall be issued only upon payment
of all fees, the posting and continued effectiveness of any required
performance and maintenance guarantees, upon compliance with
all other applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and regulations,
and upon completion of the following improvements for the lot in
question and for that portion of the tract serving the use such as
providing access to it, providing stormwater facilities to control
stormwater flows to, through, and beyond the site in question, or
similar services where the following improvements have been
required as part of the subdivision and/or site plan approval:
a. Curbs.
b. All utilities.
c. Water supply and sewerage treatment facilities, which shall be
functioning and servicing each use for which a certificate of
occupancy is being requested.
d. Storm drainage facilities.
e. Rough drainage facilities.
f. Base course of the street(s) serving the property.
g. Base course of driveways and parking areas.
2. With respect to any individual residential lot within a subdivision, a
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued only upon the completion
of the following improvements, in addition to those listed in
Subsection E1 above, to the extent the same are required as part of
a subdivision approval:
a. Sidewalks.
b. Driveway aprons.
c. Street names and traffic regulatory signs.
§ 2804 GENERAL § 2806
BH1:235
§ 2806. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 2807. SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
Subdivision approval pursuant to this Ordinance is required for subdivisions
(except exempt subdivisions). The submittal of an application for site plan
approval shall not limit the requirements for submission and approval of
subdivisions as otherwise required by this Ordinance.
No subdivision plat shall be filed and no deed describing subdivided land
requiring subdivision approval shall be recorded with the County Recording
Officer until the required minor or final major subdivision approval has been
obtained from the approving authority.
§ 2808. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
No construction permit shall be issued for any new structure, a change of
use of an existing structure or addition to an existing structure until a site
plan has been reviewed and approved by the approving authority except for
the following:
A. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building structure or land is
used, in violation of this Ordinance; or any regulation made under
authority conferred hereby or any approval granted hereunder or the
conditions of such approval, the violator shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000.00 or 90 days in jail for each violation. Each day in which
the offense occurs shall constitute a separate violation. Further, the
proper local authorities of the Borough or any interested party, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to
restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
B. If, before any final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer any land which forms a part of a
subdivision for which municipal approval is required by this Ordinance,
such persons shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 and
each lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation.
In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
1. For injunctive relief, and
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale, if a Certificate of Compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 2806 FLEMINGTON CODE § 2808
BH1:236
Chapter LDDL
LAND DEVELOPMENT DISPOSITION LIST
§ LDDL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Land Development Ordinance adopted September 9, 1999. Compiled and
updated through February 2007 by the Borough of Flemington.
Additional ordinances interpolated:
A. Construction permits for individual lot applications involving only a
detached one- or two-dwelling unit building, except for those in a
planned residential development as to which no final site plan approval
has been granted.
B. Accessory buildings as otherwise permitted for detached one- or twofamily
dwellings.
C. Other buildings accessory to residential principal uses.
D. Any change of use from one permitted principal use to another
permitted principal use, if, in the opinion of the Administrative Officer,
the parking and traffic circulation provisions existing on the site shall
be adequate and sufficient for the proposed use.
E. The alteration or repair of an existing building which is not either a
detached one- or two-dwelling unit building upon determination by the
Administrative Officer that the alterations or repair:
1. Will not result in additional lot coverage whether by buildings or
site improvements; except that a nonresidential structure which
increases the existing building coverage by 10 percent or less shall
not require site plan approval if, in the opinion of the
Administrative Officer, such addition or alteration shall not create
nuisance problems to adjoining land uses;
2. Will not increase the number of required off-street parking or
loading spaces;
3. Will conform to the maximum and minimum standards as set forth
in Chapter 16; and
4. Is not proposed in conjunction with a use requiring a conditional
use permit.
Such exemption from site plan review shall not apply to any use,
building, structure, or landscape either currently listed on the
local, State or National Register of Historic Places, or proposed for
inclusion on such register or registers in the Historic Preservation
Element of the Master Plan.
§ 2808 GENERAL § LDDL-1
BH1:237
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Title
Supp.
No.
2009-3 4-13-09 Affordable Housing Development
Fees, § 2634
2009-4 5-9-09 Affordable housing procedural
requirements - Third Round Fair
Share § 2632, Affirmative
marketing procedures § 2633
2009-15 10-26-09 Inclusionary Housing Overlay
District § 2635
2010-3 3-8-10 Applications - submission checklist
§ 1516
2010-17 11-22-10 Historic district and landmark
review § 1631
2011-8 4-11-11 Sign Review Committee § 1401
2011-10 5-9-11 Conditional uses in Village
Shopping Zone § 2623
2011-17 9-2-11 Area, yard and building coverage in
Village Shopping Zone § 2623
2011-25 12-12-11 Definitions § 2601
2011-26 12-12-11 Redevelopment Office/Senior
Housing Overlay District § 2640
2012-01 3-12-12 Green Building and Environmental
Sustainability Implementing
Ordinance. Definitions § 1201,
lighting § 1633, connectivity and
complete streets § 1634, Zoning
Districts §§ 2613, 2614, 2615, 2616,
2617, 2618, 2619, 2620, 2621,
2622, 2623, 2624, 2625, 2626,
additional standards for all districts
§ 2627, parking number of spaces
§ 2629, solid waste § 2636,
impervious cover § 2637, local food
§ 2638, solar energy facilities
§ 2639
2012-03 2-13-12 Applications - submission checklist
§ 1516
2012-06 4-10-12 Temporary banners § 2631
§ LDDL-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § LDDL-1
BH1:238
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Title
Supp.
No.
2012-15 9-24-12 Revise Village Shopping District
(VS) to Village Artisan Shopping
District (VAS). Definitions § 1201,
Zoning Districts §§ 2610, 2620,
2621, 2623, 2631
2013-11 7-15-13 Adopt Zoning Map dated June 2013
§ 2611
2013-13 9-9-13 Temporary banners § 2631 1
2014-4 4-16-14 Amends Land Development;
readopts 2620, Downtown Business
District, amends outdoor dining
areas, 2620F2
2
2014-5 4-16-14 Amends Land Development,
readopts 2623, Village and Artisan
Shopping District; amends 2623F2,
outdoor dining areas
2
2014-6 4-16-14 Amends Land Development;
readopts 2618, Transitional
Commercial District; amends
outdoor dining areas, 2618E3
2
2014-7 5-12-14 Amends Land Development;
readopts 2621, Downtown Business
II District; amends outdoor dining
areas, 2621F2
2
2015-19 9-28-15 Amends Ch. 26, Zoning; 1201,
definitions; 2623, Village Artisan
Shopping (VAS) District, 26-20,
Downtown Business (DB) District;
2621, Downtown II Business (DBII)
District-adds brewery as a
permitted use
3
2016-12 5-23-16 Amends Land Development Volume;
2631A1c(5) We Love Flemington
banner
4
2017-9 8-14-17 Amends Ch. 12 Land Development
Definitions; 1201 Words and Terms
Defined; amends Ch. 2 Zoning;
2632 Affordable Housing
Procedural Requirements; adds
Municipal Housing Liaison and
Administration subsections P2 and
P3; adds subsection Q Enforcement
of Affordable Housing Regulations
5
§ LDDL-1 GENERAL § LDDL-1
BH1:239
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Title
Supp.
No.
2017-10 8-14-17 Amends Ch. 26 Zoning; 2610
Zoning Districts and 2611 Zoning
Map, removes language
Inclusionary: Housing Overlay
District; repeals 2635 Inclusionary
Housing Overlay District and adds
2635 Affordable Housing
Inclusionary Zoning Set - Aside
5
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2018-1 2-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 26 42
2018-8 5-14-2018 Land Development
Definitions
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 12; Ch.
26
42
2019-12 6-10-2019 Planning Board and
Historic Preservation
Commission
Amendment; Design
and Performance
Standards
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 14; Ch.
16; Ch. 26
42
2019-21 10-28-2019 Planning Board and
Historic Preservation
Commission
Amendment
Ch. 14 42
§ LDDL-1 FLEMINGTON CODE § LDDL-1
BH1:240