Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Town of Guttenberg (1993)", and is herein referred to as
the "Revision" or "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
BOARD OF COUNCIL — Shall mean the Governing Body of the Town of
Guttenberg elected pursuant to law.
CLERK OR TOWN CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Hudson.
DAYS — Shall mean the calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the Town
government established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Town
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Board of Council.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases, the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT — See tenant.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — And the title of an officer or official shall be
construed as if the words "of the Town of Guttenberg" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted
by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as
it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
1:1
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural person, partnership, joint
venture, society, association, club, firm, trustee, trust, corporation or
unincorporated group; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
of any kind or personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the Town.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, all
rights thereto and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and
the adjacent building line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall mean and include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public. "Street" shall be considered to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless
the contrary is expressed or unless such construction is inconsistent with
the apparent intent.
TENANT — As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
TOWN — Shall mean the Town of Guttenberg, in the County of Hudson and
the State of New Jersey. The word "Town" shall be construed as if the words
"of Guttenberg, New Jersey" followed it.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
§ 1-2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 1-3
1:2
"Shall" is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal
holiday, that day shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" includes printing, typewriting, and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code, identified by
Arabic numbers, and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter and/or Arabic number.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it has not been declared unconstitutional,
invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such
determination shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters,
sections, subsections or paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.1
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [New; Ord. No. 23-12]
For violation of any provision of this Code, or other ordinance of the Town
of Guttenberg unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection
with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the
violation shall be by one or more of the following: imprisonment in the
County jail or in any place provided by the municipality for the detention
of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days; and/or by a fine not
1. Editor's Note: Penalty provision taken from N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5.1
1:3
exceeding $2,000; and/or by a period of community service not exceeding
90 days.2
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Board of Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed
at an amount not exceeding $100. The court before which any person is
convicted of violating any ordinance or Code provision shall have power to
impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community service not
less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or
such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned
in the County jail or place of detention provided by the Town, for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
2. Note: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, any municipality that chooses to impose a fine in an
amount greater than $1,250 upon an owner for violations of housing or zoning codes shall
provide a thirty-day period in which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or
abate the condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a court
of competent jurisdiction for an independent determination concerning the violation.
Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be
imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the property, it
is determined that the abatement has not been substantially completed. (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29)
§ 1-5.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 1-5.6
1:4
§ 1-5.6. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all,
may be appropriate for a particular case or violation.
§ 1-6. CODE OF THE TOWN OF GUTTENBERG TO BE MAINTAINED
BY TOWN CLERK. [New]
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
"The Code of the Town of Guttenberg, 1992" required to be filed in the office
of the Town Clerk for the use of the public. All changes in the Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Board of Council subsequent to the adoption of
the Code, which the Board of Council shall adopt specifically as a part of
the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such change or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Code, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE; PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATION. [New]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Town
of Guttenberg to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section
of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in
Section 1-5.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5

ARTICLE I
Mayor and Board of Council
§ 2-1. (RESERVED)
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1
1:7

ARTICLE II
Meetings of the Board of Council
§ 2-2. TIME OF MEETING ESTABLISHED. [Ord. 12/19/83 § 1; New]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:45 A-1, the annual reorganization meeting
of the Mayor and Board of Council of the Town of Guttenberg shall be held
at 8:00 p.m. on the first Wednesday of January except that should January
1 fall on Wednesday, then the reorganization meeting shall be held at 8:00
p.m. on January 2 that year.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:9

ARTICLE III
Municipal Offices
§ 2-3. TOWN CLERK.
§ 2-3.1. (Reserved)
§ 2-3.2. Deputy Town Clerk. [Ord. 4/17/72 § 2; Ord. 0315-89A §§ I, II,
IV, V]
§ 2-4. TOWN ATTORNEY.
§ 2-4.1. Appointment and Term. [Ord. 1/18/54; Ord. #007/07; Ord.
No. 08-2017]
There hereby is created the position of Town attorney who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Council and shall hold office for a term of one
year.
§ 2-4.2. Duties. [Ord. 4/7/47 § VII; Ord. 2/4/52 § 1; Ord. 1/18/54 § 1;
Ord. 4/17/72 § 1; Ord. #007/07; Ord. No. 08-2017]
The Town Attorney shall render such legal advice and counsel as may be
required by the Mayor, Town Council, employees and departments for the
Town of Guttenberg; shall appear as the attorney of record in all court
proceedings wherein the Town or any department or officer thereof shall
be a party by virtue of their official relationship; attend all meetings of
the Town Council whether regular, caucus, adjourned or special; advise the
Mayor and Council, Town Administrator and Town Clerk upon their request
a. Created. There is hereby created the position of Deputy Town Clerk in
the Town of Guttenberg.
b. Duties. The duties of the Deputy Town Clerk shall include, but not be
limited to, working under the direction of and assisting the Town Clerk
in carrying out of the functions of his or her office; such functions
include, inter alia, serving as the Chief Administrative Clerk of the
Town, dealing with and assisting the public or directing the public to
the appropriate person or office for assistance, and implementing and
enforcing all personnel policies established by the Mayor and Board of
Council of the Town of Guttenberg for all administrative personnel of
the Town who fall under the supervisory jurisdiction of the Governing
Body.
c. Appointment. The Deputy Town Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Board of Council, for a term of three
years, which will expire on December 31 every third year. [Amended
7-22-2019 by Ord. No. 17-19]
d. Salary. The salary for the position of Deputy Town Clerk shall be
established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4.2
1:11
on any and all legal matters relating to the Town Government; advise
all department heads on legal matter relating to their departments and
Town Government; prepare and supervise the preparation of all contracts,
deeds and other legal documents required by the Town Council and Town
Administrator; attend all meetings and consultations as directed by the
Mayor and Council on behalf of the Town; and provide all such other legal
services as may be directed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-4.3. Compensation. [Ord. 4/17/72; Ord. #007/07; Ord. No.
08-2017]
The Town Attorney shall be subject to 40A:11-5. Therefore, the Town
Attorney shall receive no annual salary. The Town Attorney shall be
compensated through a contract with the law firm which he/she is
associated in accordance with an agreement for such fees as shall be
approved by the Mayor and Council. The law firm shall be compensated
by the Town for services rendered and reimbursed by the Town for
disbursements made and expenses incurred, within the limits of designated
appropriations.
§ 2-5. MUNICIPAL PROSECUTOR.
§ 2-5.1. Appointment; Compensation. [Ord. 2/17/75 § I; Ord. #003/
00]
The appointment of the Municipal Prosecutor or an additional Municipal
Prosecutor as needed, shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council for
one-year terms, at a salary set forth by the salary ordinance of the Town
of Guttenberg. Said Municipal Prosecutor or the additional Municipal
Prosecutor shall appear on the local Municipal Court level, at all regular
stated court sessions of the Municipal Court of Guttenberg, New Jersey.
Appeals or other extraordinary proceedings, litigation or unforeseen
services or matters shall be subject to such additional fees or costs as
necessary and required, in accordance with standards of the New Jersey
and Hudson Bar Associations on claim, subject, however, in each case, to
approval by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-6. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
§ 2-6.1. Position Created. [Ord. 6/7/89 § I; New]
There is hereby created the position of Chief Financial Officer of the Town
of Guttenberg.
§ 2-6.2. Duties. [Ord. 4/7/47 § V; Ord. 4/5/54 § I]
The Chief Financial Officer shall be the custodian of Town funds committed
to his keeping, and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by
the laws of the State of New Jersey and by resolutions of the Mayor and
Board of Council, pertaining to the office of Chief Financial Officer. He shall
§ 2-4.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-6.2
1:12
maintain regular office hours as designated by the Mayor and Board of
Council when not engaged elsewhere on Town business. He shall perform
such other compatible duties as the Mayor and Board of Council shall
assign. He shall serve for such term as is fixed by law for Chief Financial
Officers and shall be paid the sum established in the Salary Ordinance,
payable weekly.
§ 2-6.3. Compensation. [Ord. 6/7/89 § II]
The salary of the Chief Financial Officer shall be established in the Salary
Ordinance.
§ 2-7. TREASURER.
§ 2-7.1. Position Created. [Ord. 6/7/89 § I; New]
There is hereby created the position of Treasurer of the Town of
Guttenberg.
§ 2-7.2. Duties. [Ord. 4/5/54 § V]
The Treasurer shall be the custodian of Town funds committed to his
keeping, and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by the laws
of the State of New Jersey and by resolutions of the Mayor and Board
of Council, pertaining to the office of Treasurer. He shall serve as a full
time employee in performing such duties, and shall maintain regular office
hours as designated by the Mayor and Board of Council when not engaged
elsewhere on Town business. He shall perform such other compatible duties
as the Mayor and Board of Council shall assign. He shall serve for such term
as is fixed by law for Treasurers, and shall be paid the sum established in
the Salary Ordinance, payable weekly.
§ 2-7.3. Compensation. [Ord. 6/7/89 § II]
The salary of the Treasurer shall be established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-8. TAX COLLECTOR.
§ 2-8.1. Duties; Term. [Ord. 4/7/47 § 1; Ord. 1/15/51 § II; Ord. 4/5/54
§ 1]
The Tax Collector shall have the duty of collecting and accounting for taxes
and assessments due to the Town of Guttenberg, in addition to such other
duties as may be prescribed by the laws of the State of New Jersey. The Tax
Collector shall hold office for such term as is prescribed by Statute and shall
be compensated at the annual salary established in the Salary Ordinance.
The Tax Collector shall perform such other additional administrative duties
pertaining to Town business as the Mayor and Board of Council shall
assign, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on two days of each
§ 2-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8.1
1:13
week as designated by the Mayor and Board of Council at such additional
compensation as shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-8.2. Deputy Tax Collector. [Ord. 7/16/84]
The appointment of a Deputy Tax Collector is hereby authorized for oneyear
terms expiring June 30th of each year to assist the Tax Collector and
under the direction of the Tax Collector in the management of the collection
of taxes in the Town.
§ 2-9. TAX ASSESSOR.
§ 2-9.1. Duties. [Ord. 47/47 § 1; Ord. 1/15/51 § II; Ord. 4/7/47 § 1]
The Tax Assessor shall have and perform the duties of levying and assessing
all taxes and assessments on behalf of the Town of Guttenberg, and of
defending and upholding all such levies and assessments, pursuant to the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-9.2. Hours Designated. [Ord. 4/7/47 § 1; Ord. 1/15/51 § II; Ord.
4/5/54 § 1]
He shall maintain regular office hours as designated by the Mayor and
Board of Council when not engaged elsewhere on Town business. He shall
perform such other compatible duties as the Mayor and Board of Council
shall assign. He shall serve for such term as is fixed by law for assessors,
and shall be paid the salary established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-9.3. Designated as Administrative Officer. [Ord. #016/97]
The Tax Assessor of the Town of Guttenberg shall be designated as the
Administrative Officer of the Town of Guttenberg who shall be responsible
for, within seven days of receipt of a written request for same, making and
certifying a list from the current tax duplicates of names and addresses of
owners to whom any applicant before a Land Use Board in the Town of
Guttenberg is required to give notice of his, her or its application pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12(b).
§ 2-9.4. Deputy Tax Assessor. [Ord. #007/09]
The Tax Assessor Office will have the position of Deputy Tax Assessor who
shall have all of the powers and duties of the Tax Assessor as defined in
Subsection 2-9.1 and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 through 40A:9-148.1.
§ 2-10. TOWN AUDITS.
a. The salary and deputy tax assessor shall be established by ordinance.
§ 2-8.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-10.1
1:14
§ 2-10.1. Duties. [Ord. 4/7/47 § IX]
The Town Auditor shall audit the books of the Town Officials and employees
in conformity with the requirements of the State of New Jersey and the
Board of Council and shall perform such other and additional services as
may be required of him.
§ 2-11. PURCHASING DIRECTOR.
§ 2-11.1. Appointment. [Ord. 12/7/87 § XXVIII]
The appointment of Purchasing Director is hereby authorized for one-year
terms expiring June 30th annually.
§ 2-11.2. Duties. [Ord. 12/7/87 § XXVIII]
The Purchasing Director shall establish, maintain and control a centralized
purchasing system and assist the Department of Finance in maintaining an
encumbrance system as required by law.
The salary for such position shall be established by ordinance.
§ 2-12. OPERATIONS MANAGER.
§ 2-12.1. Position Created. [Ord. #022/97 § I]
There is hereby created the position of Operations Manager.
§ 2-12.2. Duties. [Ord. #022/97 § II]
Duties of the Operations Manager shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Making recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Council
concerning the nature and location of municipal improvements.
b. Attending all meetings of the Mayor and Board of Council which are
open to the public.
c. Recommending to the Mayor and Council for adoption such measures
as he or she may deem necessary or expedient.
d. Making reports to the Mayor and Council as requested.
e. Supervising any department or departments of the Town for which no
department head has been appointed by the Mayor and Council.
f. Serving as Town Recycling Coordinator.
g. Performing such other duties related to the day to day operations of the
Town as may be assigned by the Mayor.
§ 2-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-12.3
1:15
§ 2-12.3. Salary. [Ord. #022/97 § III]
The salary of the Operations Manager shall be as set forth in the Town
Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-13. MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-13.1. Position Created. [Ord. #04/98 § 1]
There shall be and hereby is created in the Town of Guttenberg, the office
of Municipal Administrator.
§ 2-13.2. Appointment. [Ord. #04/98 § 2]
A person appointed to the office of Municipal Administrator in the Town of
Guttenberg need not be a resident of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-13.3. Duties. [Ord. #04/98 § 3; Ord. #009/00; Ord. #002/01]
The duties of the Municipal Administrator of the Town of Guttenberg shall
include:
a. Being the chief executive and administrative official of the municipality;
b. Executing all laws and ordinances of the Town of Guttenberg;
c. Appointing and removing all department heads and all other officers,
subordinates, and assistants with the advice and consent of the Mayor
and Board of Council of the Town Guttenberg;
d. Supervising all employees of the Town of Guttenberg;
e. (Reserved)
f. Making certain that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the
Town of Guttenberg or its inhabitants in any statute, public utility
franchise or other contract are faithfully kept and performed, and upon
knowledge of any violation call such violation to the attention of the
Mayor and Board of Council;
g. Attending all meetings of the Mayor and Board of Council with the right
to take part in discussions but without the right to vote;
h. Recommending to the Mayor and Board of Council, for adoption by
them, such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient,
keeping the Mayor and Board of Council advised of the financial
condition of the municipality, making such reports to the Mayor and
Board as may be requested by it, and, at least once a year, making an
annual report of his work for the benefit of the Mayor and Board of
Council and the public in general;
i. Investigating at any time the affairs of any officer or department of the
Town of Guttenberg;
§ 2-12.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-13.3
1:16
§ 2-13.4. Full-Time Position. [Ord. #04/98 § 4; Ord. #009/00; Ord.
No. 02-2017]
The position of Municipal Administrator shall be considered a full-time
position of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-13.5. Salary. [Ord. #04/98 § 5; Ord. #009/00; Ord. No. 02-2015]
The annual salary to be paid to the Municipal Administrator appointed
pursuant to the authority of this section shall be as set forth by the Salary
Ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-14. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.3
§ 2-14.1. Position Created. [Ord. #03/99 § II]
There is hereby created the administrative position of Director of Public
Safety of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-14.2. Appointment, Term. [Ord. #03/99 § III; Ord. #018/04]
The Director of Public Safety shall be appointed by the Mayor and Board
of Council. All employees not affiliated with, or members of a labor union
shall be deemed "employees at will," employed at the will of the Town of
Guttenberg, with employment for no definite or established length of time,
and subject to termination at any time, for any reason, or for no reason at
all, consistent with law and Town of Guttenberg's ordinances, regulations
and policies.
§ 2-14.3. Qualifications.
Any person seeking appointment to the position of Director of Public Safety
shall demonstrate to the Mayor and Board of Council that he or she is
qualified for the position by virtue of training or experience. By way of
example and not limitation, such person may have prior law enforcement
experience and/or supervisory and administrative experience in either the
public or private sector.
j. (Reserved)
k. (Reserved)
l. Performing such other duties as may be required by legislative or other
directive of the Mayor and Board of Council of the Town of Guttenberg.
3. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 016/98 pertaining to the Department of Public Safety and
Director of the Department of Public Safety was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
03/99.
§ 2-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-14.4
1:17
§ 2-14.4. Duties. [Ord. #03/99 § V]
The duties of the Director of Public Safety shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
§ 2-14.5. Part-Time Position. [Ord. #03/99 § VI]
The position of Director of Public Safety shall be deemed a part-time
position calling for approximately 20 hours per week.
a. Exercising full control over the Police Department seeing, among other
things, to the proper enforcement of any rules and/or regulations
adopted by the Mayor and Board of Council, which shall be deemed the
appropriate authority under law.
b. Reporting, from time to time, to the Mayor and Board of Council such
matters related to the Police Department as may require their
attention.
c. Interviewing candidates for appointment to and/or promotion in the
Police Department and making recommendations for such appointment
and/or promotion to the Mayor and Board of Council, which shall
determine and make all appointments and promotions.
d. Bringing charges, when appropriate, against any member of the Police
Department and, pending a hearing on those charges before an
appropriate authority, suspend the charged member, with or without
pay, if the Director deems such a suspension necessary to the good
order and discipline of the Police Department.
e. Developing programs of continuing education for the members of the
Police Department to insure the highest level of training for the
members of the Department.
f. Establishing and maintaining communications with schools and public
and private associations to help such schools and associations
understand and cooperate in the public safety effort of the community.
g. Establishing performance criteria for the members of the Police
Department and periodically evaluating the members under the
established criteria.
h. Working with the Chief Financial Officer of the Town of Guttenberg to
establish the annual operating budget for the Police Department.
i. Reviewing land use applications, when requested to do so by the
Guttenberg Planning/Zoning Board, to ascertain the potential impact of
any proposed land use project on the safety of Town of Guttenberg
residents and/or property.
j. Performing such other duties as may be reasonably requested by the
Mayor and Board of Council.
§ 2-14.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-14.6
1:18
§ 2-14.6. Salary. [Ord. #03/99 § VII]
The annual salary of the first Director of Public Safety shall not exceed
$30,000. Thereafter the annual salary shall be as set forth in the salary
ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-14.7. Fire-Fighting Operations. [Ord. #03/99 § VIII]
Insofar as fire fighting operations within the Town of Guttenberg are
concerned, any operations that do not come under the authority and
supervision of the North Hudson Regional Fire and Rescue organization
shall be under the control and supervision of the Director of Public Safety.
§ 2-14.8. Deputy Director of Public Safety. [Ord. #05-14]
§ 2-15. PAYROLL CLERK.
§ 2-15.1. Position Created. [Ord. #026/02]
There is hereby created the position of Payroll Clerk.
a. Position Created. There is hereby created the position of Deputy
Director of Public Safety who shall perform such duties as may be
assigned and designated by the Director of Public Safety and the Mayor
and Council.
b. Duties. Where the Director of Public Safety is unavailable due to illness,
disability, or absence, the Deputy Director of Public Safety shall act in
his/her place and shall perform the duties of the Director of Public
Safety.
c. Qualifications. Any persons seeking appointment to the position of
Deputy Director of Public Safety shall demonstrate to the Mayor and
Board of Council that he/she is qualified for the position by virtue of
training or experience. By way of example and not limitation, such
person may have prior law enforcement experience and/or supervisory
and administrative experience in either the public or private sector.
d. Appointment, Term. The Deputy Director of Public Safety shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Board of Council, with employment for no
definite or established length of time, and is subject to termination at
any time, for any reason, or for no reason at all, consistent with law and
the Town of Guttenberg's ordinances, regulations and policies.
e. Part-Time Position. The position of Deputy Director of Public Safety
shall be deemed a part-time position calling for approximately 20 hours
per week.
f. Salary. The annual salary of the Deputy Director of Public Safety shall
be as set forth in the salary ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-14.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-15.2
1:19
§ 2-15.2. Duties and Qualifications. [Ord. #026/02]
Duties of the Payroll Clerk shall include, but not be limited to the following:
§ 2-16. DIRECTOR OF REVENUE AND FINANCE.
a. The Payroll Clerk later appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Town
of Guttenberg shall work under the supervision of the Chief Finance
Officer of the Town, or a person assigned by him, and shall perform the
work set forth herein.
b. The Payroll Clerk shall, under the direct supervision of the Chief
Financial Officer, perform the routine and repetitive clerical tasks
involved in the recording, checking, calculating and summarizing of the
working time of employees and shall do related work as required.
c. Example of the work performed by the Payroll Clerk:
1. Performs varied clerical tasks involved in preparing payrolls of a
simple, routine and repetitive nature.
2. Records, checks, calculates and summarizes the working of
employees.
3. Prepares payroll sheets.
4. Computes withholding taxes.
5. Calculates deductions to be made from the pay of individuals.
6. Refers errors and irregularities to superiors.
7. Gives routine information in person and over the phone.
8. Maintains established records and files where selection and
classification of data does not require difficult decisions and where
procedures are routinized.
d. Requirements. The Payroll Clerk shall have:
1. Some knowledge of modern office methods, practices and
equipment and of performing routine, repetitive and noncomplex
tasks involved in the keeping of financial and/or other records of a
mathematical nature.
2. The ability to:
(a) Read, write, speak and understand English sufficiently to
perform the duties of this position.
(b) Understand, remember and carry out oral and written
directions.
§ 2-15.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-16.1
1:20
§ 2-16.1. Position Created. [Ord. No. 08-2015]
There is hereby created the position of Director of Revenue and Finance.
§ 2-16.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 08-2015]
Under direction, the Director of Revenue and Finance shall plan, direct
and administer all activity pertaining to the management of the financial
resources of the entire Town of Guttenberg and in particular the Finance,
Tax Collection, Tax Assessment and Purchasing Departments.
§ 2-16.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 08-2015]
Any persons seeking appointment to the position of Director of Revenue and
Finance shall demonstrate to the Mayor and Board of Council that he/she
is qualified for the position by virtue of training or experience. By way of
example and not limitation, such person may have prior revenue and finance
experience and/or supervisory and administrative experience in either the
public or private sector.
§ 2-16.4. Appointment. [Ord. No. 08-2015]
The Director of Revenue and Finance shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Board of Council.
§ 2-16.5. Salary. [Ord. No. 08-2015]
The annual salary of the Director Revenue and Finance shall be as set forth
in the salary ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-17. DIRECTOR OF PERSONNEL.
§ 2-17.1. Position Created. [Ord. No. 06-2016]
There is hereby created the position of Director of Personnel.
§ 2-17.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 06-2016]
Under direction of the Town Administrator, the Director of Personnel shall
plan, direct and administer all activity pertaining to the management of the
personnel matters of the entire Town of Guttenberg. This shall include but
not be limited to:
a. Develop and administer the Town's personnel programs, including up to
date job classifications and pay plans, active recruitment of needed
personnel and in-service training programs.
b. Design, install and maintain personnel records for each Town officer
and employee, including any education, training, professional or trade
licenses of each employee, all personnel action taken with respect to
each employee and compensation and benefits of each employee.
§ 2-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17.2
1:21
§ 2-17.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 06-2016]
Any persons seeking appointment to the position of Director of Personnel
shall demonstrate to the Mayor and Board of Council that he/she is qualified
for the position by virtue of training or experience. By way of example and
not limitation, such person may have prior personnel experience and/or
supervisory and administrative experience in either the public or private
sector.
§ 2-17.4. Appointment. [Ord. No. 06-2016]
The Director of Personnel shall be appointed by the Mayor and Board of
Council.
§ 2-17.5. Salary. [Ord. No. 06-2016]
The annual salary of the Director of Personnel shall be as set forth in the
salary ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
c. Be in charge of all personnel matters and shall develop, install and
administer an orderly procedure for the consideration, review and
proper level of discipline including but not limited to suspension and/or
termination of personnel problems.
d. Any other personnel matter as requested by the Town Administrator or
the Mayor and Board of Council.
§ 2-17.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-17.5
1:22
ARTICLE IV
Departments
§ 2-18. POLICE DEPARTMENT. [Ord. No. 10-2018 replaced
references in § 2-18 from Chief of Police to Commander of
Operations.]
§ 2-18.1. Members. [Ord. 5/20/46 § 1; Ord. 7/26/68 § 1; Ord. 4/19/70
§ 1; Ord. 4/18/77 § 1; Ord. 7/7/80 § 1; Ord. 1-1981 § 1; Ord. 7/6/87
§ 1; Ord. 4/18/90 § 1; Ord. 2/6/91 § 1; Ord. 3/6/91 § 1; New; Ord. 0/2/
96; Ord. 005/97 §§ I - III; Ord. #029/97 § I; Ord. #030/97 § I; Ord.
#07/98 § 1; Ord. #02/99 §§ I - III; Ord. #032/00; Ord. #018-08; Ord.
#12-12; Ord. No. 15-2015; Ord. No. 18-2015; Ord. No. 17-2018]
§ 2-18.2. Appointment. [Ord. 5/20/46 § II; Ord. 005/97 § IV; Ord.
#030/97 § I; Ord. #018-08; Ord. No. 15-2015; Ord. No. 18-2015;
Ord. No. 17-2018]
a. The table of organization of the Police Department of the Town of
Guttenberg shall be as follows:
1. One Commander of Patrol Operations who shall hold the rank of
and receive the pay of Lieutenant.
2. One Commander of Staff/Administration who shall hold the rank of
and receive the pay of Lieutenant.
3. Six Sergeants.
4. Eighteen Police Officers, along with any Class I or Class II Special
Law Enforcement Officers, as may be appointed from time to time
by the Town of Guttenberg, in accordance with New Jersey Statues.
b. The salaries of any full-time regular Police Officer (not including any
Class I or Class II Special Law Enforcement Officers) shall be as set
forth in a collective bargaining agreement, as exists and agreed to
between the Town of Guttenberg and the collective bargaining unit that
represents the regular full-time Police Officers of the Police
Department.
c. The normal chain of command for police matters shall be (1) the
Director of Public Safety; (2) Lieutenant of Patrol Operations, (3)
Lieutenant and (4) Sergeant; (5) Police Officer, (6) Class II Law
Enforcement Officers; (7) Class I Law Enforcement Officers.
a. Lieutenant, Sergeant and Patrol Officer shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Board of Council by Resolution.
The assignment of each Lieutenant to either the Patrol Operations or
Staff/Administrative Officer shall be made by the Guttenberg Police
Committee after consideration of the recommendation of the
Guttenberg Director of Public Safety. The Guttenberg Police Committee
§ 2-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18.2
1:23
§ 2-18.3. Removal from Office. [Ord. 5/20/46 § III]
No member of the Police Department shall be removed from his office or
employment except for cause and in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 2-18.4. Committee on Police. [Ord. 5/20/46 § IV]
There shall be appointed annually by the Mayor and Board of Council from
among the members of the Council, a Committee, to be known as the
"Committee on Police," consisting of three members, whose duty it shall
be to enforce the provisions of all such rules and regulations as shall be
adopted by the Mayor and Board of Council for the government, control
and discipline of the Police Department. Such Committee shall have power
to inflict such penalties for neglect of duty, misbehavior, incompetency
or inability to serve, as are authorized by this section or such rules and
regulations as may be hereafter adopted by the Council, provided, however,
that the Committee shall not have power to reduce an officer in rank or
to dismiss an officer or patrolman from the Police Department, except for
cause and in the manner provided by the Statute.
§ 2-18.5. Supervision of the Department. [Ord. 5/20/46 §§ V, VI; Ord.
005/97 § IV; Ord. #030/97 § I; Ord. #018-08]
§ 2-18.6. Duties of Commander of Operations. [Ord. 5/20/46 § VII;
Ord. No. 10-2018]
The Commander of Operations shall be the chief executive officer of the
Department, subject to the laws of the State, provisions of this section,
the orders of the Mayor and Board of Council or of the Committee on
Police of the Board of Council. The chief executive officer may immediately
suspend from duty, without pay, any officer or patrolman acting under him
until the final hearing and disposition of any charges that may be preferred
retains the right to change said assignment at its sole discretion at
any time after consideration of the recommendation of the Guttenberg
Director of Public Safety.
a. The Police Department shall be under the direct charge, control, and
supervision of the Committee on Police, as provided in the preceding
subsection, and of the Chairman of such Committee, and any orders
issued by the Chairman of the Committee on Police the officers or
members of the Police Department shall be deemed the action of the
Committee.
b. Subject to rules and regulations of the Mayor and Board of Council and
of the Committee on Police of the Board of Council, Commander of
Patrol Operations, the Lieutenant, Sergeants, and Patrolmen shall be
under the control and direction of the Director of Public Safety.4
4. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 03/99 created the position of Director of Public Safety who
has control over the Police Department. See § 2-13.
§ 2-18.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-18.6
1:24
against such officer or patrolman in the manner provided by this section.
The Commander of Operations shall respond to serious fires and riotous
or tumultuous assemblages within the Town, take command of the Police
who are present, save and protect property, arrest any persons who are
violating the laws, disturbing the peace, or inciting others to do so. The
Commander of Operations shall, under the direction of the Committee on
Police, detail and assign the patrolmen to duty, and may order, temporarily,
any or all of the Police Department to any place in the Town where their
service may be necessary, but the Commander of Operations shall make
no permanent detail without concurrence of the Committee on Police. The
Commander of Operations shall attend the meetings of the Committee on
Police and of the Board of Council, whenever requested, in writing, by the
Chairman of the Committee on Police or the Town Clerk. The Commander of
Operations shall communicate to the Committee on Police the presence of
any infections or contagious diseases or the presence or the evidence of any
nuisance detrimental to the public health. The Commander of Operations
shall promulgate to his subordinates orders of the Committee on Police, and
it shall be the duty of all the officers and members of the Police Department
to render to him and to his orders, implicit obedience. Any order not given
by him in person shall be given in writing. The Commander of Operations
shall report to the Committee on Police at least once a month the number
of arrests made and crimes and incidents reported (where no arrests have
been made).
§ 2-18.7. (Reserved)5
§ 2-18.8. Patrolmen. [Ord. 5/20/46 § IX]
The duties of a patrolman shall be to patrol the post to which he is assigned,
to act as a peace officer, to enforce all the laws of the State, all ordinances
of the Town, and to obey all lawful orders issued to him by any officers of
the department.
§ 2-18.9. Salary. [Ord. 5/20/46 § X; Ord. 8/2/82 § 1]
The annual salary or compensation of the members of the Police
Department shall be established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-18.10. Eligibility. [Ord. 5/20/46 § XI]
No person shall be eligible for appointment as an officer or patrolman in the
Police Force of the Town of Guttenberg unless:
a. He is a citizen of the United States;
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2-18.7, Deputy Chief; Duties, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 5/20/46 and 005/97 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 030/97.
§ 2-18.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18.10
1:25
§ 2-18.11. Uniforms. [Ord. 5/20/46 § XII]
The officers and members of the Police Department shall wear police
uniforms, the details of which may be established by resolution of the Mayor
and Board of Council or by order of the "Police Committee."
§ 2-18.12. Special Officers. [New; Ord. #026/97 § I; Ord. #012/05;
Ord. #002-08]
The Mayor and Board of Council, pursuant to the authority granted under
the "Special Law Enforcement Officers' Act," N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.,
may appoint Class One and/or Class Two Special Law Enforcement Officers.
The powers and authority of any Class One and/or Class Two Special Law
Enforcement Officer appointed by the Mayor and Board of Council shall be
as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11.
The Mayor and Board of Council may appoint up to 10 Class One Special
Law Enforcement Officers.
The Mayor and Board of Council may appoint as Class Two Special Law
Enforcement Officers a number of such officers which shall not exceed 25%
of the total number of regular police officers of the number of Class Two
Special Law Enforcement Officers or the equivalent thereof which were in
the employ of the Town of Guttenberg as of March 1, 1985, whichever is
greater.
All Special Class One and Class Two Officers that are appointed by the
Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg shall be appointed for a term
of one year. Set appointments shall expire at the end of one year unless
renewed by the Mayor and Council by resolution.
§ 2-18.13. School Crossing Guards. [Ord. 5/22/84; Ord. No. 10-2018]
b. He has never been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude which
would, in the judgment of the Mayor and Board of Council, be
prejudicial to the morale of the force;
c. He is sound in body and in good health;
d. He is not less than 18 years of age and not more than 35 years of age,
provided that any person serving in the Armed Forces of the United
States of America or who has recently been discharged from service or
may in the future be discharged from services in the Armed Forces of
the United States of America, may be appointed to the Department,
notwithstanding that his age exceeds 35 years of age, provided that
such appointment is permitted by Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
a. Appointment. The appointment of part-time School Crossing Guards for
indeterminate terms may be authorized by resolution of the Board of
Council. The guards shall assist the Police Department and other
municipal officers with crossing of children at or about intersections
traversed by elementary school children.
§ 2-18.10 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-18.13
1:26
§ 2-18.14. Police Manual. [Ord. 9/6/77]
A copy of the Police Manual is hereby established and adopted. A copy is
on file in the office of the Town Clerk of Guttenberg, New Jersey, and is
hereby adopted and established for the Police Department of the Town of
Guttenberg.
§ 2-18.15. Contracted Off-Duty Employment. [Ord. #037/00 §§ I - IV;
Ord. #006/01; Ord. #010/05; Ord. #021/05; Ord. No. 17-2016]
b. Salaries of School Crossing Guards shall be established by ordinance.
c. School Crossing Guards shall be subject to the supervision of the
Commander of Operations.
a. Purpose; Policy. For the convenience of those persons and entities
which utilize the service of off-duty law enforcement officers of the
Guttenberg Police Department and to authorize the outside
employment of Town police while off-duty, the Town hereby establishes
a policy regarding the use of said officers.
1. Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
police related employment for private employers only during offduty
hours and at such time as will not interfere with the efficient
performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
Town.
2. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Director of Public Safety, which approval
shall be granted if in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety,
such employment would not be inconsistent with the efficient
functioning and good reputation of the Police Department and
would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the
officer or officers who are to perform the work.
b. Escrow Accounts.
1. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Guttenberg Police Department shall
estimate the number of hours such law enforcement services are
required, which estimate shall be approved in writing by the
Director of Public Safety, and shall establish an escrow account
with the Town Treasurer of the Town by depositing an amount
sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and administrative
fees set forth in Subsection d for the total estimated hours of
service.
The following utilities shall be and hereby will be exempt from
advanced payment for police services:
(a) Public Service Electric & Gas.
§ 2-18.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18.15
1:27
(b) Hudson United Water Co.
(c) All telephone companies (Bell Atlantic, Verizon etc.)
2. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Director of Public Safety or his designee,
shall verify that the balance in the escrow account of the person or
entity requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation
and fees for the number of hours specified in the request for
services. The Director of Public Safety shall not post a request for
services from any person or entity unless all fees and compensation
required in the manner described above have been deposited with
the Town Treasurer. No officer shall provide any such services for
more hours than are specified in the request for services.
3. In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease
and requests for further or future services shall not be performed
or posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
4. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
c. Requests for Services.
1. All requests to the Town for the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers in the Guttenberg Police Department for a
period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Director of
Public Safety for posting at least 10 days before such services are
required. Any law enforcement officers, when so employed by the
Town shall be treated as an employee of the Town provided,
however, that wages earned for outside employment shall not be
applied toward the pension benefits of law enforcement officers so
employed, nor shall hours worked for outside employment be
considered in any way compensable as over-time.
d. Rates of Compensation, Administrative Fee, Payment of Services.
1. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers shall be established as follows:
(a) Rates of compensation per hour shall be $45.
(b) An additional fee of $5 per hour is hereby established to cover
administrative costs, overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses of
the Town of Guttenberg.
Therefore, the total hourly rate of compensation shall be $50.
e. Insurance.
§ 2-18.15 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-18.15
1:28
§ 2-18.16. Civilian Police Dispatchers. [Ord. #011/05; Ord. #015/06;
Ord. No. 10-2018]
§ 2-19. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-19.1. (Reserved)6
1. Each private person or entity who shall employ off-duty law
enforcement officers, pursuant to this subsection, shall agree to
indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Guttenberg for any
liability or personal liability or property damage claims made
against the Town of Guttenberg for actions that arose while the law
enforcement officer was employed by the private person or entity.
Furthermore, each private person or entity shall be responsible for
maintaining his or her own insurance coverage. Such insurance
coverage shall include, but not be limited to, general liability
property damage and automobile insurance. Proof of said
insurance coverage shall be provided to the Town of Guttenberg
prior to the assignment of any law enforcement officer to said
private person or entity.
f. Any persons or entities who request to utilize the services of off-duty
police officers and it is the decision of the Director of Public Safety that
there is a need to utilize off-duty police vehicles with the detail, then the
person or entity shall pay $100 for use of the police vehicle per day for a
period not to exceed eight hours. All time after the eight-hour period of
each day shall be paid at the rate of $15 per hour.
a. Appointment and Duties. The appointment of civilian police dispatchers
for an indeterminate term may be authorized by resolution by the
Mayor and Council. The civilian police dispatcher shall receive and
respond to in person, telephone or other request for emergency
assistance including law enforcement, fire, medical or other emergency
services and dispatch appropriate units to response sites. The police
dispatcher shall, in addition to other duties, operate radio, data
processing and computer oriented equipment to receive, retrieve, enter
and transmit information to law enforcement and or other emergency
services agencies. The civilian police dispatcher shall also perform
related work, including clerical, as directed.
b. Salary of the civilian police dispatcher shall be established by
Ordinance.
c. Civilian police dispatchers shall be subject to the supervision of the
Police Sergeant, Tour Commander, Commander of Patrol Operations,
Commander of Operations and/or Director of Public Safety.
6. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2-19.1, pertaining to paid firefighters and containing
portions of Ordinance Nos. 6/19/39, 008/97, 021/97 and 013/98 was repealed by Ordinance
No. 018/02.
§ 2-18.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.2
1:29
§ 2-19.2. Qualifications. [Ord. 6/19/39; Ord. 6/4/73; Ord. 018/02]
Membership in any of the Volunteer Fire Companies of the Fire Department
of the Town of Guttenberg shall be open to all citizens of the Town of
Guttenberg between the ages of 18 and 35 years, subject to the remaining
provisions of this section.
§ 2-19.3. Application for Membership. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 2; Ord. 018/
02]
Application for membership shall be submitted by the prospective member
to the Fire Department.
§ 2-19.4. Physician's Certificate. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 3]
The applicant shall submit with his application for membership, in form
approved by the Board of Council, a certificate from the Town Physician
or other doctor as the Mayor and Board of Council shall designate by
resolution, indicating that the applicant is in sound, physical condition and
is physically able to perform the duties of a firefighter of the Town. In the
event the applicant is unable to furnish such certificate from the physician,
the application shall not be considered.
§ 2-19.5. Approval or Rejection by Members of the Fire Company.
[Ord. 6/19/39 § 4]
If the Fire Department determines that the applicant is physically, mentally
and morally qualified to become a member of the Department, the
application shall be submitted at the next meeting, and the department shall
then vote for the admission or rejection of the applicant as a member. The
voting shall be in accordance with the by-laws of the department.
§ 2-19.6. Report of Vote to Mayor and Board of Council. [Ord. 6/19/
39 § 6]
After voting upon an application, a report shall be submitted to the Board of
Council at its next regular meeting. This report shall contain a statement of
the date when the applicant was voted upon.
§ 2-19.7. Residency in the Town Required. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 8]
Only persons who have been residents of the Town of Guttenberg for at least
six months shall be eligible for membership in the Fire Department.
§ 2-19.8. Failure to Respond to Duties. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 9]
Any member of the Fire Department who shall fail to perform his duties for
four successive months shall be brought up on charges by a company officer.
If the charges are sustained by a majority of the company, the member may
be suspended or expelled from the company.
§ 2-19.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-19.9
1:30
§ 2-19.9. Leaves of Absence. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 10]
Leaves of absence from the department may be granted in accordance with
the by-laws of the Fire Department.
§ 2-19.10. Council Powers to Transfer Firefighters. [Ord. 6/19/39
§ 11]
The Board of Council may, at any time it sees fit, transfer any firefighter
or firefighters from one Fire Company to any other Fire Company and
thereupon such firefighter shall have the same rights and privileges as the
other members of the Fire Company to which he is transferred.
§ 2-19.11. False Alarms. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 12]
Any member of the Fire Department knowingly or willfully turning in a false
alarm of a fire, or causing the same to be done shall be expelled from the
company.
§ 2-19.12. Reinstatement of Expelled Firefighter. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 13]
Any member expelled from the Fire Department may be reinstated in the
department in the same manner as a new member.
§ 2-19.13. Official Records. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 14]
The Town Clerk shall keep a book of records of the Fire Department,
in which shall be entered the names of all members, their ages, date of
confirmation, resignation or expulsion.
§ 2-19.14. Number of Members Permitted. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 15]
The membership of the different companies shall be limited to 40 members
for each Engine Company, Hook and Ladder Company and Hose Company,
and the Exempt Association shall consist of all exempt members.
§ 2-19.15. Exempt Certificate. [Ord. 6/19/39 §§ 16, 17; Ord. 4/6/65
§ 1]
a. A member, having served his term according to law, may request that
his name be reported to the Board of Council to be placed on the
exempt roll. The Town Clerk, under the direction of the Board of
Council, shall issue an Exempt Certificate to such member providing he
is a member in good standing.
b. After the issuance of an Exempt Certificate to any member of the Fire
Department, such member shall not be an active member of such
company except by the direct consent and approval of the Board of
Council. Such action of the Board of Council shall be made by
resolution.
§ 2-19.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.15
1:31
§ 2-19.16. Officers of the Department. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 18]
The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Chief, First Assistant
Chief and Second Assistant Chief who shall be elected by ballot by the
members of the department, on the second Wednesday of November
annually, and at such other time as a vacancy may occur. Subject to the
provisions of Subsection 2-19.7, every member of the department who shall
have been confirmed by the Board of Council at least one week previous
to such election shall be entitled to vote at such election. Each company
shall appoint, previous to the election, two members to act as Tellers at
the election, which shall be held at the place of meeting of the several
companies composing the department, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. The Tellers shall immediately after closing the polls and
canvassing and declaring the result in their respective places of meeting,
proceed to the place of meeting of the Board of Council and convene and
organize as a Board of Election and canvass and declare the result of the
election and notify the Board of Council of the number of votes cast by
each company, and for whom such votes were cast. In case of vacancy in
the above named officers, the Board of Council shall call a Special Election
giving 10 days' notice to the foreman of each company. In the event of a tie
vote, in connection with any of these positions, the Board of Council shall
appoint a person to fill such office.
§ 2-19.17. Duties of Officers of the Fire Department. [Ord. 6/19/39
§ 19]
The duties of the officers of the Fire Departments shall be as described in
the by-laws of the Fire Department.
The Chief shall report annually to the Board of Council the condition of the
apparatus and hoses of the department and all other property under his
control, the loss and damage done by fire to buildings and goods, and keep
a register of all fires and false alarms. He shall report all needed repairs to
the Board of Council.
§ 2-19.18. Chain of Command at Fire. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 20]
In the absence of all chief officers, the highest ranking company officers
shall be in charge. In the absence of company officers, the senior firefighter
shall be in charge.
§ 2-19.19. Suspension or Disbanding of Company. [Ord. 6/19/39
§ 22]
The Board of Council may, upon the advice of the Chief, suspend for
misconduct any company from service and may disband the same in case
the charges are sustained. The Board of Council may also disband such
c. For purposes of eligibility, all time spent on active duty in the Armed
Forces of the United States shall be credited to the applicant, provided
that the maximum credit under such provisions shall be five years.
§ 2-19.15 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-19.19
1:32
company in the event it determines the services of such company are no
longer needed in the Town.
§ 2-19.20. Apparatus Not to be Taken Beyond Town Limits; Use for
Private Purposes. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 23]
No apparatus shall be taken beyond the limits of the Town or used for
private purposes without the consent of the Board of Council or its
designee.
§ 2-19.21. Expulsion of Member. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 24]
Any member of the department who disobeys the orders of the Chief,
Assistant Chiefs or officers of the company of which he is a member, or any
person filling the vacancy of any of the above officers, and acting as such
at any fire, parade or wash, may, upon being found guilty after an impartial
trial, be expelled from the department in the manner provided.
§ 2-19.22. Removal of Officers. [Ord. 6/18/39 § 25]
Any officers of the Fire Department may be removed by a resolution of the
Board of Council.
§ 2-19.23. Procedure for the Approval of Claims. [Ord. 6/19/39 § 26]
All claims against the Town for the Fire Department shall be certified by the
Chief or acting Chief.
§ 2-19.24. through § 2-19.34. (Reserved)
§ 2-19.35. through § 2-19.37. (Reserved)7
§ 2-19.38. Contracted Off-Duty Employment. [Ord. #022/05]
a. Purpose; Policy. For the convenience of those persons and entities
which utilize the service of off-duty fire watch officials of the
Guttenberg Fire Prevention Department and to authorize the outside
employment of Town fire watch officials while off-duty, the Town hereby
establishes a policy regarding the use of said officers.
1. Members of the Fire Prevention Department shall be permitted to
accept fire watch related employment for private employers at such
time as will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly
scheduled or emergency duty for the Town.
2. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty fire watch officials
shall first obtain the approval of the Fire Inspector, which approval
7. Editor's Note: Former Subsections 2-19.35 through 2-19.37, pertaining to paid firefighters
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 6/19/39, 12/21/53, 8/8/84, 9/16/92, 1995-07,
005/1996, 021/97 and 013/98, were removed at the direction of the Town in Supplement
No. 9.
§ 2-19.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.38
1:33
shall be granted if in the opinion of the Fire Inspector, such
employment would not be inconsistent with the efficient
functioning and good reputation of the Fire Prevention Department
and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the
officer or officers who are to perform the work.
b. Escrow Accounts.
1. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty fire
watch official in the Guttenberg Fire Prevention Department shall
estimate the number of hours such services are required, which
estimate shall be approved in writing by the Fire Inspector, and
shall establish an escrow account with the Town Treasurer of the
Town by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the rates of
compensation and administrative fees set forth in Subsection d for
the total estimated hours of service.
2. Prior to posting any request for services of an off-duty fire watch
official, the Fire Inspector shall verify that the balance in the
escrow account of the person or entity requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of
hours specified in the request for services. The Fire Inspector shall
not post a request for services from any person or entity unless all
fees and compensation required in the manner described above
have been deposited with the Town Treasurer. No officer shall
provide any such services for more hours than are specified in the
request for services.
3. In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of an off-duty fire watch official shall cease and
requests for further or future services shall not be performed or
posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
4. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
c. Request for Services.
1. All requests to the Town for the services of an off-duty fire watch
official in the Guttenberg Fire Prevention Department for a period
of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Fire Inspector for
posting at least 10 days before such services are required. Any fire
watch officials, when so employed by the Town shall be treated as
an employee of the Town provided, however, that wages earned for
outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension
benefits of fire watch officers so employed, nor shall hours worked
for outside employment be considered in any way compensable as
overtime.
d. Rates of Compensation, Administrative Fee, Payment of Services.
§ 2-19.38 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-19.38
1:34
§ 2-20. PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-20.1. Duties of the Department. [Ord. 11/15/48 § I; Ord. 12/28/
54 § 1]
The cleaning of the streets, collection, removal and disposal of ashes,
garbage, refuse and waste matter in the Town shall be performed by the
Town operating through the Public Works Department.
§ 2-20.2. Supervision of the Department. [Ord. 11/15/48 § II]
The Public Works Department shall be under the supervision and control
of the Mayor and Board of Council and such committee thereof, as may be
designated by said Board, to supervise the same.
§ 2-20.3. Members of the Department. [Ord. 11/15/45 § 4; Ord. 12/
28/54 § 1; Ord. #020/97 § I; Ord. #07-14]
The Public Works Department shall consist of a Superintendent of Public
Works, one Foreman and no more than 12 laborers. The position of Foreman
shall be a full-time position. Laborers may be appointed either full-time
or part-time employees by the Mayor and Board of Council in its sole
discretion.
Supervision of the Department shall be the responsibility of the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. This position shall
1. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of fire watch
officials shall be established as follows:
(a) Rates of compensation per hour shall be $35.
(b) An additional fee of $3 per hour is hereby established to cover
administrative costs, overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses of
the Town of Guttenberg.
Therefore, the total hourly rate of compensation shall be $38.
e. Insurance.
1. Each private person or entity who shall employ off-duty fire watch
officials, pursuant to this subsection, shall agree to indemnify and
hold harmless the Town of Guttenberg for any liability or personal
liability or property damage claims made against the Town of
Guttenberg for actions that arose while the fire watch official was
employed by the private person or entity. Furthermore, each
private person or entity shall be responsible for maintaining his or
her own insurance coverage. Such insurance coverage shall
include, but not be limited to, general liability property damage and
automobile insurance. Proof of said insurance coverage shall be
provided to the Town of Guttenberg prior to the assignment of any
fire watch official to said private person or entity.
§ 2-19.38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20.3
1:35
either be full-time or part-time based upon the sole discretion of the Mayor
and Board of Council. The appointment shall be for a one-year term.
The Department shall be responsible for maintaining the public streets,
public buildings and all other public areas of the Town of Guttenberg in a
clean, safe and healthful condition; for installing, cleaning, maintaining and
repairing all traffic signs, signals, controls and equipment; for cleaning and
removing snow, debris and all other potentially dangerous things from the
public areas of the Town of Guttenberg and for such other services as may
be assigned by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Salaries for members of the Department shall be as set forth in the Town
Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-20.4. Foreman of the Department. [Ord. 8/20/73 § 1; Ord. #020/
97; Ord. #07-14]
The Public Works Department shall have one Foreman, appointed for a oneyear
term, who shall work with and supervise the men, under the direction
of the Superintendent of Public Works. The Foreman shall also, in case
of illness, absence or other cause, carry on the duties of Superintendent
of Public Works temporarily, during the absence of the appointed
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 2-20.5. Substitute or Temporary Workers. [Ord. 5/21/84 § 1; Ord.
6/7/84 § 1]
The Mayor and Board of Council may appoint substitute or temporary
workers in the Public Works Department, in the place and stead of the
regularly appointed members of the Public Works Department, to serve in
the event of illness, accident, vacation or other temporary need, and shall
fix the compensation therefor at a rate established in the Salary Ordinance
for each day of service.
Each of the substitute or temporary Public Works workers shall be subject
to the same rules, regulations and requirements as are applicable to the
regular Public Works workers, while on duty.
§ 2-20.6. Permission to Join in Contracts with Other Municipalities.
[Ord. 11/15/48 § VI; Ord. 12/28/54 § 1]
The Mayor and Board of Council may purchase the necessary equipment
for the cleaning of the streets, and may, by resolution, enter into contracts
with other municipalities or private entities for the collection, removal and
disposal of the ashes, garbage, refuse and other waste matter collected in
the Town.
§ 2-21. DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION AND HUMAN
RESOURCES.
§ 2-20.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-21.1
1:36
§ 2-21.1. Department Created. [Ord. #001/02]
The Department of Administration and Human Resources of the Town of
Guttenberg shall be and hereby is created.
§ 2-21.2. Assignment to Committee. [Ord. #001/02]
The Department of Administration and Human Resources shall be assigned
to a Committee, chaired by a member of the Town of Guttenberg's Board of
Council.
§ 2-21.3. Responsibilities of Department; Personnel Policy Manual.
[Ord. #001/02]
The responsibilities of the Department of Administration and Human
Resources shall include, but not be limited to the following:
§ 2-22. through § 2-25. (RESERVED)
a. Oversee the administration and operation of Town Hall as a business
entity in order to create and maintain a productive and cost-effective
workplace.
b. Coordinate the creation of a Personnel Policy Manual which shall
contain all policies and procedures of the Town of Guttenberg for its
noncontractual employees.
c. Oversee compliance with the Personnel Policy Manual by all
noncontractual employees of the Town of Guttenberg.
d. Recommend to the Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg a
corrective action for noncompliance with the Personnel Policy Manual
when necessary.
e. Assist with labor relations pertaining to contractual employees of the
Town of Guttenberg as may be requested by the Mayor and Board of
Council.
§ 2-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22
1:37

ARTICLE V
Municipal Court
§ 2-26. MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-26.1. Name of Court. [Ord. 10/18/48 § I]
A Municipal Court to be named "Municipal Court of the Town of Guttenberg
in the County of Hudson" is hereby established in the Town pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:8 et seq.
§ 2-26.2. Judge of the Municipal Court. [Ord. 10/18/48 § II]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have the qualifications, possess such
tenure of office and have, possess and exercise all the functions, powers,
duties and jurisdiction as is conferred upon such Judge by the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq. and as may be conferred upon him by law. The Judge
shall be appointed in the manner provided by law.
§ 2-26.3. Court Administrator. [Ord. 1/1/62 § 1]
The Administrator of the Municipal Court of the Town of Guttenberg shall,
under the direction and supervision of the Judge of the Municipal Court,
perform all the duties required of him by law and the Revised Rules of
Practice and Procedure of the Supreme Court of New Jersey and all orders
and directives issued pursuant thereto. He shall keep accurate records
and accounts pertaining to the operation of the Municipal Court and make
appropriate accounting of all moneys passing through his hands and render
such reports as are required by law and by the directives of appropriate
authorities. He shall, under the direction and supervision of the Judge of
the Municipal Court, exercise all the powers and perform all the duties
incumbent upon him by law in the efficient operation of the Municipal Court
of Guttenberg, New Jersey. He shall, when so designated by the Judge, act
as Violations Clerk of the Court and his salary for such combined services
shall be as established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-26.4. Deputy Court Administrator. [Ord. 1/14/74 § 1]
a. The appointment of a Deputy Court Administrator for the Municipal
Court is hereby authorized, under the direction and supervision of the
Judge of the Municipal Court at an annual salary as shall be fixed by
ordinance.
b. Duties. The Deputy Court Administrator shall perform the duties of the
Administrator of Municipal Court whenever necessary, and in the
absence or disability of the Court Administrator.
The Deputy Court Administrator shall supervise, operate and maintain
the sound and recording system of the Municipal Court, under the
supervision and direction of the Judge of the Municipal Court and the
Administrator of the Municipal Court of Guttenberg, New Jersey and
§ 2-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26.4
1:39
§ 2-26.5. Violations Clerk. [Ord. 9/17/62 § 1]
The Violations Clerk of the Municipal Court of Guttenberg, New Jersey,
shall, under the direction and supervision of the Judge, perform such duties
as are prescribed by law and the Revised Rules of Practice and Procedure
of the Supreme Court of New Jersey, and all orders and directives issued
pursuant thereto.
He shall keep accurate records and accounts pertaining to the position of
Violations Clerk, and account fully as to all moneys passing into his hands,
and render such reports as are required by law and by the directives of
appropriate authorities, as to all matters pertaining to his duties as such
Violations Clerk.
The Court Administrator and the Violations Clerk shall be appointed
annually for one-year terms, respectively, by the joint appointment and
consent of the Municipal Judge and Mayor and Board of Council at
respective salaries to be established by the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-26.6. Municipal Public Defender; Fee for Representation. [Ord.
#1995-03 §§ 1, 2; Ord. #033/97 §§ 1
4]
shall perform such other duties as may be authorized or required by the
Judge of the Municipal Court and subject to law.
c. Terms. The term of the Deputy Court Administrator shall be for one
year.
a. Any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender of the Town of Guttenberg shall pay an application fee of $200
or the amount necessary to pay the costs of the Municipal Public
Defender's services, whichever is less.
b. The Municipal Court may waive the above application fee only if the
applicant demonstrates, by clear and convincing proof, that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the applicant.
c. The Municipal Court may permit the applicant to pay the application fee
over a specific period of time not to exceed four months.
d. Funds collected pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in a
dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial Officer of the Town
of Guttenberg and used exclusively to meet the costs incurred in
providing the services of a Municipal Public Defender including, when
required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
§ 2-26.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-26.6
1:40
ARTICLE VI
Municipal Employees
§ 2-27. DIRECTOR OF RECREATION.
§ 2-27.1. Duties. [Ord. 8/20/62 § 1; Ord. 5/17/82 § 1; Ord. 3/21/83
§ 1]
a. The Director of Recreation, under the direction and supervision of the
Mayor and Board of Council and of the chairman of the committee to
which his duties and activities are assigned, shall organize and
supervise recreation, sports, crafts and other activities for the Town.
b. He shall conduct such activities as required, including, but not limited
to, a daily weekday recreation program during the summer months
between July 1 and August 31 of each year, including evening
programs; and afternoon programs between 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
weekdays between September 1 of each year and June 30 of the
following year, including evening programs.
c. He shall submit a written outline of his proposed recreation programs
detailing the nature and extent of such activities, prior to inaugurating
them for approval by the chairman or by the Mayor and Board of
Council, and conduct same pursuant to such rules and regulations as
the chairman shall prescribe.
d. He shall supervise all activities, either personally or through such
qualified assistant as may be provided him by the Mayor and Board of
Council and allow no unsupervised activity whatsoever.
e. He shall render reports of all such programs and activities, including a
specification of all measures taken to insure the safety of all children
participating in such activities, and shall apply for permission from the
chairman of the committee prior to engaging in any activities which
involve taking children outside of the confines of the Town of
Guttenberg. He shall require written permission and waiver from the
parents or guardians of each child prior to permitting any child to
participate in any Guttenberg recreation activities.
f. In addition to his regular reports, he shall immediately report any injury
or unusual event arising or occurring, directly or indirectly, from such
activities, to such chairman and to the Town Attorney. He shall see that
all participating children are covered by such insurance as may be
afforded in any programs and take such measures at all times as will
safeguard the health and safety of all children in his care.
g. He shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the
Mayor and Board of Council to facilitate or improve the activities above
set forth.
§ 2-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-27.2
1:41
§ 2-27.2. Terms; Salary. [Ord. 8/20/62 § 1; Ord. 5/17/82 § 1; Ord. 3/
21/83 § 1]
His appointment shall be an annual appointment for a one-year term, at a
salary established by the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-27.3. Assistant Recreation Director. [Ord. 8/20/62 § 1; Ord. 2/3/
93 §§ 1
4; Ord. #12-01-1993; Ord. #004/00]
§ 2-27.4. Director of Public Affairs.
a. Establishment. There shall be one Assistant Director of Recreation
position. The Department of Recreation will consist of one Director of
Recreation, one Assistant Director of Recreation and one Director of
Public Affairs.
b. Duties. The duties of the Assistant Recreation Director shall be as
directed by the Recreation Director and/or the Council person in charge
of the Recreation Department.
c. Appointment. Appointment to the position of Assistant Recreation
Director shall be by the Mayor and Board of Council.
d. Salary. The salary of the Assistant Recreation Director shall be set by
the local Salary Ordinance.
a. Position Created. The position of Director of Public Affairs for the Town
of Guttenberg shall be and hereby is created and shall be assigned to
the Department of Recreation.
b. Appointment; Term. The Director of Public Affairs shall be appointed by
the Mayor and Council for a term to expire on the June 30th next
following the date of appointment.
c. Duties. The duties of the Director of Public Affairs shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
1. Coordinating festivities, parades, and other social functions on
special occasions in the Town of Guttenberg as directed by the
Mayor and Board of Council.
2. Acting as liaison between the residents of the Town of Guttenberg
and the Mayor and Board of Council.
3. Representing the Town of Guttenberg at special events as directed
by the Mayor and Board of Council.
4. Performing such other duties as may be reasonably requested by
the Mayor and Board of Council.
§ 2-27.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-27.4
1:42
§ 2-28. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
§ 2-28.1. Creation of Positions. [Ord. 9/6/89 § I; New]
There are hereby created the positions of three local ordinance enforcement
officers to be known as Code Enforcement Officers.
§ 2-28.2. Duties of Code Enforcement Officers. [Ord. 9/6/89 § II;
New; Ord. #004/97; Ord. #017/02]
The Code Enforcement Officers shall be responsible for the enforcement
of all ordinances of the Town of Guttenberg and are hereby empowered to
issue summonses for any violations thereof. The Code Enforcement Officers
are hereby assigned, for administrative purposes, to the Mayor and Board
of Council and shall work under the direct supervision of the Mayor and
Board of Council, performing such duties as may be directed by the Mayor
and Board of Council in addition to those specified herein.
§ 2-28.3. Manner of Appointment; Term of Appointment. [Ord. 9/6/
89 § IV; New; Ord. #018/04]
All employees not affiliated with, or members of a labor union shall be
deemed "employees at will," employed at the will of the Town of Guttenberg,
with employment for no definite or established length of time, and subject
to termination at any time, for any reason, or for no reason at all, consistent
with law and Town of Guttenberg's ordinances, regulations and policies.
§ 2-28.4. Salaries. [Ord. 9/6/89 § V; New]
Salaries for the positions of Code Enforcement Officers shall be as set forth
in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-29. OFFICE OF LICENSE INSPECTOR.
§ 2-29.1. Established. [Ord. 7/21/52 § I]
There is hereby created and established the Office of License Inspector for
the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-29.2. Duty of License Inspector. [Ord. 7/21/52 § II]
The License Inspector shall have the duty and obligation to receive and
act upon all applications for licenses which are issued pursuant to all
ordinances adopted in the Town except those issued pursuant to the laws
concerning alcoholic beverages and those issued by or pursuant to
authorization of the Plumbing Subcode Official or Health Officer of the
Board of Health. He shall make all investigations required or necessary to
d. Part-time Position. The position of Director of Public Affairs shall be
deemed a part-time position calling for approximately 10 hours per
week.
§ 2-27.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.2
1:43
be made in order that the eligibility of the applicant for such license shall
be fully established before the license is issued. Upon being satisfied that
the license should issue and that its issuance would be in conformity with
the provisions of all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town and also
in conformity with all the laws of the State of New Jersey and the United
States of America, he shall issue such license and collect the fee therefor as
set by the applicable ordinance.
§ 2-29.3. Inspections. [Ord. 7/21/52 § III]
Wherever, by reason of applicable law or the provisions of any ordinance,
rule or regulation of the Town, the license requires that the licensee shall
perform certain work under and pursuant to the authority of the license,
the License Inspector shall make adequate and appropriate inspections in
order to determine that the work is being performed in a manner and to the
extent required, pursuant to said laws, ordinances or rules and regulations.
§ 2-29.4. Duty to Enforce Licensing Ordinances. [Ord. 7/21/52 § IV]
It shall be the duty of the License Inspector to enforce all ordinances in the
Town requiring the issuance of licenses, in order that persons required to
procure licenses shall be compelled to do so, and he shall be authorized to
make complaint before the Municipal Court for and on behalf of the Town
for the violation of any ordinance where the issuance of a license is required
and has not been procured.
§ 2-29.5. Definition. [Ord. 7/21/52 § V]
The term "license" shall be construed not only to mean licenses required
to be issued pursuant to ordinances, but wherever permits are required to
be issued pursuant to ordinances, such permits shall be considered to be
embraced within the term "license".
§ 2-29.6. Collection of Fees: Reporting Procedure. [Ord. 7/21/52
§ VI]
The License Inspector shall keep full account of all fees and other monies
collected by him belonging to the Town and shall transmit the same monthly
to the Mayor and Board of Council together with a report showing the
number of licenses issued, the type and kind thereof and the amount of
money collected for each license.
§ 2-29.7. Term of Office. [Ord. 7/21/52 § VII; Ord. #018/04]
The License Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor and Board of
Council. All employees not affiliated with, or members of a labor union
shall be deemed "employees at will," employed at the will of the Town of
Guttenberg, with employment for no definite or established length of time,
and subject to termination at any time, for any reason, or for no reason at
all, consistent with law and Town of Guttenberg's ordinances, regulations
and policies.
§ 2-29.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-29.8
1:44
§ 2-29.8. Compensation. [Ord. 7/21/52 § VIII; Ord. 2/21/55 § 1]
The License Inspector shall serve without compensation.
§ 2-30. EXECUTIVE-DIRECTOR OF THE RENT CONTROL BOARD.
§ 2-30.1. Appointment. [Ord. 6/7/82 § XXI (a)]
The appointment of an Executive-Director of the Rent Control Board is
hereby authorized for a one-year term. His services shall include but are not
limited to the administration and direction of the administration of the Rent
Control Board.
§ 2-30.2. Compensation. [Ord. 6/7/82 § XXI (b)]
The salary for such services is hereby fixed at a yearly rate established in
the Salary Ordinance, payable monthly, for services rendered four hours per
day, five days per week.
§ 2-30.3. Supervision. [Ord. 6/7/82 § XXI (c)]
The Executive-Director of the Rent Control Board shall be subject to the
supervision of the Executive Department or other designee by the Mayor
and Board of Council.
§ 2-31. RECYCLING COORDINATOR.
§ 2-31.1. Creation of Position. [Ord. 4/20/88 § 1]
The position of Recycling Coordinator for the Town of Guttenberg is hereby
created.
§ 2-31.2. Duties of Recycling Coordinator. [Ord. 4/20/88 § 2]
The Recycling Coordinator shall be responsible for effecting programs
within the Town which will implement the goals, objectives and mandates of
the State of New Jersey as detailed in the Source Separation and Recycling
Act (L. 1987, Ch. 102)
The Recycling Coordinator's duties shall include but not be limited to,
developing and implementing plans for promoting recycling, preparing
recycling grant proposals, conducting public information activities designed
to foster recycling efforts by the community at large, and making regular
reports to the Mayor and Board of Council on the status of the Town's
recycling program.
§ 2-31.3. Work Schedule of Recycling Coordinator. [Ord. 4/20/88
§ 3]
The Recycling Coordinator shall be a salaried rather than an hourly
employee and shall be required to work at such time or times as may be
§ 2-29.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31.3
1:45
necessary to accomplish, on behalf of the Town, the goals, objectives and
mandates of the State of New Jersey as detailed in the Source Separation
and Recycling Act (L. 1987, Ch. 102)
§ 2-31.4. Compensation. [Ord. 4/20/88 § 4]
The annual salary for the position of Town Recycling Coordinator shall be
as set forth in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-31.5. Assistant Recycling Coordinator. [Ord. #3-15-89A §§ II, IV,
V]
§ 2-32. HOUSING INSPECTOR.
§ 2-32.1. Position Established; Duties. [Ord. 8/21/91 §§ 1, 2]
There is hereby established in the Town of Guttenberg the position of
Housing Inspector to enforce the regulations set forth in the Hotel and
Multiple Dwellings Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. and the regulations
promulgated thereunder entitled, "Regulations for Maintenance of Hotel
and Multiple Dwellings" and amendments thereto which are set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq. as the standards for the maintenance of such
structures within the Town.
§ 2-32.2. Appointment. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 2]
The Housing Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Board of Council and in addition to the above described
duties shall perform such other functions as may be designated from time
to time by the Mayor and Board of Council.
a. Position Created. The position of Assistant Recycling Coordinator is
created.
b. Duties. The duties of the Assistant Recycling Coordinator shall include,
but not be limited to, working under the direction of and assisting the
Town Recycling Coordinator in the carrying out of the functions of his
or her office; such functions include, inter alia, developing and
implementing plans for promoting recycling, preparing recycling grant
proposals, conducting public information activities regarding recycling
in the Town of Guttenberg, and making regular reports to the Mayor
and Board of Council on the status of the Town's recycling program.
c. Appointment. The Assistant Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Council, for a
term which will expire on June 30 of the year in which he is appointed.
d. Compensation. The salary for the position of Assistant Recycling
Coordinator shall be established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-31.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-32.3
1:46
§ 2-32.3. Salary. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 4]
The Housing Inspector shall receive an annual salary as set forth in the
annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-33. VIOLATIONS OFFICER.
§ 2-33.1. Position Created. [Ord. #1994-10 § I]
There are hereby created the position is of five Violations Officers in the
Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-33.2. Appointment; Term. [Ord. #1994-10 § II; Ord. #018/04]
The Mayor and Board of Council, by majority vote thereof, may appoint not
more than five Violations Officers to serve during any one period of time. All
employees not affiliated with, or members of a labor union shall be deemed
"employees at will," employed at the will of the Town of Guttenberg, with
employment for no definite or established length of time, and subject to
termination at any time, for any reason, or for no reason at all, consistent
with law and Town of Guttenberg's ordinances, regulations and policies.
§ 2-33.3. Assigned to Police Department. [Ord. #1994-10 § III; Ord.
No. 10-2018]
All Violations Officers appointed hereunder are hereby assigned, for
administrative purposes, to the Police Department and shall serve under
the direct supervision of the Commander of Operations or his designee,
performing such duties as may be directed by the Commander of Operations
or his designee in addition to those specified herein.
§ 2-33.4. Duty and Authority. [Ord. #1994-10 § IV]
The duty and authority of any Violations Officer appointed hereunder shall
be to:
a. Issue a parking ticket (summons) for any violation of a statute,
ordinance, resolution or regulation which regulates the parking of
vehicles.
b. Serve and execute all process for any parking offense issuing out of the
Guttenberg Municipal Court.
c. Cause any vehicle which is parked, stored or abandoned in the Town of
Guttenberg in violation of a statute, ordinance, resolution or regulation
to be towed away from the scene of the violation, all costs of such
towing and subsequent storage to be borne by the owner of the towed/
stored vehicle.
d. Issue a summons for any violation of any ordinance, resolution or
regulation of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-32.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33.5
1:47
§ 2-33.5. Salary. [Ord. #1994-10 § V]
The salary of any Violations Officer appointed hereunder shall be no less
than $7.70 per hour and no more than $10.50 per hour. The salary of each
Violations Officer shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and Board of
Council taking into consideration the qualifications and experience of each
such officer.
§ 2-34. URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE COORDINATOR. [Ord. #008/96]
The position of Urban Enterprise Zone Coordinator for the Town of
Guttenberg shall be and hereby is created.
§ 2-35. TECHNICAL ASSISTANT.
§ 2-35.1. Position Established; Duties. [Ord. #027/04]
There is hereby established in the Town of Guttenberg the position of
Technical Assistant who shall be responsible for recordkeeping and
administration of the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 2-35.2. Salary. [Ord. #027/04]
The Technical Assistant shall receive an annual salary as set forth by the
Salary Ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-36. through § 2-39. (RESERVED)
§ 2-33.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-36
1:48
ARTICLE VII
Boards, Commissions and Committees
§ 2-40. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-40.1. Organization. [Ord. 3/2/1908 § I]
There shall be a Board of Health established in the Town, organized in
accordance with the provisions of the act of the Legislature of the State of
New Jersey, entitled "An act to establish in this State a Board of Health and
a Bureau of Vital Statistics and to define their respective powers and duties.
Approved March 31, 1987."
§ 2-40.2. Members; Term; Vacancy. [Ord. 3/2/1908 § II; Ord. 2/21/90,
§ 1]
The Board of Health of the Town of Guttenberg shall be composed of six
members, all residents of the Town, to be appointed by the Mayor and Board
of Council. The term of office of a member of the Board of Health shall be
three years; provided, however, that the members of the Board of Health
appointed upon the adoption of this ordinance shall, in order to provide for
the staggered expiration of terms, be appointed according to the following
schedule:
Two members shall be appointed for terms to expire December 31, 1990.
Two members shall be appointed for terms to expire December 31, 1991.
Two members shall be appointed for terms to expire December 31, 1992.
Following the above cited initial appointments, all appointments to the
Board of Health shall be for a term of three years or, in the case of an
appointee who is appointed to fill an unexpired term of a Board of Health
member who has vacated office, the appointment shall be for the remainder
of the unexpired term only.
§ 2-40.3. Clerk; Duties; Salary. [Ord. 4/7/47 § 12; 1/15/52, § XII]
The Clerk of the Board of Health shall perform such services as may be
required by that Board and the Mayor and Board of Council. His salary shall
be established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-41. TRI-MUNICIPAL HEALTH REFERRAL SERVICE. [Ord. 4/17/
78 § 4]
The Town of Guttenberg is participating in a Tri-Municipal Health Referral
Service with other North Hudson communities, to increase health care to
the citizens of Guttenberg and adjacent areas, in the interest of public
health and safety, and as part of such public purposes has undertaken
certain reciprocal obligations and is receiving health care benefits, as part
of such program.
§ 2-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-41
1:49
As part of this program, the appointment of a Guttenberg Clerical Assistant
to the Tri-Municipal Health Referral Service, 400-68th Street, Guttenberg,
New Jersey, is hereby authorized, for a one-year term, at such salary as
is fixed by ordinance, said terms to be contingent and conditioned upon
continued participation of the Town in the program, and effective upon
appointment.
The Clerical Assistant, under the direction of the Mayor and Council and of
the Board of Health of the Town of Guttenberg shall provide such general
clerical assistance to the Tri-Municipal Health Referral Service, including
appropriate typing, filing, clerical work and other assistance as may be
required.
§ 2-42. HOUSING AUTHORITY.
§ 2-42.1. Purpose. [Ord. 3/2/50; Preamble]
There exists in the Town of Guttenberg, unsanitary or unsafe dwelling
accommodations, and persons of low income are forced to reside in such
unsanitary or unsafe accommodations; and in the Town there is a shortage
of safe or sanitary dwelling accommodations available at rents which
persons of low income can afford and such persons are forced to occupy
overcrowded and congested dwelling accommodations. The aforesaid
conditions cause an increase in and spread of disease and crime and
constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the
residents of the Town and impair economic values; and those conditions
necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditures of public funds
for crime prevention and punishment, public health and safety, fire and
accident protection, and other public services and facilities. These areas
in the Town cannot be cleared, nor can the shortage of safe and sanitary
dwellings for persons of low income be relieved, through the operation of
private enterprise, and the construction of housing projects for persons
of low income (as defined in the Local Housing Authorities Law) would
therefore not be competitive with private enterprise. The clearance,
replanning and reconstruction of the areas in which unsanitary or unsafe
housing conditions exist and the providing of safe and sanitary dwelling
accommodations by any public body for persons of low income are public
uses and purposes for which public money may be spent and private
property acquired and are governmental functions. It is in the public
interest that work on projects for such purposes be commenced as soon as
possible.
§ 2-42.2. Authority Created. [Ord. 3/2/50 § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Housing Authorities Law," as
amended, of the State of New Jersey, a body corporate and politic to be
known as the "HOUSING AUTHORITY OF THE TOWN OF GUTTENBERG,
IN THE COUNTY OF HUDSON," is hereby created and established.
§ 2-41 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-42.3
1:50
§ 2-42.3. Copy Filed. [Ord. 3/2/50 § 2]
The Town Clerk is authorized and directed to file a certified copy of this
section with the Commissioner of the State Department of Conservation and
Economic Development.
§ 2-43. OFFICE ON COMMUNITY AND MINORITY AFFAIRS.
§ 2-43.1. Office Created. [Ord. #006/96 § I; Ord. #030/00]
There is hereby created an Office of Community and Minority Affairs for the
Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-43.2. Responsibilities. [Ord. #006/96 § II; Ord. #030/00]
The Office on Community and Minority Affairs for the Town of Guttenberg
shall be responsible for:
§ 2-43.3. Staffing. [Ord. #006/96 § III; Ord. #030/00]
The Office of Community and Minority Affairs for the Town of Guttenberg
shall be staffed with volunteers.
§ 2-43.4. Appointments. [Ord. #006/96 § IV; Ord. #030/00]
All appointments related to the Office on Community and Minority Affairs
for the Town of Guttenberg, be they of volunteer, shall be made by the
Mayor and Board of Council of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 2-44. through § 2-48. (RESERVED)
a. Promoting Community and minority interests within the Town of
Guttenberg.
b. Identifying special needs of the minority communities in the Town of
Guttenberg and assisting them in meeting those needs.
c. Acquainting members of the minority communities with the laws of our
country and developing a respect for those laws.
d. Establishing a close working relationship between the municipal
government of the Town of Guttenberg and the minorities of the Town.
e. Cooperating with other Community and minority organizations whether
those organizations be business, civil, charitable or cultural
organizations to further the advancement of the minorities of the Town
of Guttenberg.
§ 2-42.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-44
1:51

ARTICLE VIII
Administrative Policies and Procedures
§ 2-49. PAYMENT OF PROPERTY TAX FOR GUTTENBERG
PROPERTY.
§ 2-49.1. Prohibition of Cash Payments. [Ord. No. 14-2015]
No payment of property tax for Guttenberg property shall be accepted by
cash. The only means of payment accepted shall be check or money order.
§ 2-50. PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT TAXES OR ASSESSMENTS
PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSES.
§ 2-50.1. Payment of Taxes or Assessment Required. [Ord. 4/5/89
§ I]
No license or permit shall be issued by or approved by the Town or any of its
departments or subagencies unless the applicant for the license or permit,
if the applicant is the owner of the property in which the business or activity
to be licensed or permitted is to be conducted, pays in full any delinquent
property taxes or assessments on the property.
§ 2-50.2. Revocation of License for Delinquent Tax Payments. [Ord.
4/5/89 § II]
Any license or permit issued or approved by the Town or any of its
departments or subagencies shall be revoked by the issuer if the licensee
owns the property on which the licensed business or activity is conducted
and has failed to pay the taxes due on his property for at least three
consecutive quarters.
§ 2-50.3. Exceptions. [Ord. 4/5/89 § III]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the "Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act," N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 2-51. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-51.1. Purpose. [Ord. 3/21/90 § 1]
It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for the defense of
actions against, and the indemnification of, public employees as permitted
by N.J.S.A. 59:10-4.
§ 2-51.2. Definitions. [Ord. 3/21/90 § 2]
As used in this section:
§ 2-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-51.2
1:53
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any elected or appointed official or any officer,
employee or servant, whether or not compensated or part-time, who is
authorized to perform any act or service; provided, however, that the term
does not include an independent contractor.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any employee or former employee of the
Town.
§ 2-51.3. Provisions for Defense. [Ord. 3/21/90 § 3]
The Town shall provide for the defense of any action brought against a
public employee on account of any act or omission in the scope of his
employment, and this obligation shall extend to any cross action,
counterclaim or cross complaint against such employee.
§ 2-51.4. Exceptions. [Ord. 3/21/90 § 4]
The provisions for defense shall not be applicable when the Mayor and
Board of Council determine that:
§ 2-51.5. Methods of Providing Defense. [Ord. 3/21/90 § 5]
The Town may provide any defense required of it under this section through
an attorney from its own staff or by employing other counsel. The Town shall
in no event be responsible for costs or attorney's fees incurred by anyone
unless it shall have agreed in writing to the terms of this representation.
§ 2-51.6. Control Over Litigation. [Ord. 3/21/90 § 6]
Whenever the Town provides any defense required of it under this section
the Town, through counsel, may assume exclusive control over the
representation of the public employee and such employee shall cooperate
fully with the defense.
§ 2-51.7. Indemnification. [Ord. 3/21/90 § 7]
a. The act or omission was not within the scope of employment;
b. The act of failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct
or actual malice;
c. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Town and the public employee;
d. The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an insurance
policy or policies; whether obtained by the Town or by any other person.
e. The public employee failed to deliver to the Town Attorney within 10
calendar days after the time he is served with any summons, complaint,
process, notice, demand or pleading, the original or a copy of the same;
f. The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 2-51.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-51.7
1:54
§ 2-52. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-52.1. Submission of Detailed Statement and Certification
Required. [Ord. 8/4/75 § 1]
Any person claiming payment from the Town of Guttenberg shall first
submit a detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such
claim, on forms hereby approved, to the Town Clerk, specifying particularly
how the bill or demand is made up, and a certification of the party claiming
payment that it is correct. No bill, claim, or demand shall be considered for
payment unless the voucher has attached to it (or includes) a certification
of a department head (or other municipal official responsible) or of his duly
designated representative, having personal knowledge of the facts, that
the goods have been received by, or the services rendered to the Town
of Guttenberg, and that those services or goods are consistent with any
existing contract or purchase order. The Governing Body shall review and
sign all vouchers.
§ 2-52.2. Procedure; Town Clerk to Examine and to Submit Bills to
Mayor and Board of Council. [Ord. 8/4/75 § 2]
The bill or claim duly certified shall be presented the Town Clerk for
inclusion in the agenda of the next available formal meeting of the
a. In any case where the Town is required to provide a defense under this
section, the Town shall pay or shall reimburse the public employee for
the following:
1. Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the Town on
behalf of the employee.
2. Any judgments entered against the employee including, but not
limited to, exemplary or punitive damages resulting from the
employee's civil violation of State or Federal law if, in the opinion of
the Mayor and Board of Council, the acts committed by the
employee upon which the damages are based did not constitute
actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional
wrong.
3. If the Town has failed, after reasonable notice, to provide such
required defense, all costs of defending the action, including
reasonable counsel fees and expenses together with costs of any
appeal.
b. In addition, in any case where the Town would be required to provide a
defense under this ordinance, except for the fact that such defense is
provided for by insurance, the Town shall provide indemnification as
aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by insurance.
c. Nothing in the section shall authorize the Town to pay for damages
resulting from the commission of a crime.
§ 2-51.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-52.2
1:55
governing body, and it shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to examine
all bills or claims submitted for payment in order to ascertain if proper
administrative procedures have been followed. All claims or bills to be
considered by the governing body shall be considered systematically
without preference and the claims or bills shall be made available to every
member of the governing body in sufficient time prior to formal action by
that body.
§ 2-52.3. Approval or Disapproval by the Governing Body. [Ord. 8/4/
75 § 3]
Claims shall be considered by the governing body which shall approve the
same, except that the governing body may reject any claim in whole or in
part presented to it, stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved
claim shall be referred back to the Town Clerk with such instructions as the
governing body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 2-52.4. Recording of Claims. [Ord. 8/4/75 § 4]
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes or through an appropriate claims register, indicating that the
governing body has by formal action approved the same with appropriate
record as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records pertaining
to approved and disapproved bills or claims shall be available for public
inspection.
§ 2-52.5. Certification and Payment. [Ord. 8/4/75 § 5]
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he shall
turn the same over to the chief Financial Officer/Treasurer who shall
forthwith prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof, which
checks shall be signed by the Mayor and thereafter signed by the Chief
Financial Officer/Treasurer. After preparing checks for the payment of
claims, he shall record them in proper books of account and thereafter mail
the checks to the claimants.
§ 2-53. PAYROLL ACCOUNT.
§ 2-53.1. Personnel Payroll Bank Account Established. [Ord. 4/21/55
§ 1]
There shall be established, in such institutions as the Mayor and Board of
Council shall from time to time designate, a separate payroll bank account
of the Town of Guttenberg in the County of Hudson, to be known as the
"Personnel Payroll Bank Account" for the purpose of depositing all payroll
requirements of the Town of Guttenberg in the County of Hudson, therein,
and the disbursement of funds therefrom for personnel payroll purposes, on
the basis of certified payrolls and warrants hereinafter provided for.
§ 2-52.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-53.2
1:56
§ 2-53.2. Authorized Disbursements. [Ord. 4/21/55 § 2]
Disbursements are hereby authorized from the "Personnel Payroll Bank
Account" by the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer for payroll purposes on
the basis of certified payrolls, and such regulations as the Mayor and Board
of Council prescribe.
§ 2-53.3. Signatures Required. [Ord. 4/21/55 § 3]
Payroll warrants for these purposes shall be inspected and signed by the
Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer, or in his absence or disability, by the
Town Clerk. In periods of emergency when both the Chief Financial Officer/
Treasurer and Town Clerk are absent or disabled, the payroll warrants shall
be signed and inspected by such person as the Mayor and Board of Council
shall, by resolution, designate as Acting Treasurer.
§ 2-53.4. Approval of Payrolls. [Ord. 4/21/55 § 4]
The certified payrolls and warrants under which such payrolls were paid
shall be submitted to the next subsequent meeting of the Mayor and Board
of Council for inspection and approval or ratification.
§ 2-54. ESTABLISH FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES. [Ord. #1994-01
§ I; Ord. #016/04; Ord. #017/06; Ord. No. 23-2016; Ord. No.
27-2017]
A charge shall be made for the following items/services in the amount
shown after the item/service:
a. Accident/incident reports by mail $5.
1. Incident report written request only: money order - $10 cash and
stamp address envelope.
b. Accident/incident reports by pickup $2.
c. Real estate license fingerprints $10.
d. Immigration fingerprints $5.
e. Taxi license $30.
Taxi license renewal $30 cash
f. Liquor license $10.
g. Transfer liquor license $15.
h. Good conduct letter $15.
i. Discovery fees for attorneys and insurance companies (first page) $5.
(per add. page) $1.
§ 2-53.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-54
1:57
§ 2-55. FEES FOR PUBLIC RECORDS. [Ord. #013/02 §§ 1 — 4; Ord.
#20-10]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the following fees shall apply to
members of the public requesting information pursuant to same:
§ 2-56. FEES FOR MARRIAGE, CIVIL UNION, DOMESTIC
PARTNERSHIP CERTIFICATES AND CEREMONIES. [Ord. No.
27-2017]
j. Pistol purchase permit (State mandated) $2.
k. Firearms identification card (State mandated) $5.
l. Security fingerprints $10.
m. Bus driver license fingerprints $5.
n. Board of Education fingerprints.
Town resident $5.
Out-of-town resident $10.
o. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 27-2017]
p. Copy of Zoning Ordinance or Master Plan $25.
q. Criminal record check $10 cash.
r. Copy/printing cost to the public for documents obtained at the media
center/recreation center/cultural center $0.10 per page.
a. Duplication of Paper Documents.
1. $0.05 per page for letter sized pages or smaller.
2. $0.07 per page for legal sized pages or larger.
b. Special Service Charge. If the records requested to be duplicated,
inspected or examined cannot be reproduced by ordinary document
copying equipment in ordinary size or extraordinary expenditure of
time and effort to accommodate the request is needed, in addition to
the actual duplicating cost, the requestor shall pay a fee of $20 per hour
for the time required to fulfill the request.
c. Medium for Copying. If the records requested to be duplicated,
inspected or examined is requested in a medium not maintained by the
Town, in addition to the actual duplicating cost, the requestor shall
incur a fee of $50.
d. Examination of Records. If the requestor of a record requests to
examine said record, the requestor shall pay a special service fee of $20
per hour for cost of the custodian safeguarding the same.
§ 2-54 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-56
1:58
§ 2-57. AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF
GUTTENBERG TO IMPLEMENT FIVE-YEAR EXEMPTION AND
ABATEMENT LAW FOR CONSTRUCTION OF MULTIPLE
DWELLINGS WITHIN THE TOWN'S REHABILITATION AREA.
§ 2-57.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 07-2017 Preamble]
The Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
(the "Exemption Law") enables municipalities which contain an area that
has been designated as an area in need of rehabilitation pursuant to the
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. (the
"Redevelopment Law"), to provide for the short term exemption or
abatement of local property taxes imposed upon eligible dwellings,
commercial and industrial structures within such rehabilitation area.
On March 27, 2017, the Town of Guttenberg (the "Town") designated
certain properties within its borders as an area in need of rehabilitation in
accordance with the Redevelopment Law (the "Rehabilitation Area").
The Town believes that improvements to, and the revitalization of, the
Rehabilitation Area are of great importance to the Town as a whole.
§ 2-57.2. General. [Ord. No. 07-2017 § 1]
The recitals set forth above are incorporated herein as if set forth at length.
§ 2-57.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 07-2017 § 2]
All terms utilized in this section not specifically defined herein shall conform
to the meanings set forth in the Exemption Law. For ease of reference, the
definitions set forth in the Exemption Law as of the date of the adoption
of this section are attached hereto as Exhibit A. However, if the definitions
set forth in the Exemption Law shall be subsequently amended, then the
Exemption Law, and not Exhibit A, shall control.8
a. Certified copies of marriage certificates, civil union certificates and
domestic partnership may be obtained from the Registrar or Deputy
Registrar. The fee for such certificate shall be $15.
b. There shall be a fee of $25 for any correction to the license or
certificates.
c. For marriage, civil union or domestic partnership ceremonies
performed by the Mayor, there shall be a fee of $50 for a ceremony
involving a bona fide, current resident of the Town of Guttenberg and
there shall be a fee of $100 for a ceremony involving only nonresidents.
8. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 2-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-57.4
1:59
§ 2-57.4. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 07-2017 § 3; amended
3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 06-19]
The Town hereby determines to utilize the authority granted under Article
VIII, Section I, paragraph 6 of the New Jersey Constitution to establish
the eligibility of certain multiple dwellings for exemptions, as provided
in this section and as permitted by the Exemption Law, throughout the
Rehabilitation Area. In order to qualify for exemption under this section any
proposed project must contain at least 12 dwelling units.
§ 2-57.5. Exemptions for Construction of Multiple Dwellings
Require Application to the Town Council for a Tax Agreement. [Ord.
No. 07-2017 § 4]
§ 2-57.6. Contents of Application for Exemption. [Ord. No. 07-2017
§ 5]
Applicants for an exemption under this section shall provide the Tax
Assessor with the following information:
a. Exemptions for Which Application Is Required. The Town hereby
determines that any property owner seeking exemption from taxation
with respect to the construction of multiple dwellings shall make
application to the Town Council in accordance with this section and
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9.
b. Contents of Application. Applicants for an exemption under this section
shall provide the Town Council and the Tax Assessor with the
information required by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9 and any such other pertinent
information as the Town may require, including but not limited to that
information set forth at Subsection 2-57.6.
c. Review and Recommendation by Tax Assessor. Within 60 days of receipt
of a complete application pursuant to this section, the Tax Assessor
shall review the information provided and shall provide written
recommendations to the Town Council with respect to same.
d. Action by Town Council. After receipt of the Tax Assessor's
recommendations, the Town Council shall determine whether to enter
into a tax agreement in accordance with the terms of the Exemption
Law, including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9 and N.J.S.A. .
a. Application for Tax Agreement.
1. A general description of the project for which exemption is sought,
and an estimated schedule of completion for the project;
2. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
3. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Town Council to demonstrate the structure and design of the
project;
§ 2-57.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-57.6
1:60
§ 2-57.7. Additional Exemptions When Property Already Subject to
Exemption. [Ord. No. 2017-07 § 6]
The Town hereby determines that an additional improvement or
construction completed on a property already granted a previous exemption
pursuant to this section during the period in which the previous exemption
is in effect, shall be eligible to qualify for an additional exemption under
the standards identified in this section. The additional improvement or
construction shall be considered as separate for purposes of calculating the
exemption, except that the assessed value of any previous improvement or
construction shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that
improvement or construction for the purpose of determining the assessed
value of the property for which any additional exemption is to be subtracted.
4. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project;
5. A statement of the reasons for seeking an exemption on the project,
and a description of the benefits to be realized by the Town and the
property owner if an exemption is granted;
6. Estimates of the cost of completing the project;
7. A statement showing (i) the real property taxes currently being
assessed at the project site; (ii) estimated tax payments that would
be made annually by the property owner with respect to the project
during the period of the exemption, and (iii) estimated tax
payments that would be made by the property owner with respect
to the project during the first full year following the termination of
the exemption;
8. A description of the number and types of dwelling units to be
provided, a description of the common elements or general
common elements, and a statement of the proposed initial rentals
or sales prices of the dwelling units according to type and of any
rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the dwellings' units
respecting low or moderate income housing;
9. A certification by the property owner listing (i) all properties within
the Town owned by the property owner or in which the property
owner has an interest and (ii) all agreements with the Town to
which the property owner is a party; and
10. Such other pertinent information as the Town may require.
b. Application Fee. Every application submitted to the Tax Assessor in
accordance with this § 2-57 shall include an application fee payable to
the Town in the amount of $2,000. [Added 4-22-2019 by Ord. No.
10-19]
§ 2-57.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-57.8
1:61
§ 2-57.8. Tax Delinquency. [Ord. No. 07-2017 § 7]
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this section with respect to
any property for which real estate taxes or other municipal charges are
delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties and interest for nonpayment
of taxes are due.
§ 2-57.9. Revaluation During Exemption Period. [Ord. No. 07-2017
§ 8]
In the event that the Town implements a revaluation or reassessment during
the exemption period for any property, any exemptions granted hereunder
shall continue to apply but at a valuation level consistent with the
revaluation or reassessment.
§ 2-57.10. Revision of Base Assessment During Exemption Period.
[Ord. No. 07-2017 § 9]
The granting of an exemption for a particular property shall not prejudice
the right of the Town to appropriately examine and revise the assessment
during the five-year exemption period in the event the base assessment is
found to be improperly valued and assessed.
§ 2-57.11. Effective Date; Sunset Provision. [Ord. No. 07-2017 § 10]
Upon final passage and publication, this ordinance 07-2017 (§ 2-57),
adopted April 24, 2017, shall take effect as provided by law, and shall
authorize the Town to grant exemptions up to a five-year period in duration.
This section shall lapse, unless readopted, on January 1, 2027, and no
exemptions shall be granted after January 1, 2027, without such readoption.
§ 2-57.12. Prior Actions Superseded. [Ord. No. 07-2017 § 11]
Any and all previous ordinances adopted by the Town relating to the
Exemption Law are hereby superseded by this section.
§ 2-58. ELECTRIC AND/OR NATURAL GAS AGGREGATION
PROGRAM. [Ord. No. 22-2018]
a. The Town of Guttenberg publicly declares its intent to become an
aggregator of electric power on behalf of its residential users of
electricity pursuant to the Government Energy Act of 2003, N.J.S.A.
48:3-91.3 to - 98, and implementing regulations.
b. The Town of Guttenberg will utilize approved vendors, Commercial
Utility Consultants, Inc., pursuant to the NJ E-PROCUREMENT Pilot
program (P.L. 2001, c. 30) under the NJ Department of Community
Affairs. The Reverse Energy auction will seek bids from licensed and
appropriate third party suppliers. If such winning bid is selected and
agreement executed, individual residential consumers would retain the
option not to participate and to choose any alternatives they desire.
§ 2-57.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 2-58
1:62
c. The Mayor and/or Town Administrator are hereby authorized and
directed to execute any documents necessary to carry out the purpose
of this section.
§ 2-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58
1:63
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. NOISE.
§ 3-1.1. Unnecessary Noise Prohibited. [Ord. 12/4/50 § 1]
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person
to make, cause or suffer or permit to be made or caused upon any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him, or upon any public street in the
Town, any unnecessary noises or sounds by means of the human voice, or
by any other means or methods which are physically annoying to persons or
which are so harsh, or so prolonged or unnatural, or unusual in their use,
time and place as to occasion physical discomfort or which are injurious to
the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the Town, or any
number thereof.
§ 3-1.2. Specific Prohibitions. [Ord. 12/4/50 §§ 2 - 5; Ord. #019/03]
a. Radios, Phonographs, Musical Instruments, Etc. It shall be unlawful for
any person to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or
operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or
other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the
person so playing, using or operating such instrument or device and
such persons who are voluntary listeners thereto, or in such manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit playing by a
band or orchestra in a hall or building.
b. Advertising. It shall be unlawful for any person for advertising purposes
or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the passing public, to
play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used or operated any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud-speaker, sound
amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing
of sound on the streets or public places of the Town or any place where
the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the streets or public places or
which is so placed and operated that the sound therefrom can be heard
to the annoyance or inconvenience of travelers upon any street or
public place, or of persons in neighboring premises.
c. Loud Speaker or Sound Amplifier. It shall be unlawful for any person
either as principal, agent or employee to play, use or operate for
advertising purposes, or for any other purpose whatsoever, on or upon
the public streets in the Town, any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker
or sound amplifier, or radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker
or sound amplifier, or any other instrument known as a calliope or any
instrument of any kind or character which emits therefrom loud and
§ 2-58 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-1.2
1:64
§ 3-1.3. Penalty. [Ord. 12/4/50 § 6]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, and
each violation of this section, and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 3-2. (RESERVED)9
§ 3-3. CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-3.1. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages. [New]
No person shall serve, sell, dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic
beverage on a public street of this Town or upon any public grounds,
parks, sidewalks or in any automobile or other vehicle or any other means
of transportation while on the public streets, public grounds, parks or
sidewalks.
§ 3-3.2. Possession of Open Containers. [New]
No person shall possess any open bottle, can or container which contains
alcoholic beverages on any public street of this Town or upon any public
raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle operated or
standing upon the streets or public places.
d. Horn or Warning Device. It shall be unlawful for any person to sound
any horn or warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle except when required by law, or when necessary to give timely
warning of the approach of the vehicle or as a warning of impending
danger to persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street.
No persons shall sound any horn or warning device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which shall emit an unreasonable loud
or harsh sound, or for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
e. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of
any building or sidewalk other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday is prohibited, except in the case of
an emergency in the interest of public health or safety or as permitted
by the Guttenberg Construction Code Official.
1. The Construction Code Official may issue a permit for the defined
work listed above, during prohibited hours, if in his opinion there
are extraordinary circumstances to justify same. Such permit may
be granted for a period not to exceed one month and must be
renewed for any successive month.
9. Editor's Note: Former Section 3-2, Loitering, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance 3/19/73, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 001-10.
§ 3-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3.2
1:65
grounds, parks, sideways or in any automobile or other vehicle or any other
means of transportation while on the public streets, public grounds, parks
or sidewalks.
§ 3-3.3. Penalty. [Ord. 11/17/86 § 1]
Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-4. LITTERING.
§ 3-4.1. Definition. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 1]
As used in this section:
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or other natural or
synthetic material or any combination thereof including, but not limited to,
any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match, or any flaming
or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass
clippings, leaves or other law or garden waste, newspapers, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, and packaging or construction
materials, but does not include the waste of the primary processes of
mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or
manufacturing.
§ 3-4.2. Litter Receptacles. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 2]
The use of litter receptacles shall be required at the following public places,
which exist or are planned for the future in the municipality. The proprietors
of these places or sponsors of these events shall be responsible for
providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate containerization
is available.
a. Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools and
government buildings;
b. Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear 1/4 mile
without a receptacle;
c. All parks and other recreation areas;
d. All street vendor locations;
e. All self-service refreshment areas;
f. All construction sites;
g. All shopping centers;
h. All gasoline service station islands;
§ 3-3.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-4.2
1:66
§ 3-4.3. Littering Prohibited. [Ord. 3/16/08 § 1; Ord. 8/17/88 § 11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard, or otherwise
place litter of any nature whatsoever upon public or private property, other
than in a litter receptacle or structure or container designated for the
collection of the particular item.
§ 3-4.4. Sidewalks to be Kept Free of Litter. [Ord. 3/16/08 § 2; Ord.
8/17/88 § 12]
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from any obstruction or litter of
every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts, and alleys
free from litter and other offensive material.
§ 3-4.5. Sweeping Litter into Gutter Prohibited. [Ord. 3/16/08 § 2;
Ord. 8/17/88 § 12]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin, or
other public place any litter or accumulation of litter from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property
shall keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free from litter. All
sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 3-4.6. Spillage on Streets. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 8]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any street or roadway unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded
to prevent its load or any part thereof from dropping, sifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which
any object or substance has fallen or otherwise escaped, which object or
substance could cause a traffic obstruction, damage a vehicle or otherwise
endanger persons or property, shall immediately cause the area to be
cleaned of all such objects or substances and shall pay the costs for such
cleaning.
§ 3-4.7. Disposal of residential and/or commercial trash in public
trash receptacle. [Ord. No. 15-2018]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard, or otherwise
dispose of their residential (household) and/or commercial (business) trash
into any public trash receptacle or container.
i. All marinas, boat moorages and fueling stations, all boat launching
stations and all public and private piers operated for public use;
j. All special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses, barbecues and festivals.
§ 3-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4.8
1:67
§ 3-4.8. Penalty. [Ord. #16-12; Ord. No. 15-2018]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General Penalty.
§ 3-5. POSTING OF NOTICES OR ADVERTISEMENTS.
§ 3-5.1. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 12/18/11 §§ I, II]
§ 3-5.2. Penalty. [Ord. 12/18/11 § III]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-6. POLITICAL SIGNS AND CAMPAIGN MATERIALS. [Prior
source history includes Ord. No. 5/20/85]
§ 3-6.1. Legislative Declaration. [Ord. No. 02-2018]
The Town Council finds and declares that the safety and welfare of the
residents and others using the streets and sidewalks of the Town are
endangered because of the common practice of candidates for public office
and their supporters, and of supporters and detractors in elections to:
§ 3-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 02-2018]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
a. No person shall distribute or post any paper with any written, printed
or painted matter thereon of any kind, or write or paint any word or
words upon any of the sidewalks, curbstones, fire hydrants, retaining
walls, or upon anything that may be deposited or erected in or upon any
public street or highway within the Town.
b. No person shall nail, tack, paste, or in any way attach to any tree, post,
telegraph pole, trolley pole, electric light pole, or any other post or pole,
or upon anything erected upon or in the public streets of the Town, any
card, bill, poster or sign of any material or description.
a. Affix posters, signs and other campaign literature to trees, lawns, poles,
trestles, traffic signs and other structures in the Town, causing same to
be obliterated, obstructed and defaced.
b. Write names and slogans upon the streets and sidewalks of the Town,
causing lawful markings upon same to be confused, obstructed and
defaced.
c. Fail to remove such signs, posters and other campaign literature after
the elections, thereby requiring the diversion of the work effort of
municipal personnel and causing an unsightly condition and expensive
drain on municipal funds.
§ 3-4.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-6.2
1:68
CAMPAIGN MATERIAL — Shall mean any poster, sign, handbill, circular,
banner, card, advertisement, printed sticker, painted words or material
having reference to any election or to the adoption or rejection of any public
questions at any general, primary or special election.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual candidate, corporation, political
committee, citizen's committee or partnership, organization, association or
any committee or group of persons organized on behalf of or against any
candidate or public question to be voted on at any special, primary or
general election.
POLITICAL SIGN — Shall mean any sign, including on the lawns or grounds
of private property, advancing the candidacy of any candidate or group of
candidates for public office or supporting or opposing a public question,
expressly excluding, however, any such signs posted or displayed on
existing commercial billboards by or with the consent of the owner thereof
and any such signs posted or displayed on licensed motor vehicles in
operating condition; provided, however, that no such vehicle is parked or
placed in any location for the primary purpose of displaying any such signs,
it being the intention of this section to eliminate the unsightly condition
created by the parking or standing of motor vehicles bearing political signs
at or adjacent to trafficked areas for the purpose of displaying such signs.
PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC FACILITY — Shall mean any property or item
used for public purposes, including but not limited to all public streets,
sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, all public parks, squares,
spaces, grounds, buildings, medians, traffic signal facilities, utility poles
or any other type of public pole, public trees, litter receptacles, benches,
bus shelters, fences or any object affixed to or placed upon public streets,
parking lots or sidewalks which is affixed or placed thereon for public
purposes or for the use of the public.
§ 3-6.3. Political Signs. [Ord. No. 02-2018]
§ 3-6.4. Statement of Information Required. [Ord. No. 02-2018]
All campaign material and political signs shall bear upon the face thereof
a statement of the name, address and other information of the person who
caused same to be printed, copied or published as required to be disclosed
by New Jersey Election Statutes.
a. Except as provided in paragraph b hereof below, any such political signs
shall be a ground sign or a sign placed on or in private property, with
the consent of the owner, and no such sign shall exceed 10 square feet
in total display area.
b. Any privately owned building or part thereof designated and serving as
the campaign headquarters of any candidate or group of candidates for
election for public office or as headquarters of a person or entity
supporting or opposing a public question may display one political sign
not exceeding 20 square feet in total area.
§ 3-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6.5
1:69
§ 3-6.5. Persons Responsible for Removal. [Ord. No. 02-2018]
The following persons shall be responsible under this article for the removal
of any campaign material or political sign posted:
§ 3-6.6. Time Restraints on Posting and Removal. [Ord. No.
02-2018]
No campaign material or political sign shall be erected, posted or displayed,
including on private property, more than 30 days prior to the date of the
election to which such material or sign pertains, and any such material or
sign shall be removed not more than 14 days after the date of such election.
§ 3-6.7. General Restrictions. [Ord. No. 02-2018]
a. Any person, firm or corporation who shall erect or display or who shall
cause or permit to be erected or displayed any campaign material or
political sign on premises subject to his, her or its control.
b. Persons whose names appear on any political sign or on any campaign
material and as required by New Jersey Election Statutes.
c. Any other person who actually places any campaign material or political
sign in any public place or public facility, even though his or her name
does not appear thereon.
a. No person shall draw, write or print or permit or suffer to be drawn,
written or printed upon any street or sidewalk or upon any public place
or facility any slogan, motto, name or symbol whether the same is
written with chalk, paint or any other substance. Each day the political
sign, advertisement or writing remains in violation of this section may
be considered a separate violation, and a separate complaint may be
issued for said violation until it is removed.
b. No campaign material or political sign shall be attached, stapled, taped
to or affixed in any way upon any public place, public facility or on
public property, including but not limited to, utility poles and traffic
poles, by any means. Each day the political sign, advertisement or
writing remains in violation of this section may be considered a
separate violation, and a separate complaint may be issued for said
violation until it is removed.
c. No campaign material or political sign shall be attached, stapled,
painted, taped to or affixed upon private property or private fence or a
private tree without the consent of the owner thereof. Each day the
political sign, advertisement or writing remains in violation of this
section may be considered a separate violation, and a separate
complaint may be issued for said violation until it is removed.
d. No person shall remove, tear down, deface or destroy any lawfully
erected political sign on private property without the consent of the
owner of said private property.
§ 3-6.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-6.8
1:70
§ 3-6.8. Violations and Penalties; Issuance of Warning. [Ord. No.
02-2018]
§ 3-7. URINATING IN PUBLIC.
§ 3-7.1. Prohibition. [Ord. #1994-13]
No person shall urinate in any street, highway, thoroughfare or public place
within the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 3-7.2. Penalty. [Ord. #1994-13]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section, shall
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-7A. INDECENT EXPOSURE.
§ 3-7A.1. Prohibited. [Ord. #1994-05]
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or drive on any street, avenue,
highway, road or public place located in the Town of Guttenberg in a state
of nudity. A person shall be found in a state of nudity when his clothing
or absence of clothing completely exposes to public view a persons anus,
genitals, pubic area or female breasts.
§ 3-7A.2. Penalty. [Ord. #1994-05]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section, shall
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-8. OBSCENE MATERIAL.
§ 3-8.1. Possession, Sale, Exhibition and Distribution Prohibited.
[Ord. 6/15/59 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or control for
sale, exhibition or distribution, or who shall sell or offer to sell, exhibit,
give away, distribute upon or within any street, alley, park, school building
or room, hall, theater, show house, newsstand, store or other place of
a. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in the amount of $100 per
violation, plus an additional $50 for each day the sign is not removed.
Fines for violation of any provision of this section may be payable at the
Violations Bureau without a court appearance. Costs of court of $33 will
also be imposed.
b. No summons or complaint shall issue to a candidate or the owner of
private property on which a sign is located more than 14 days after the
election until a warning is first issued to the candidate and owner and
the sign is not removed within seven days of the issuance of said notice.
§ 3-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.1
1:71
business or entertainment, any book, pamphlet, paper, films, or other thing
containing obscene, lewd, immoral or otherwise indecent language, prints,
pictures, figures, representations, and manifestly tending to the corruption
of morals.
§ 3-8.2. Penalty. [Ord. 6/15/59 § 2]
Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-9. BLASTING.
§ 3-9.1. Regulations. [Ord. 2/23/1881 § I]
No person shall authorize or engage in any blasting within the Town unless
before forming each blast it shall be securely covered with six green
timbers, of not less than four inches in thickness, 10 inches in width and
10 feet in length each, all securely chained together and placed over and
around each charge, and held in place by at least 300 pounds of weight
placed on top of them, nor unless three minutes notice before giving the
blast shall be given by displaying a red flag on a staff not less than 10 feet
high, set in a conspicuous place 25 feet from the point where the charge is
placed in every direction where any street extends, and by calling out the
words "a blast!" several times repeated, and loud enough to be distinctly
heard at a distance of 200 feet in every direction from the blast, and that no
heavier charge than seven pounds of powder be used in one blast.
§ 3-9.2. Penalty. [Ord. 2/23/1881 § II]
Any violation of any provision of this section is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and any person guilty thereof shall be liable to the penalty stated
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 for any one or each offense.
§ 3-10. SMOKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 3-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. #14-13]
As used in this section, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ENCLOSED AREA — Shall mean all areas between a floor and a ceiling,
extending to the center perimeter walls of a structure.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Shall include all public parks,
playgrounds and ball fields publicly owned or leased by the Town of
Guttenberg and all property owned or leased by the Town of Guttenberg
upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted
and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including all areas
adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to, any parking area,
driveway or drive aisle.
§ 3-8.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-10.1
1:72
SMOKING — Shall mean the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke
from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be
smoked, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic
smoking device.
§ 3-10.2. Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places. [Ord. #14-13]
Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities
owned or leased by the Town of Guttenberg and all property owned or
leased by the Town of Guttenberg upon which the public is invited or upon
which the public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational
activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not
limited to, any parking area, driveway or drive aisle, which have been
designated with no-smoking signs.
§ 3-10.3. Signs. [Ord. #14-13]
No-smoking signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with
a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently and
conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by this section. The signs shall
be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol which
contrasts in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited at the
designated area. The sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a
fine.
§ 3-10.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #14-13]
The enforcement authority of this section shall be the Police Department
and Health Department of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 3-10.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #14-13]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50 for the first offense and $100 for the second
offense.
§ 3-11. TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance 11/13/91 and
Ordinance Nos. 12-11 and 43-11.
§ 3-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. #17-13]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean the removal and transportation
of an automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or
§ 3-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11.1
1:73
a parking area to a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto.
INSIDE BUILDING — Shall mean a vehicle storage facility that is
completely indoors, having one or more openings in the walls, for storage
and removal of vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each
opening.
OUTSIDE SECURED — Shall mean an automobile storage facility that is not
indoors and is secured by a fence, wall or other manmade barrier that is at
least six feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a similar
on-site security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — Shall mean an automobile storage facility that is
not indoors and is not secured by a fence, wall or other manmade barrier,
and all other storage facilities not defined above as "inside building" or
"outside secured."
STORAGE CHARGES FOR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — Shall mean
the maximum allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a
twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period
begins at 12:01 a.m.
TOW VEHICLE — Shall mean only those vehicles equipped with a boom
or booms, winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment
specifically designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of
motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — Shall mean the towing operator's
principal place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in
use.
§ 3-11.2. Official Towers to Be Appointed. [Ord. #17-13]
§ 3-11.3. Services to Be Furnished. [Ord. #17-13]
a. The Director of Public Safety shall appoint persons or companies
meeting the criteria set forth in this section and engaged in the
business or offering the services or a motor vehicle towing, wrecker or
storage service, whereby damaged, impounded, disabled, abandoned,
immobile or illegally parked motor vehicles are towed or otherwise
removed by use of a tow vehicle, as defined in this section. Such
persons or companies shall be known as "official towers."
b. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license which shall be
issued as hereinafter provided.
a. Official towers shall furnish adequate and proper wrecking, towing,
storage and emergency repair services to motor vehicles damaged,
impounded, disabled, abandoned, immobile or illegally parked within
the limits of the Town, when requested to do so by an authorized Town
official.
§ 3-11.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-11.3
1:74
§ 3-11.4. Application Process; Review; Investigation. [Ord. #17-13]
b. No official tower shall subcontract any work to be performed pursuant
to this section without having first obtained prior written approval from
the Governing Body. Any official tower to whom approval to subcontract
work has been given shall be responsible for the services performed by
the subcontractor and shall remain liable for any violation of this
chapter by the subcontractor.
a. Every two years, the Town Administrator shall cause to be published,
bid specifications for the appointment of official towers as defined in
subsection 3-11.2. Those bid submissions for all companies interested
in becoming an official tower, shall be returned to the Town of
Guttenberg within 30 days of bid publications. All companies approved
by the Director of Public Safety, shall be appointed for two years.
b. Bid submissions specifications for inclusion on the official towers' list
shall be made to the Director of Public Safety upon a form provided by
and submitted to the Town Administrator and shall contain all of the
following information:
1. The name, residence and business address and telephone number
of the owner of the towing company. If the owner is a corporation,
the application shall contain the name, residence and business
address and telephone number of every stockholder owning more
than 10% of the issued stock.
2. Such information as may be required by the Director of Public
Safety concerning the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
facilities of such applicant, as hereinafter provided, showing that
the applicant meets the minimum standards of performance,
3. A certificate or certificates of insurance evidencing adequate
insurance coverage as hereinafter provided.
4. A nonrefundable application fee of $100 to cover the administrative
expenses incurred by the Town in processing the bid submissions.
5. The names and addresses of two business references who have
known the applicant for at least two years and who can attest to the
applicant's experience and performance in the towing, wrecking
and storage business.
6. The names and addresses of any other public agencies which the
applicant has or is contracted with in the last five years.
7. A New Jersey Business Registration Certificate.
c. Upon receipt of the bid submissions, the Town Administrator shall
forward a copy to the Commander of Patrol Operations for his review
and approval. The review by the Commander of Patrol Operations shall
consist of the following:
§ 3-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11.4
1:75
1. A background check to determine if either the applicant or the
applicant's personnel have been convicted of a criminal offense or
have had their driver's licenses suspended or revoked within the
past year. Conviction of a criminal offense or suspension of a
driver's license within the past year shall be a cause for
disqualification from inclusion on the official towers' list.
2. An inspection of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
area proposed to be utilized by the applicant to verify the accuracy
of the information contained in the application and to determine
compliance with applicable laws and regulations and the standards
of performance required by this section.
3. A check with State Division of Consumer Fraud to determine if the
applicant has had complaints filed against it and the findings of
such complaints. A sufficient number of verified findings against
the applicant shall be cause for disqualification.
4. An investigation and inquiry with any other public agencies which
the applicant presently or previously has contracted for towing to
determine the applicant's compliance in their rules and
regulations. Failure to comply with other agencies may be cause for
disqualification.
d. A bidder may be included on the official towers' list by the Director of
Public Safety when, from a consideration of the application and from
such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the Director finds
that all of the following circumstances exist:
1. The bidder has not knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in the
application or in any other document required pursuant to this
section.
2. The bidder has met the standards in this section and has furnished
the required hold harmless agreement and certificate(s) of
insurance.
3. The bid submissions have been reviewed and approved by the
Commander of Patrol Operations.
4. Neither the bidder nor the bidder's personnel have been convicted
of a criminal offense or had their drivers' licenses suspended within
the past year. In the discretion of the Director of Public Safety, an
applicant may be granted a license pending return, of a criminal
record search,
e. The Commander of Patrol Operations shall conduct his review and
render a report to the Director of Public Safety, recommending either
approval or denial of the application.
§ 3-11.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-11.4
1:76
§ 3-11.5. Issuance of License; Term; Reasons for Revocation;
Renewal. [Ord. #17-13]
§ 3-11.6. Minimum Standards of Performance. [Ord. #17-13]
To qualify for inclusion on the list of official towers, bidders must meet the
following minimum standards:
f. Written notice of the approval or denial of the bid shall be provided to
the bidder within seven days of the decision of the Director of Public
Safety.
a. Upon approval of the bid as herein provided, the Administrator shall
issue the bidder an official towers' license for each tow vehicle or
flatbed vehicle to be utilized in providing services pursuant to this
section. Said license shall be subject to a payment to the Town of
$2,000.
b. Said licenses, which shall be in a form approved by the Director of
Public Safety, shall be displayed on the tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle at
all times.
c. The licenses shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of
issuance, shall be nontransferable and shall be subject to revocation by
the Director of Public Safety for any of the following reasons:
1. If it is subsequently determined that the applicant knowingly and
with intent to deceive, made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application or in any other
document required pursuant to this section.
2. Violation of any Federal or State law or municipal ordinance or
regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or the
provision of towing services.
3. Violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Insurance.
4. Unsatisfactory service provided pursuant to this section.
d. Each year, there shall be a new bid process as described in subsection
3-11.4. No current holder of a license shall be given any preference in
the new bid process.
a. Minimum Vehicle Requirements.
1. Every official tower shall maintain and have available to render
services required by this section a minimum of three regular tow
vehicles, one flatbed vehicle. No vehicle can be owned by or leased
from any other official tower or from any person who owns 10% or
more of the ownership of any other official tower.
2. Vehicle Classes.
§ 3-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11.6
1:77
(a) Regular tow vehicles must be equipped with a boom or winch
assembly mounted on the chassis, a dolly assembly, a tow sling
or wheel lift assembly at least 100 feet of either 3/8 inch or 7/
16 inch cable attached to a motor-driven winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
3. Each bidder shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership or lease of the vehicles which will be utilized to provide
services pursuant to this section.
b. Minimum Equipment Requirements.
1. Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall have two-way radio
capability with a dispatching center on a twenty-four-hour basis.
2. Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall comply with any and all
State, Federal and local laws, regulations and ordinances
pertaining to safety, lighting and towing equipment requirements
and shall be subject to inspection by the Police at any time. No
changes may be made in said vehicles or equipment unless prior
written approval is obtained from the Director of Public Safety.
3. Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display the official towers'
license and shall have the name of the official tower displayed on
the vehicle in such a manner and of such lettering as conforms to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
c. Minimum Personnel Requirements.
1. Official towers shall have available, at all times, to provide the
services required by this section.
2. All persons employed by official towers to provide the services
required by this section shall meet the following requirements and
be subject to the following regulations. They shall:
(a) Be competent mechanics able to provide minimum road
services for disabled vehicles.
(b) Have a valid driver's license having no restrictions or
conditional endorsements other than a condition requiring the
wearing of eyeglasses.
(c) Be mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times.
(d) Obey all traffic laws and regulations.
(e) Be subject to inspection by and shall be approved by the
Commander of Patrol Operations prior to rendering any
services pursuant to this section.
§ 3-11.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-11.6
1:78
§ 3-11.7. Utilization of Official Towers' List. [Ord. #17-13]
(f) Not have been convicted of a crime nor have had their driving
privileges suspended or revoked within the past year.
(g) Not be employed by or provide services to any other official
tower.
d. Minimum Storage Requirements.
1. Every official tower shall own or lease and maintain an inside
building or outside secured storage area meeting the following
requirements:
(a) The storage area shall be capable of storing a minimum of 50
passenger vehicles and one tractor and trailer.
(b) The location of the storage area shall be either within the limits
of the Town or at such location outside of the Town as to
facilitate reasonable towing distances.
(c) The storage area shall be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence
having a minimum height of six feet, with at least one lockable
gate for ingress and egress, and shall be lighted from dusk to
dawn.
(d) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for such use.
(e) The storage facility shall be available for towing and to the
public 24 hours a day, 365 days per year.
(f) The official tower shall have an employee on duty during all
hours in which the storage facility is open.
(g) The official tower shall not charge a release fee or other charge
for releasing vehicles to their owners after normal business
hours or on weekends.
(h) Each official tower shall maintain said storage area exclusively
and shall not share said storage area with any other official
tower of the Town of Guttenberg.
(i) All storage areas must have a valid Certificate of Occupancy
from the local municipality. Proof of same must be submitted
with the application.
(j) The storage area can not be owned or leased from any other
official tower or any person who owns 10% or more of the
ownership of another official tower.
2. The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper and
safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this section. The
official tower shall be liable for any damage incurred by such
vehicles while in transit to or while stored in the storage areas.
§ 3-11.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11.7
1:79
§ 3-11.8. Hold Harmless Agreement. [Ord. #17-13]
Bidders shall agree in writing to assume the defense of and indemnify
and hold harmless the Town, its elected officials, boards, commissions,
officers, employees and agents, from all suits, actions, damages or claims
to which the Town may be subjected to any kind and nature whatsoever
resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as a consequence of the provision
of towing, wrecking, storage and/or emergency services provided at the
request of the Town pursuant to this section. Official towers shall enter into
a hold harmless agreement prior to being included on the official towers'
list.
§ 3-11.9. Insurance. [Ord. #17-13]
a. Official towers shall be placed on the list in the order in which their bid
is approved.
b. The Town shall request wrecking, towing and storage services from
each official tower in rotation. When called, the tower shall advise the
dispatcher if a vehicle is available and the estimated time of arrival. If
no tow vehicle is available or if the response time will exceed 20
minutes, the next official tower on the list shall be called, and so on. If
none of the official towers are available or able to provide such services
as are requested by the Town, the Town may request such services from
any other available source.
c. All requests for service shall be made by any member of the Police
Department and must be reported immediately to the police desk. The
Police Department should forward said request to the tower.
d. The Town shall request service only from official towers. All cars towed
by a licensed tower under the auspices of this section shall tow said
vehicles to storage facilities.
e. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, official towers shall give priority to requests
from the Town over any other requests which may be received by the
official towers.
a. No person shall be included on the official towers' list unless and until
such person has provided to the Town a certificate or certificates of
insurance evidencing that there is in effect the following insurance
coverage:
1. Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limits.
2. Workers' compensation as required by law.
3. Garage keepers liability in an amount not less than $60,000 per
location.
§ 3-11.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-11.9
1:80
§ 3-11.10. Towing and Storage Fee Schedule. [Ord. #17-13]
4. Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit.
5. Sufficient comprehensive general public liability insurance to
protect the town from any liability, loss or damages arising out of
the activities to be conducted. Such insurance shall be in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for
each accident.
b. Policies of insurance shall contain endorsements to provide collision
coverage from vehicles in tow.
c. Policies of insurance shall be written by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Insurance
companies shall be acceptable to the Town and shall have at least a B+
rating by a recognized rating service.
d. The Town of Guttenberg shall be named as an additional insured on all
policies of insurance provided pursuant to this section. All certificates
of insurance shall provide that the policies may not be canceled,
terminated or coverage decreased without 30 days' written notice to
the Town.
e. Policies of insurance required by this section shall be maintained in full
force and effect at all times. In the event that any coverage is canceled,
terminated, interrupted or decreased in amount, the tower shall be
removed from the official towers' list until such time as the required
coverage is reinstated or replaced.
a. The maximum allowable fees for towing and storage:
1. Class 1: Automobiles.
Wheel Lift $125
Flatbed $125
Storage $35/day
2. Class 2: SUV, Vans, Pickups Up to 9,000 lbs.
Wheel Lift $150
Flatbed $150
Storage $45/day
3. Class 3: Trucks and Buses Over 9,000 lbs.
§ 3-11.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11.10
1:81
§ 3-11.11. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. #17-13]
Underlift-Wheel Lift $250/hour (2 hr.
minimum)
Lowboy $250/hour (2 hr.
minimum)
Storage $85/day (per unit)
b. Under certain circumstances official towers shall be allowed to charge
for extra services that may be required above the basic towing charge
(such as rolled over vehicles, vehicle off the roadway, waiting time at
the scene of a motor vehicle accident, cleanup and speedy dry). The
charges for any of these extra charges shall be consistent with industry
standards.
a. Copies of this section and the schedule of fees that may be charged by
official towers shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours at the Town Hall. Copies shall also be made available to
the public at each official tower's place of business.
b. All official towers shall post, in a prominent place at each storage area
clearly visible to the public, a schedule of the fees that may be charged
for all services provided pursuant to this section. A copy of the schedule
of fees must be provided to any owner of a vehicle that has been towed.
c. The Town reserves the right to make periodic unannounced inspections
of the personnel vehicles, equipment and storage areas of all official
towers.
d. The relationship between an official tower and the Town is one of an
independent contractor. Neither party shall be construed in any manner
whatsoever to be an employee of the other, nor shall any employee or
agent furnished by any party be construed to be an employee or agent
of the other party. Inclusion on the official towers' list shall not be
construed or considered as a joint venture, partnership, association,
contract or employment or profit-sharing agreement.
e. The municipality shall not be liable or responsible for compensating the
official towers for any of the services performed under this section
unless those services are performed for Town vehicles. Compensation
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the towed motor vehicle, and
the official tower shall proceed directly against the owner.
f. The official tower shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the
conduct of its employees.
g. Each official tower shall keep and maintain adequate and complete
records showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all services
rendered and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be
available for inspection by the Town at any time during normal business
§ 3-11.10 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-11.11
1:82
§ 3-11.12. Dispute Resolution; License Revocation. [Ord. #17-13]
§ 3-11.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #17-13]
§ 3-12. AUDIBLE ALARMS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 3-12.1. Scope. [Ord. 3/3/93 § 1]
This section shall apply to all motor vehicles on which an audible alarm has
been installed whenever such vehicles are parked, garaged or otherwise
located within the jurisdictional limits of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 3-12.2. Audible Alarm Systems to Require Physical Contact;
Exception. [Ord. 3/3/93 § 2]
No motor vehicle or vehicles subject to this section shall have an audible
alarm system installed therein or thereon which may be activated by any
means other than physical contact with the vehicle; provided, however, that
an audible alarm system which may be remotely activated by the owner or
other lawful operator of the vehicle shall be permitted.
hours. Records shall be kept and maintained by the official tower
at one central location and shall be retained for a period of seven
years. Records may be written, printed or computerized as long as the
requirements of this subsection are met.
a. In the event a complaint is received by the Town involving the improper
or unsatisfactory performance of services by an official tower, excessive
charges or damage to a motor vehicle while in the custody of the tower,
written notice of the same shall be provided by the Administrator to the
official tower involved. The tower shall have the opportunity to respond,
in writing, in five days.
b. Within 14 days of receipt of the tower's response, or within 21 days of
receipt of the complaint, if no response is received, the matter shall be
presented by the Administrator to the Director of Public Safety.
c. If, after considering the matter, the Director of Public Safety shall
determine that one of the causes for revocation of the official towers'
license exists, the license shall be revoked, and the tower shall
surrender the same to the Administrator within one day.
d. Failure to surrender the license upon revocation shall constitute a
violation of this section.
e. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
a. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 and each violation of any of the
provisions of this section and each day.
§ 3-11.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12.3
1:83
§ 3-12.3. Automatic Termination of Alarm Required. [Ord. 3/3/93
§ 3]
No audible alarm system which will not automatically terminate its
operation within five minutes of being activated shall be permitted on any
motor vehicle which is subject to this section.
§ 3-12.4. Frequent, Unjustified Alarms Declared a Nuisance. [Ord.
3/3/93 § 4]
Any audible alarm system which is activated more than three times in any
eight-hour period under circumstances in which the Police Department,
after proper investigation, determines that there has been no attempt to
steal, vandalize, unlawfully enter or otherwise disturb the motor vehicle on
which the audible alarm is installed shall be deemed a public nuisance.
§ 3-12.5. Penalty. [Ord. 3/3/93 § 5; New]
The owner of any audible alarm system which is deemed a public nuisance
pursuant to subsection 3-12.4 shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-13. CURFEW.
§ 3-13.1. Finding and Purpose. [Ord. #015/04 § 1; Ord. #019/06 § 1;
Ord. #002-09 § 1]
The Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg hereby find there has
been a significant breakdown in the supervision normally provided by
certain parents and guidance for juveniles under 17 years of age resulting in
juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior including
vandalism, noisy and rowdy behavior, breaking and entering, public
drinking and littering, and harassment of residents.
The Mayor and Council further find that the offensive activities of the
juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances because
the activities are easily concealed whenever police officers are present
and the establishment of reasonable curfew regulations will enable the
community to better control the free and unobstructed access to the streets
and public places by the majority of residents and will enable the police to
act reasonably and fairly to prevent the violation of laws and ordinances by
juveniles.
The Mayor and Council further find and have determined that a curfew
meets a very real local need and that curfew ordinances in other
communities have been a significant factor in minimizing juvenile
delinquency. A curfew in Guttenberg is particularly appropriate in view
of the high density of population in Guttenberg and the mixed use of
residential and commercial areas throughout the Town. The regulation
of juveniles is an attempt to minimize danger to the juveniles and the
§ 3-12.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-13.1
1:84
community during the danger hours for nocturnal crime and mischief, which
could be accentuated because of the juvenile's immaturity.
Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is an accepted norm
by a substantial majority of the community and parents have expressed a
desire to have a curfew in order to augment their efforts to supervise and
guide their children.
§ 3-13.2. Curfew for Juveniles. [Ord. #015/04 § 2; Ord. #019-06 § 2;
Ord. #002-09 § 2; Ord. #39-11]
Unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, it shall be unlawful for a
juvenile to be in any public place within the Town of Guttenberg on Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and/or Thursday between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and extending until 5:00 a.m. of the following day. On Friday and
Saturday between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and extending until 5:00 a.m. of
the following day.
§ 3-13.3. Exceptions. [Ord. #015/04 § 3; Ord. #019-06 § 3; Ord.
#002-09 § 3]
In the following exceptional cases a minor located upon a public place
during the nocturnal hours for minors, their parents and their fellowcitizens
shall not, however, be considered in violation of the Curfew
Ordinance.
a. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
b. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
c. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion and/or freedom
of speech. The exercise or said right shall begin by first delivering to the
person designated by the Director of Police Department to receive that
information, at the Police Headquarters on 6808 Park Avenue,
Guttenberg, a written communication, signed by the juvenile and
countersigned, if practicable, by a parent of the juvenile with their
home address and telephone number, specifying when, where and in
what manner the juvenile will be upon the public places at night (during
hours when the Curfew Ordinance is otherwise applicable to said
minor) in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
communication.
d. In case of reasonable necessity for the juvenile remaining upon the
public places but only after the juvenile's parent has communicated to
the Director of Police Department or the person designated by the
Director of Police Department to receive such notifications, the facts
establishing the reasonable necessity relating to specified public places
at a designated time for a described purpose including points of origin
§ 3-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13.3
1:85
and destination. A copy of the communication, or the police record
thereof, duly certified by the Police Department to be correct, with an
appropriate notation of the time it was received and the names and
addresses of the parent and juvenile, shall be admissible evidence.
e. When the juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile
resides.
f. When returning home from and within one hour after the termination of
a school or Town sponsored activity, or an activity of a religious or other
voluntary association, of which prior notice, indicating the place and
probable time of termination, has been given in writing, to and duly
filed for immediate reference by the Director of Police Department or
officer assigned by the Director on duty at the police station, thus
encouraging, as in other exceptional situations, responsible conduct on
the part of juveniles involved in such activities and striking a fair
balance for any conflicting interests.
g. When authorized, by special permit, from the Director of Police
Department or the officer designated by the Director for that purpose,
carried on the person of the juvenile thus authorized, as follows: When
necessary nighttime activities of a juvenile may be inadequately
provided for by other provisions of this section, then recourse may be
had to the Director of Police Department, either for a regulation as
provided in paragraph h or for a special permit as the circumstance
warrant. A written application signed by a juvenile and by a parent of
the juvenile shall be submitted. This application shall include: (a) the
name, address, and telephone number of a parent thereof, (b) the
height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and other physical
characteristics of the juvenile (c) the necessity which requires the
juvenile to remain upon the public place during the curfew hours
otherwise applicable, and (d) the street or route and the beginning and
ending of the period of time involved by date and hour. The Director of
Police Department may grant a permit in writing for the use by the
juvenile of public places at such hours as in the opinion of the Director
of Police Department may reasonably be necessary. In an emergency
this may be handled by telephone or other effective communication,
with a corresponding record being made contemporaneously to the
Director of Police Department or to the person designated by the
Director of Police Department to act on his behalf in an emergency, at
the police station.
h. When the juvenile carries a certified card of employment, renewable
each calendar month when the current facts so warrant, dated or
reissued not more than 45 days previously, signed by the Director of
Police Department and briefly identifying the juvenile, the address of
the juvenile's home and of the juvenile's place of employment, and the
juvenile's hours of employment.
i. Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their several limitations such as
provisions for notification, are severable, as hereinafter provided but
§ 3-13.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-13.3
1:86
§ 3-13.4. Parental Responsibility. [Ord. #015/04 § 4; Ord. #019/06
§ 4; Ord. #002-09 § 4]
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a juvenile knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile to be or remain upon
any public place under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or
otherwise beyond the scope of the Curfew Ordinance. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge, which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's legal custody.
It is intended to continue to keep the neglectful or careless parent up
to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through
an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
juvenile.
here reemphasized will be considered by the Mayor and Council as
warranted by future experience illuminated by the views of student
government association, school personnel, citizens, associations,
parents, officers and persons in authority concerned positively with
juveniles as well as with juvenile delinquency.
a. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a parent or
guardian thereof, a juvenile under appropriate circumstances, for
example, a juvenile of tender age, near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or are known.
b. In any event the police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a written
report with the Director of Police Department or shall participate to the
extent of the information for which he is responsible in the preparation
of a report on the curfew violation. It is not the intention of this Section
to require reports that will prevent police officers from performing their
primary police duties. The reports shall be as simple as is reasonably
possible and may be completed by police departmental personnel other
than sworn police officers.
c. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the juvenile and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If
the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then
the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the
extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance
by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be entrusted to an
adult, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent or
guardian assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending
the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
§ 3-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13.5
1:87
§ 3-13.5. Enforcement Procedure. [Ord. #015/04 § 5; Ord. #019/06
§ 5; Ord. #002-09 § 5]
If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is upon the public place
in violation of the Curfew Ordinance, the officer shall notify the juvenile that
he or she is in violation of the ordinance and shall require the juvenile to
provide his or her name, address and telephone number and how to contact
his or her parent or guardian.
In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of convincing
evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer shall, in the first
instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
§ 3-13.6. Penalties. [Ord. #015/04 § 6; Ord. #019/06 § 6; Ord.
#002-09 § 6]
a. First Violation. For the first violation, the normal procedure shall then
be to take the juvenile to the Police Station where a parent or guardian
shall immediately be notified to come for the juvenile. At the police
station, the parent shall be questioned. This is intended to permit
ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and
to centralize responsibility in the person designated there and then on
duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement,
and recording, thus, making available experienced personnel and
access to information and records.
b. Second Violation. A juvenile with a second violation of this section shall
be brought to the police station where his parent or guardian shall be
immediately notified to come for the juvenile at that time. When the
parent arrives at the police station, the parent shall be given an
Ordinance Summons for a violation of this section in the name of the
juvenile. The juvenile shall then be subject to the penalties as described
in subsection 3-13.7.
a. Community Service. Any person, juvenile or adult, convicted of a
violation of this section shall be required to perform community service
as directed by the Court. As provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52, wherever
both a juvenile and the juvenile's parent or guardian violate the section,
they shall be required to perform community service together.
b. Fines. Any juvenile convicted of a violation of the Curfew Ordinance
shall be subject to a fine of $50 for a first offense, $100 for a second
offense and not less than $150 nor more than $1,000 for any third and
subsequent offense. Any parent or guardian convicted of a violation,
after the warning notice pursuant to subsection 3-13.6 of a first
violation by a juvenile, shall be fined $50 and for a second offense by a
parent or guardian the fine shall be $100. For any subsequent offense
by a parent, the fine shall be no less than $150 and not more than
$1,000.
§ 3-13.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-13.7
1:88
§ 3-13.7. Construction. [Ord. #015/04 § 7; Ord. #019/06 § 7; Ord.
#002-09 § 7]
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance. If any provision, including any exception, part, phrase, or term
or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby
and the validity of the Curfew Ordinance in any and all other respects shall
not be affected thereby.
§ 3-13.8. Notice. [Ord. #015/04 § 8; Ord. #019/06 § 8; Ord. #002-09
§ 8]
Notice of existence of this section and of the curfew regulations established
by it shall be posted in, on or about such public or quasi-public places as
may be determined by the Director of Police Department in order that the
public may be informed of the existence of this section and its regulations.
§ 3-13.9. Expiration Date. [Ord. #015/04 § 9; Ord. #019/06 § 9; Ord.
#002-09 § 9]
This section shall expire and shall be null and void after June 30, 2011.
The provision, commonly known as a "sunset provision" is included in this
section to ensure that the section, its effectiveness and its need will be
reviewed by the Mayor and Council within a reasonable time after its
adoption.
§ 3-14. ENROLLING A NONRESIDENT STUDENT IN THE
GUTTENBERG SCHOOL SYSTEM.
§ 3-14.1. Prohibition. [Ord. #14-1994 §§ 1, 2]
§ 3-14.2. Violation or Penalties. [Ord. #14-1994 § 3]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
§ 3-15. GRAFFITI.
a. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to assist, aid, abet, allow,
permit, suffer or encourage a minor to register or enroll in the
Guttenberg School System where the minor is ineligible to attend as a
result of the minor's nonresident status.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or her name,
address or other residence designating documentation to be utilized in
the registration or enrollment of any nonresident student in the Town of
Guttenberg School System unless previous permission has been
granted by the Superintendent of the Guttenberg School System or his
or her designee.
§ 3-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15.1
1:89
§ 3-15.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1995-06 § 1]
GRAFFITI — Shall mean any writing, drawing, marking, symbol or the like
placed upon any real or personal property, whether private property or
public property, by using paint, spray paint, aerosol paint, markers, chalk,
dyes or any other substance or method without the consent or authorization
of the owner of the property.
MINOR — Shall mean any person under the age of 18 years.
WIDE FELT TIP MARKERS — Shall mean a marking pen or instrument
of which the surface used for writing or marking purposes is equal to or
greater than 1/8 of an inch.
§ 3-15.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #1995-06 § 2]
§ 3-15.3. Requirement to Remove Graffiti. [Ord. #012/03]
The owner of any commercial or residential premises located within the
Town of Guttenberg which has any form of graffiti on any building, structure
or accessory structure or building shall be required to either restore the
defaced surface by removing the graffiti or repaint the defaced surface
using the same color paint as existed previously on a defaced surface within
10 days after written notice to the owner, occupant, lessee, sublessee, agent
or landlord by the Building Inspector (or designee) to remove the graffiti.
§ 3-15.4. Remedy of Town of Guttenberg. [Ord. #012/03; Ord. No.
09-2017]
At the request of the owner of any commercial or residential premises
located within the Town of Guttenberg, the Town of Guttenberg shall
remove any form of graffiti on any building, structure or accessory structure
without a cost to the owner. The owner, who shall make the request, shall
execute a full release to the Town of Guttenberg which shall indemnify and
hold harmless the Town of Guttenberg, Guttenberg municipal employees
and/or agents from and against all liability, damage, claims, demands, costs,
judgments, fees (including attorney fees) or losses to the extent the same
shall be caused by the Town of Guttenberg's, its employees and/or agents
negligent acts, errors or omissions in the performance of its removal of
graffiti.
§ 3-15.5. Penalties. [Ord. #1995-06 § 2]
a. No person shall write, draw, print, or place with ink, paint, chalk or
other substance, graffiti or other markings whether obscene or not and
whether intended to offend or not, on the real or personal property of
another, whether such property is publicly or privately owned, unless
the owner of said property specifically consented to the same. Nor shall
any person willfully or maliciously damage, deface or vandalize the
property of another by inscribing or placing graffiti or any other
markings on a public or private street, or on public or private property
whether real or personal.
§ 3-15.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-15.5
1:90
§ 3-16. (RESERVED)10
§ 3-17. REGULATIONS FOR DYNAMIC COMPACTION OF SOIL.
§ 3-17.1. Hours Prohibited. [Ord. #027/97 § I]
No person shall and no owner shall permit the compacting of soil or
surcharging land by means of the process commonly known as dynamic
compaction, before 8:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. and prohibited on Sunday.
§ 3-17.2. Dynamic Compaction Defined. [Ord. #027/97 § II]
The term dynamic compaction as used in this section shall mean the process
of dropping or rapidly lowering a weight by free fall which weight has been
raised by mechanical means so that such weight land heavily upon soil
which is to be compacted.
§ 3-18. OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL DISPLAY OF FRUITS, FLOWERS,
PLANTS, FOOD PRODUCTS PROHIBITED. [Ord. #028/97 § I]
No retail or wholesale commercial establishments within the Town of
Guttenberg shall display and/or offer for sale any fruits, flowers, plants,
a. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section,
upon conviction thereof shall pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 or be
subject to imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph for a first
offense involving the actual defacing or marring of any private or public
property, a person having been convicted of same shall be subject to a
minimum mandatory fine of not less than $250 and a minimum
mandatory period of imprisonment or a term of community service of
not less than 10 days. One day of community service shall consist of
eight hours.
c. For a second or subsequent violation involving the actual defacing or
marring of any private or public property, a person having been
convicted of same shall be subject to a minimum, mandatory fine of not
less than $500 and a minimum mandatory period of imprisonment of
not less than 10 days, and shall be of such form and substance as the
Court shall deem appropriate under the circumstances.
d. In addition to any other penalty imposed by the Court, any person
convicted for a violation of this section may, at the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, be required to pay to the owner of the
damaged property monetary restitution in the amount of the pecuniary
damage caused by the act of graffiti.
10.Editor's Note: Former Section 3-16, Disorderly Persons Offense, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 007/96 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 002-10.
§ 3-15.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18
1:91
vegetables or other vegetation or any meats and/or other food products,
cooked or uncooked, outside the walls of the building or structure which
contain such commercial enterprise's principal business activity, nor shall
such establishments place or allow to be placed any tables or chairs outside
the walls of the building or structure which contains such establishment.
§ 3-19. LOCATION AND BOUNDARIES OF DRUG-FREE SCHOOL
ZONES.
§ 3-19.1. Map Adopted. [Ord. #015/98 § 1; Ord. #34-11]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (C.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone map produced on or about June 9,
2011, by Boswell McClave Engineering, municipal engineers, is hereby
approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and
areas within the municipality of property which is used for school purposes
and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board, and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school
property.
§ 3-19.2. Locations and Boundaries of School Property. [Ord. #015/
98 § 2; Ord. #34-11]
The Drug-Free School Zone map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-19.1 of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if
any, that this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and Drug-
Free School Zones.
§ 3-19.3. Changes in Location or Boundaries. [Ord. #015/98 § 3;
Ord. #34-11]
The school board, or chief administrative officer in the case of any private or
parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation
to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Attorney of
any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of
any property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-19.4. Map on File. [Ord. #015/98 § 4; Ord. #34-11]
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection
3-19.1 of this section, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such
a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map
approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed
§ 3-18 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-19.4
1:92
that a true copy of such map of this section shall be provided without cost
to the County Clerk and to the Office of the Hudson County Prosecutor.
§ 3-19.5. Additional Matters. [Ord. #015/98 § 5; Ord. #34-11]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
§ 3-20. DRUG-FREE ZONES AROUND PUBLIC PROPERTIES.
a. It is determined that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-19.1 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecution arising under the criminal laws of this State, and that
pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved adopted
pursuant to subsection 3-19.1 of this section. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, leased to any elementary or secondary school or school
board, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or
school board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approved and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone map
have been complied with.
§ 3-19.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-20.1
1:93
§ 3-20.1. Drug-Free Public Property Zone. [Ord. #035/00; Ord.
#35-11]
The locations and areas within the Town of property which is used for a
public housing facility owned by or leased to a housing authority or that is
used for any public park, or public building, and of the areas on or within
500 feet of such public housing, public park, or public building property.
§ 3-20.2. Definitions. [Ord. #035/00; Ord. #35-11]
PUBLIC BUILDING — Shall mean any publicly owned or leased library or
museum.
PUBLIC HOUSING, FACILITY — Shall mean any dwelling, complex of
dwellings, accommodation, building, structure, or facility and real property
of any nature appurtenant thereto and used in connection therewith, which
is owned by or leased to a local housing authority in accordance with
the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law," 1992, (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et
seq.) for the purposes of providing living accommodation to persons of low
income.
PUBLIC PARK — Shall mean a park, recreation facility or area, or
playground owned or controlled by a State, County, or local government
unit.
§ 3-20.3. Location and Boundaries of Public Zone Property; Map
Adopted. [Ord. #035/00; Ord. #35-11]
The Drug-Free Public Zone map produced on or about June 9, 2011, by
Boswell McClave Engineering, municipal engineers is hereby approved and
adopted, and shall constitute an official finding and record as to the location
and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet of a public housing facility,
public park or public building until such time, if any, this section shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of public housing facilities, public parks, public building and
drug-free public housing, public parks, and public building zones.
§ 3-21. KEEPING OF CERTAIN LIVE ANIMALS PROHIBITED. [Ord.
#010/99 § 1]
Any use that involves the storage, receipt, delivery, harboring, maintaining,
or keeping of live animals, including, but not limited to, chickens, roosters,
turkeys, ducks, geese, pigs, and lambs, in the Town of Guttenberg for sale
or other transfer, whether alive or dead, whether by gift or wholesale or
retail sale, for later human consumption is a prohibited use in any zone in
the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 3-22. POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
BY UNDERAGED PERSONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 3-20.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-22.1
1:94
§ 3-22.1. Prohibited Activity. [Ord. #012/01]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without legal
authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic
beverage on private property.
§ 3-22.2. Exceptions. [Ord. #012/01]
No ordinance shall prohibit an underaged person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance,
ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who
has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-22.3. Definitions. [Ord. #012/01]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underaged person's grandparent, aunt or
uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 3-22.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #012/01]
a. Fines. A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $250 for a
first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
b. Suspension of Driving Privileges. The Court may, in addition to the fine
authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone for six months the
driving privileges of the defendant. Upon the conviction of any person
and the suspension or postponement of that person's license, the Court
shall forward a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first
and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by the
Court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the imposition
of a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of sentence has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the Court shall immediately collect the
license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for any
reason the license cannot be collected, the Court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the Court.
The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
§ 3-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22.4
1:95
§ 3-23. ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS.
§ 3-23.1. Definitions. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
The following terms, as used in this section, are defined below:
ROLLER SKATES — Shall mean a pair of devices worn on the feet with
sets of wheels attached, regardless of the number or placements of those
wheels, and used to glide or propel the user over the ground.
SCOOTER — Shall mean a piece of wood or other material mounted on
skate wheels used to glide or propel the user across the ground.
§ 3-23.2. Requirements. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
Every person operating any roller skates, skateboard or scooter upon a
roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by Chapter 4 of Title 39 except as
to those provisions thereof which by their nature can have no application.
§ 3-23.3. Regulations. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
The Mayor and Council, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-10-10a may regulate the
operation of roller skates, skateboards and scooters upon the roadways and
public properties under municipal jurisdiction.
§ 3-23.4. Protective Gear. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
No person under the age of 14 may operate roller skates or a skateboard
without wearing full protective gear, including helmet, wrist guards, elbow
pads; no person under the age of 14 may operate a scooter without a
helmet, elbow pads and knee pads.
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in R.S. 39:3-40. A person shall be required
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice. Failure to
receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt
of a written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of R.S. 39:3-40.
If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the Court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Division the required report. The Court shall not collect
the license of a nonresident convicted under this section. Upon receipt
of a report by the Court, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 3-22.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-23.5
1:96
§ 3-23.5. Operation of Roller Skates, Skateboards or Scooters on
Roadways. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-10-10a, any person operating roller skates,
a skateboard or a scooter upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side
of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing
vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction; provided, however, that
any person may move to the left under any of the following situations:
§ 3-23.6. Prohibited Roadways. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
The operation of roller skates, a skateboard or a scooter by any person
under the age of 14 is prohibited upon the following roadways:
§ 3-23.7. Motors Prohibited. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
The use of motorized roller skates, scooters or skateboards is hereby
prohibited. The motor need be engaged in order for a person to be in
violation of this prohibition. Any member of the Police Department who
witnesses a violation of this subsection shall confiscate the motorized
scooter which shall remain in police custody until such time as (1) the
violator pleads guilty by the Municipal Court and pays the subsequent fine
or (2) the violator is found not guilty by the Municipal Court.
§ 3-23.8. Violations, Warnings, Fines. [Ord. #014/03 § 1]
a. To make a left turn from a left turn lane or pocket;
b. To avoid debris, drains or other hazardous conditions that make it
impracticable to ride at the right side of the roadway.
c. To pass a slower moving vehicle;
d. To occupy any available land when traveling at the same speed as other
traffic; or
e. To travel no more than two abreast when traffic is not impeded.
a. State roadways.
b. County roadways.
c. Any section of roadway with a posted speed limit in excess of 35 miles
per hour.
a. Any person violating this section shall be fined a minimum of $50 and a
maximum of $250 per offense, as determined in the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court.
b. Notwithstanding paragraph a above, any person under the age of 14
who violates the provisions of subsection 3-23.4 above, by failing to
wear the appropriate protective gears shall be warned of the violation
by the enforcing official. The parent or legal guardian of the violator
§ 3-23.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-23.8
1:97
§ 3-24. PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
§ 3-24.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2014-12]
§ 3-24.2. Park Hours. [Ord. #2014-12]
Parks, unless otherwise posted at a specific park, shall be open to the public
every day of the year from 7:00 a.m. to sunset. It shall be a violation of this
section to be in any public park prior to 7:00 a.m. or after sunset of any day.
Notwithstanding the above, the Town Administrator may, in his discretion,
issue permits allowing individuals or groups to utilize a public park for a
specific purpose or event for a time prior to 7:00 a.m. or after sunset.
§ 3-24.3. Use of and Conduct in Parks and Public Property. [Ord.
#2014-12]
may be fined a maximum of $25 for the first offense and a maximum
of $100 for any subsequent offense. The penalties provided under
this provision may be waived if the parent or legal guardian presents
suitable proof that an approved helmet or appropriate personal
protection equipment has been made available to the minor. The parent
or legal guardian shall be responsible for the minor's use of the
appropriate protective gear as provided herein. All moneys collected as
fines under this subsection shall be deposited in the Bicycle and Skating
Safety Fund, pursuant to Section 2 of P.L. 1991 c. 465 (39:4-10.2).
a. PARKS AND RECREATIONS FACILITIES - Shall include all public parks,
playgrounds and ball fields publicly owned or leased by the Town of
Guttenberg and all property owned or leased by the Town of Guttenberg
upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted
and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including all
areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to, any
parking area, driveway or drive aisle.
b. PERSON - Is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
c. VEHICLE - Is any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered,
animal-drawn, or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in
Town of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby
carriages and vehicles in the service of the Town.
a. Buildings and Other Property.
1. Disfiguration and Removal. No person in a park shall willfully mark,
deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any
building, tables, benches, railings, paving or paving material, water
lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof,
signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other
§ 3-23.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-24.3
1:98
§ 3-24.4. Littering and Dumping. [Ord. #2014-12]
§ 3-24.5. Traffic and Parking. [Ord. #2014-12]
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
2. Restrooms and Washrooms. No person in a park shall fail to
cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and
sanitary condition.
3. Removal of Natural Resources. No person in a park shall dig, or
remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants, down-timber
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting, or other means or agency.
4. Erection of Structures. No person in a park shall construct or erect
any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or
temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility
into, upon, or across such lands, except on special written permit
issued hereunder.
b. Trees, Shrubbery, Lawns and Monuments.
1. Injury and Removal. No person in a park shall damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick
the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person
attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A
person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any
other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any
area.
2. Monuments and Other Structures. No person in a park shall walk,
stand or sit upon monument, vases, fountains, railing, fences or
upon any other property not designated or customarily used for
such purposes.
a. Pollution of Waters. No person in a park shall throw, discharge, or
otherwise place or cause to be placed in the water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such
waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or
may result in the pollution of said waters.
b. Refuse and Trash. No person in a park shall have brought in or shall
dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such
refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any
park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are
not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from
the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed elsewhere.
§ 3-24.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-24.5
1:99
§ 3-24.6. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #2014-12]
a. Traffic. No person shall drive, park, stop, or stand any vehicle in any
area except paved roads or parking areas.
b. Waterfront Parking.
1. Parking. Parking shall only be during times when the Waterfront
Park is opened and utilized by the public. No parking is allowed at
any time by any person who is not present and utilizing said park.
2. Limitation of Parking. While the Waterfront is open, no vehicle shall
be parked within the Waterfront Park parking lot at any one time
for more than four hours.
3. Towing. Any vehicles parked in violation of this section may be
towed, and the cost of towing and storage of the vehicle will be at
the owner's expense.
4. Penalty. Any person parking in violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine of $40 per each day a violation occurs.
a. Intoxicating Beverages.
1. Prohibition. No person in a park shall have possession of alcoholic
beverages nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at any
time in the park.
2. Drunkenness. No person in a park shall have entered or be under
the influence of intoxicating liquor.
b. Fireworks and Explosives. No person in a park shall bring, or have in
his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or
burn, any firecrackers, torpedo rocket, or other fireworks or explosive
or inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such
area from land or highway adjacent thereto, except on special written
permit issued hereunder.
c. Domestic Animals. No person in a park shall have been responsible for
the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into areas other than
concourses and walks. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting
the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas, where such
animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate
leashes.
d. Fires. No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire or
barbecue. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other
inflammable material, within any park area.
e. Regulated Activities. No person, except as permitted at designated
times and in designated areas, shall engage in any of the following
activities:
§ 3-24.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-24.6
1:100
§ 3-24.7. Loitering and Boisterousness. [Ord. #2014-12]
No person in a park shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive,
insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
§ 3-24.8. Merchandising Advertising and Signs. [Ord. #2014-12]
No person in a park shall without proper permit or license:
§ 3-24.9. Park Permits: Park Operating Policy. [Ord. #2014-12]
1. Bike Riding.
2. Rollerblading.
3. Skateboarding.
4. Use of scooters whether motorized or non-motorized.
5. Operation of any model airplane or similar device.
6. Sledding.
a. Vending and Peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor
shall station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article or thing.
b. Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way
to any article or service for sale or hire.
c. Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands.
a. Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the Town Administrator before
participating in the following park activity:
1. Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall
file an application with the Town Administrator. The application
shall state:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(e) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
§ 3-24.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-24.9
1:101
§ 3-24.10. Enforcement. [Ord. #2014-12]
§ 3-24.11. Penalties. [Ord. #2014-12]
Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be liable to a penalty
of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days or
both.
Chapter 4
(f) Any other information which the Town Administrator shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should issue hereunder.
2. Standards for Issuance. The Town Administrator shall issue a
permit hereunder when he or she finds:
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
enjoyment of the park.
(b) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation.
(c) That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated
to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(d) That the proposed activity will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by
the Town.
(e) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use
at the date and hour required in the application.
3. Effect of Permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same
were inserted in said permits.
4. Liability of Permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by
any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the persons to
whom such permit shall have been issued.
5. Revocation. The Town Administrator shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon finding of violation of any rule or ordinance,
or upon good cause shown.
a. The Guttenberg Police Department shall, in connection with their duties
imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this section.
b. Ejectment. The Guttenberg Police Department shall have the authority
to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this section.
§ 3-24.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 3-24.11
1:102
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. TAXICABS, LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY VEHICLES.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. 6/20/90 § I]
CERTIFICATE — Shall mean a certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued by the Mayor and Board of Council, authorizing the holder
thereof to conduct a taxicab, limousine or livery business in the Town.
CRUISING — Shall mean the driving of a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle
on the streets, alleys, or public places of the Town in search of, or soliciting,
prospective passengers for hire.
DRIVER'S LICENSE — Shall mean the permission granted by the Mayor and
Board of Council to a person to drive a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle
upon the streets of the Town.
HOLDER — Shall mean a person to whom a certificate of public
convenience and necessity has been issued.
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which has been
issued livery license plates by the State of New Jersey, is used to carry
passengers for hire, does not have an established route and which is
constructed and designed to comfortably seat not more than nine
passengers excluding the operator of the vehicle.
MANIFEST — Shall mean a daily record prepared by a taxicab, limousine or
livery vehicle driver of all trips made by the driver showing time and place
of origin, destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each
trip.
RATE CARD — Shall mean a card issued by the Mayor and Council for
display in each taxicab, limousine, or livery vehicle and which contains the
rates of fare then in force.
TAXICAB — Shall mean a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business
of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of fewer than six
persons, and not operated on a fixed route.
WAITING TIME — Shall mean the time when a taxicab, limousine or livery
vehicle is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger or
passengers to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the
taxicab, limousine, or livery service is not in motion if due to any cause other
than the request, act or fault of a passenger or passengers.
§ 4-1.2. Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity Required.
[Ord. 6/20/90 § II]
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle
owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the
streets of the Town without having first obtained a certificate of public
convenience and necessity from the Mayor and Board of Council.
§ 3-24.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.3
1:103
§ 4-1.3. Application for Certificate. [Ord. 6/20/90 § III]
An application for a certificate shall be filed with the Town Clerk upon forms
provided by the Town and the application shall be verified under oath and
shall furnish the following information:
§ 4-1.4. Public Hearing. [Ord. 6/20/90 § IV]
Upon the filing of an application, the Town shall fix a time and place for
a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and
necessity have been theretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given the
general public by posting a notice of such hearing in the Town Hall. Any
interested person may file with the Town Clerk a memorandum in support
of or in opposition to the issuance of a certificate.
§ 4-1.5. Issuance of Certificate. [Ord. 6/20/90 § V5]
If the Mayor and Board of Council find that further taxicab, limousine
or livery service in the Town is required by the public convenience and
necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform such
public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this section and
the rules promulgated by the Mayor and Board of Council, then the Town
Clerk shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the applicant,
the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate and the date of
issuance; otherwise, the applicant shall be denied.
In making the above finding, the Mayor and Board of Council shall take into
consideration the number of taxicabs, limousines, or livery vehicles already
in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public
need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and
the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of all persons having an interest equal to or
greater than 10% in the business entity which is applying for the
certificate of public convenience and necessity.
c. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
d. Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public
convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.
e. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant
and the location of proposed depots and terminals.
f. In the case of taxicabs, the color scheme or insignia to be used to
designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant.
g. Such further information as the Mayor and Board of Council may
require.
§ 4-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-1.6
1:104
§ 4-1.6. Transfer of Certificates. [Ord. 6/20/90 § VIII]
No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned,
mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the Mayor and
Board of Council.
§ 4-1.7. Suspension and Revocation of Certificate. [Ord. 6/20/90
§ IX]
A certificate issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked or
suspended by the Mayor and Board of Council if the holder thereof has (a)
violated any of the provisions of this section, (b) discontinued operations for
more than 30 consecutive days, (c) has violated any ordinance of the Town,
or the law of the United States or the State of New Jersey, the violations
of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public
transportation.
Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the
proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 4-1.8. Liability Insurance Required. [Ord. 6/20/90 § 6]
No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect an insurance
policy for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000 for bodily
injury to any one person; in the amount of $300,000 for injuries to more
than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $50,000 for
property damage resulting from any one accident. Proof of such insurance
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. All insurance policies required
hereunder shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-1.9. License Fees. [Ord. 6/20/90 § VII; Ord. #18-11]
No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder
thereof has paid an annual license fee of $250 for the right to engage
in the taxicab, limousine or livery business and $100 each year for each
vehicle operated under a certificate of public convenience and necessity.
The license fees shall be for the calendar year and shall be in addition to any
other license fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable
to the holder or the vehicle or vehicles under his operation and control.
§ 4-1.10. Driver's License. [Ord. 6/20/90 § X]
No person shall operate a taxicab, limousine or livery for hire upon the
streets of the Town, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab,
limousine or livery vehicle shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab,
limousine or livery vehicle licensed by the Town shall be so driven at any
time for hire, unless the driver of the taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle
shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a driver's license
issued under the provisions of this section.
§ 4-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.11
1:105
§ 4-1.11. Application for Driver's License. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XI; Ord.
#010/04; Ord. #016/05; Ord. No. 04-2018]
An application for a taxicab, limousine, or livery vehicle driver's license
shall be filed with the Town Clerk on forms provided by the Town; and
such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following
information:
§ 4-1.12. Examination of Applicant; Current State Motor Vehicle
Operator's Permit Required. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XII]
Before any application is finally passed upon the Mayor and Board of
Council the applicant shall be required to pass an examination given by the
Police Department Traffic Officer on the applicant's knowledge of the Town;
shall be required to show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's
permit issued by the State of New Jersey; and shall be required to
demonstrate the ability to communicate in the English language.
§ 4-1.13. Police Investigation of Applicant; Traffic and Police
Record. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XIII]
The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for
taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle driver's license and a report of such
investigation and a copy of the traffic and Police record of the applicant, if
any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the Mayor
and Board of Council.
a. The names and address of two persons other than the applicant's
prospective employer who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty, and
general good character of the applicant.
b. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
c. The education background of the applicant.
d. A concise history of the applicant's past employment.
At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the Town
the sum of $10.
The Chief of Police or his designee is hereby authorized to issue a
temporary taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle driver's license to any
applicant who has fulfilled all of the requirements of this subsection.
Such temporary taxicab driver's license may be issued pending
completion of a detailed investigation of the applicant by the Police
Department and submission of the results of that investigation and
the original application for consideration by the Mayor and Board of
Council. No such temporary taxicab driver's license shall be valid for a
period greater than 90 days from the date of issuance.
§ 4-1.11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-1.14
1:106
§ 4-1.14. Consideration of Application. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XIV]
The Mayor and Board of Council shall, upon consideration of the application
and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve
or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may
request a personal appearance before the Mayor and Board of Council to
offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered.
§ 4-1.15. Issuance of License; Duration; Annual Fee. [Ord. 6/20/90
§ XV; Ord. #016/05; Ord. No. 04-2018]
Upon approval of an application for a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle
driver's license, the Town Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant which
shall bear the name, address, color, age, signature and photograph of the
applicant. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide two bust
photographs of himself or herself without head covering, at least two inches
by two inches. Photos must be of a frontal view of face and shoulders.
Such license shall be in effect until December 31 of the year in which
it is issued unless suspended or revoked earlier. A license for every year
thereafter shall issue upon the payment of $10 unless the license for the
preceding year has been revoked.
§ 4-1.16. Display of License. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XVI]
Every driver licensed under this section shall post his driver's license in
such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is
operating a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle.
§ 4-1.17. Suspension and Revocation of License. [Ord. 6/20/90 § 17]
The Chief of Police is hereby given the authority to suspend any driver's
license used under this section for a driver's failing or refusing to comply
with the provisions of this section, such suspension to last for a period of
not more than five days. The Chief of Police is also given authority to revoke
any driver's license for failure to comply with the provisions of this section.
However, a license may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice
and has an opportunity to present evidence in his behalf.
§ 4-1.18. Failure to Comply With City, State and Federal Laws. [Ord.
6/20/90 § XVIII]
Every driver licensed under this section shall comply with all Town, State
and Federal laws. Failure to do so will result in the Chief of Police
suspending or revoking a license.
§ 4-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.19
1:107
§ 4-1.19. Vehicles, Equipment and Maintenance. [Ord. 6/20/90
§ XIX]
Every vehicle operating under this section shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the
Chief of Police.
§ 4-1.20. Designation of Taxicabs. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XX]
Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted letters
not less than four inches nor more than 12 inches in height, the name of
the owner; and, in addition, may bear identifying design approved by the
Chief of Police. No vehicle covered by the terms of this section shall be
licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia to
be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, conflict with or
imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on
a vehicle or vehicles already operating under this section in such a manner
as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public; and provided
further, that if, after a license has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the
color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia thereof is changed
so as to be, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, in conflict with, or imitate,
any color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia used by any
other person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or
tend to deceive the public, the license of or certificate covering such taxicab
or taxicabs may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police.
§ 4-1.21. Rates of Fare, Rate Card Required. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XXI;
Ord. #01-13]
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a
taxicab in accordance with the following rates:
Distance Traveled Maximum Charge
6 blocks or less $4.50
7 blocks to 10 blocks $5
10 blocks to 14 blocks $5.50
14 blocks to 22 blocks $6
22 blocks to 26 blocks $6.50
26 blocks to 30 blocks $7
30 blocks to 36 blocks $7.50
36 blocks to 42 blocks $8
42 blocks to 48 blocks $8.50
48 blocks to 54 blocks $9
54 blocks to 60 blocks $10
60 blocks to 70 blocks $12
§ 4-1.19 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-1.21
1:108
Distance Traveled Maximum Charge
70 blocks to 80 blocks $13
For distances greater than 80 blocks the following set rates shall apply:
Guttenberg
to:
Secaucus Maximum $20
Jersey City Maximum $30
Hoboken Maximum $17
Fairview Maximum $9
Cliffside Park Maximum $12
Ridgefield Maximum $12
Palisade Park Maximum $15
Ridgefield Park Maximum $20
Fort Lee Maximum $15
Leonia Maximum $20
Bogota Maximum $20
Englewood Maximum $25
Englewood Cliffs Maximum $25
Hackensack Maximum $30
New York City Maximum $45
Newark Airport Maximum $35
LGA Airport Maximum $55
JFK Airport Maximum $70
Owners or drivers of taxicabs shall be allowed to charge for tolls and
reasonable gasoline surcharges.
Every taxicab operated under this section shall have a rate card setting
forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view
of all passengers in the cab. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit
an owner and/or operator of a taxicab from charging less than the above
recited rates.
§ 4-1.22. Receipts. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XXII]
The driver of any taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle shall, upon demand by
the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged,
either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specifically prepared
receipt on which shall be the name of the owner, license number or motor
number, amount of meter reading or charges and date of transaction.
§ 4-1.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.23
1:109
§ 4-1.23. Refusal of Passenger to Pay Legal Fare. [Ord. 6/20/90
§ XXIII]
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any
vehicles mentioned in this section after having hired the same, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with intent to
defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service.
§ 4-1.24. Solicitation, Acceptance and Discharge of Passengers and
Other Regulations. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XXIV; Ord. No. 07-2015]
a. Solicitation of Passengers by Driver. No driver shall solicit passengers
for a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle except when sitting in the
driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately
adjacent to the curb side thereof. The driver of any taxicab, limousine or
livery vehicle shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately
adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon a public
street, except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his
taxicab for not more than 30 consecutive minutes, and provided further
that nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from
alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting
passengers into or out of such vehicle.
b. Prohibited Solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or
annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or
obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any person for the
purpose of soliciting patronage.
c. Receipt and Discharge of Passengers on Sidewalk Only. Drivers of
taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway, but
shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the
absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and
there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets,
where passengers may be discharged at either the right or left-hand
sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.
d. Cruising. No driver shall cruise in search of passengers.
e. Solicitation of Other Common Carrier Passengers Prohibited. No driver,
owner, or operator shall solicit passengers at the terminal of any other
common carrier, nor at any intermediate points along any established
route of any other common carrier.
f. Additional Passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to
occupy or ride in any taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle unless the
person first employing the taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle shall
consent to the acceptance of an additional passenger. No charge shall
be made for an additional passenger except when the additional
passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's destination and then
only for the additional distance so traveled.
§ 4-1.23 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-1.24
1:110
§ 4-1.25. Taxicab Service. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XXV]
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the Town, operating under
the provisions of this section, shall render an overall service to the public
desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and
necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open
24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls dispatching cabs. They
shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the Town limits
as soon as they can do so and, if the services cannot be rendered within a
reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long
it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any
holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the Town limits at any
time when such holder has available cabs, or who shall fail or refuse to give
overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this section and the certificate
granted to such holder may be revoked at the discretion of the Mayor and
Board of Council.
§ 4-1.26. Manifests. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XXVI]
Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all
trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination
of each trip and amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be
g. Restriction on Number of Passengers. No driver shall permit more
persons to be carried in a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle as
passengers than the rated seating capacity of his taxicab, limousine or
livery vehicle as stated in the license for said vehicle issued by the
Police Department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.
h. Refusal to Carry Orderly Passengers Prohibited. No driver shall refuse
or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request,
unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of
this section to do so.
i. Prohibitions of Drivers. It shall be a violation of this section for any
driver of a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle to solicit business for any
hotel, or to attempt to divert, engage in selling intoxicating liquors or
solicit business for any house of ill repute or use his vehicle for any
purpose other than the transporting of passengers.
j. Prohibition of Passengers. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any
taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle to permit any person to ride on the
outside of such vehicle while the same is in motion, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to ride on the outside of such vehicle when the
same is in motion.
k. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to park and/or stand his/
her taxicab in any restricted area, or any area which is controlled by
parking meters, or at the curb within 15 feet of the entrance to any
tavern as defined in Subsection 6-3.5b,1 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 4-1.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.26
1:111
returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The
forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and
shall be of a design approved by the Chief of Police.
Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall retain
and preserve in a safe place all drivers' manifests for at least the calendar
year next preceding the current calendar year, and those manifests shall
be available to the Chief of Police or his designated representative upon
request.
§ 4-1.27. Holder's Records and Reports. [Ord. No. 6/20/90 § XXVII]
§ 4-1.28. Advertising. [Ord. 6/20/90 § 28]
Subject to the rules and regulations of the Chief of Police, it shall be lawful
for any person owning or operating a taxicab, limousine or livery vehicle for
hire to permit advertising matter to be fixed to or installed in or on such
taxicabs, limousines or livery vehicles for hire.
§ 4-1.29. Police Department's Duty to Enforce Section. [Ord. 6/20/
90 § XXIX]
The Police Department is hereby given the authority to and is instructed to
watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this
section. Upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this section, the
Police Department shall, in addition to any other action taken, report the
same to the Mayor and Board of Council, which may order or take further
action as it may deem appropriate.
§ 4-1.30. Penalty. [Ord. 6/20/90 § XXXI]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-2. PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.
a. Every holder shall keep accurate records and receipts from operations,
operating, and other expenses, capital expenditures, and such other
operating information. Every holder shall maintain the records
containing such information and other data required by this section at a
place readily accessible for examination by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative.
b. All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of
taxicabs, limousines, or livery vehicles within the territorial limits of the
Town, which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any
vehicle or to any property in an amount exceeding in the sum of $500
shall be reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the
Police Department in a form of a report to be furnished by the
Department.
§ 4-1.26 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-2.1
1:112
§ 4-2.1. Licensing Requirements. [Ord. 7/11/1883 § I]
The Board of Council may, by resolution, license persons for the purpose
of vending, hawking or peddling fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, groceries,
dry goods or any other articles or merchandise of whatsoever kind from
wagons, carts or other vehicles or from baskets, packs or other means of
carriage, and such license shall continue in force until the first Monday
in September next succeeding the granting of the license, subject
nevertheless, to being revoked by the Board of Council for just cause or
complaint, and the Chairman of the Board is hereby empowered to suspend
the party so complained of, until the next meeting of the Board of Council
thereafter, from selling, vending or hawking under his or her license.
§ 4-2.2. Fee. [Ord. 7/11/1883 § II; New; Ord. #19-11]
Each person applying for a license shall pay to the Town Clerk for each
license the sum of $500. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of such license.
§ 4-2.3. Vehicle Requirements. [Ord. 7/11/1883 §§ IV, V]
§ 4-2.4. Penalty. [Ord. 7/11/1883 § III, VI]
§ 4-3. FOOD HANDLERS, MOBILE.
a. All vehicles used for the purpose of vending, peddling or hawking shall
have on the sides thereof the name and address of the owner, in letters
at least two inches in length painted clearly and distinctly on the vehicle
and all persons peddling from baskets, packs or other means of
carriage, shall exhibit his or her license upon demand by any Town
official.
b. All vehicles used for the purpose of peddling, vending or hawking and
not having the name and address of the owner painted or written as
required in Subsection a above, shall be subject to the same penalty as
provided for in Subsection 4-2.4 of this section for selling without a
license.
a. No unlicensed person shall sell or offer to sell from any vehicle, or from
baskets, packs, or other means of carriage in any streets or public
places of the Town any fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, groceries, dry goods,
or any other articles or merchandise of whatsoever kind, under the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5 for each offense.
b. If any person having obtained a license as aforesaid shall lend or hire
the same to any other person or lend or hire, or allow the use of his
vehicle with the licensed person's name thereon for peddling purposes,
each of them shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5 for
each offense.
§ 4-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.1
1:113
§ 4-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. #010-09]
The purposes of this section are to properly control mobile food handlers
in order to prevent and discourage undesirable business practices; to help
protect the public from fraud; to permit the activity regulated to a limited
degree in consideration from the density of population, size of streets and
public rights-of-way; and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 4-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. #010-09]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean any movable
restaurant, truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle or other movable unit, including
hand-carried, portable containers in or on which food or beverage is
transported, stored or prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary
locations.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean as defined under New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Laws, any vehicle propelled or drawn by mechanical or electrical
equipment, such as but not limited to passenger cars, trucks, truck trailer,
semi trailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles,
amphibious craft on land, dune buggies or racing vehicles.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation, trust, joint
venture, association, society, church, congregation or other organization.
PUSHCART — Shall mean a vehicle or device used to carry, transport or
convey merchandise or items which are the subject of this section.
SALE — Shall mean the act of selling, holding out for sale, exchange,
transfer, advertising or delivery.
§ 4-3.3. License Required; Number Limited. [Ord. No. 010-09; Ord.
No. 20-2016; Ord. No. 27-2018; amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
02-19]
No activity as defined in this chapter shall be conducted in the Town of
Guttenberg except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall
be unlawful for any person of whatever nature to conduct the activities,
defined herein, unless they have been issued a license pursuant to this
chapter. The number of licenses that may be issued and in effect during
any twelve-month period shall not exceed six. No person, as defined in
Subsection 4-3.2, shall be issued more than one license unless there are less
than six individual applicants for that year.
§ 4-3.4. Application for License. [Ord. #010-09]
a. Application for such license shall be made in writing on a form to be
provided by the Town of Guttenberg. It shall require that the applicant
and every employee shall provide two photographs taken within 30
§ 4-3.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-3.4
1:114
§ 4-3.5. Reapplication and Recertification. [Ord. #010-09]
Each applicant and license shall each year, between August 1 and August
31, apply or reapply for the license by personally appearing at the Municipal
Clerk's Office to certify or recertify to the information contained in their
application. Where an applicant fails to appear and recertify, their name
shall be removed from the lists of pending applications. All persons who
presently have licenses shall be considered first for each license before any
new applicant.
§ 4-3.6. Investigation. [Ord. #010-09]
Such application shall be made to and licenses issued by the Municipal
Clerk of the Town of Guttenberg or his designee after investigation by the
Town of Guttenberg Police Department.
§ 4-3.7. Contents, Display and Transfer of License. [Ord. #010-09]
days of the application of a size of approximately 2 1/2 inches by 2 1/
2 inches on thin paper having a light background clearly showing a
frontal view of the applicant's face and his employee's face; one of
which is to be attached or posted to the application.
b. Such application for license shall require that the applicant give the
following information concerning himself or itself:
1. Name.
2. Specific address for the past five years.
3. Date and place of birth and citizenship.
4. Arrests or convictions at any time of any crime for disorderly
offense or of any municipal ordinance or regulation.
5. Names and addresses of employers for the last five years and
respective dates of employment.
6. Proposed location or locations for which such license is sought.
7. Description of all items to be sold.
a. Each license issued by the Municipal Clerk shall set forth the specific
food and beverage authorized to be sold, the location or locations for
the same, the name of each employee or agent and the expiration date
of the license.
b. No person shall engage in any activity, except those permitted under
the license and at the locations specific therein. Upon granting of the
license hereinabove mentioned, each licensee shall be required to
prominently display said license on his person or on the vehicle
employed to transact his business, in addition to a sign, in letters of at
§ 4-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.7
1:115
§ 4-3.8. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #010-09]
No licensee shall:
§ 4-3.9. Use of Public Roads. [Ord. #010-09]
§ 4-3.10. Enforcement. [Ord. #010-09]
Every licensee shall be subject to the supervision of the Town of Guttenberg
and its designated agencies in all provisions of this section, as well as the
rules and regulations promulgated hereby, and all orders and regulations
promulgated by the Town shall be enforced by such person or persons as
the Town, by resolution or ordinance, may designate from time to time or
who, by New Jersey State statute, may have the duty to so regulate.
§ 4-3.11. General Regulations. [Ord. #010-09]
In addition to requirements herein set forth, the following regulations must
be complied with by all mobile food handlers:
least two inches in length, printed clearly and distinctly with the name
of the licensee.
c. No license may be transferred from one person or entity to another, and
each person or entity must be licensed individually and separately.
a. Engage in a business before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
b. Transact business from its vehicle unless it is properly parked
immediately adjacent to the curb of a public street in an area where and
when parking is permitted. Furthermore, no licensee shall, at any time,
double-park its vehicle while transacting business, nor transact
business other than on the curbside of its vehicle, nor shall any licensee
conduct its activity so as to interfere with pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
a. No licensee shall park a vehicle overnight on any location within the
Town of Guttenberg. If the licensee parks a vehicle overnight on private
property for the purpose of continuing the business each day at the
same location, then such licenses shall comply with all regulations,
rules, statutes and ordinances pertaining to permanent retail food
establishments.
b. No licensee shall have a permanent location within or upon a public
road or right-of-way by reason of prior use.
a. Due to the nature, location and variety of conditions surrounding the
operation of each such establishment, it is frequently not possible to
provide certain physical facilities required for permanent
establishments. In order to assure adequate protection of food served
by temporary establishments, mobile establishments and agricultural
markets which are unable to meet fully the requirements of these
§ 4-3.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-3.11
1:116
regulations, it may be necessary to restrict the types of food sold or the
methods by which served, to modify some requirements for procedures
and facilities and to impose additional requirements.
b. The preparation of potentially hazardous foods, such as cream-filled
pastries, custards and similar products and meat, poultry, and fish in
the form of salads or sandwiches, shall be prohibited, provided that this
prohibition shall not apply to hamburgers, frankfurters and other food
which, prior to service, requires only limited preparation, such as
seasoning and cooking; and provided, however that potentially
hazardous food which is obtained in individual servings is stored in
approved facilities which maintain such food at safe temperatures
below 45° F. or above 140° F., and is served directly in the individual,
original container in which it was packaged at a food-processing
establishment, may be distributed or sold.
c. Ice which will be consumed or which will come into contact with food
shall be obtained from a source meeting standards, approved by law in
chipped, crushed or cubed form. Such ice shall be obtained in singleservice,
closed, protected containers satisfactory to the Department of
Health authority and shall be held herein until used.
d. Wet storage of packaged food and beverages shall be prohibited,
provided that wet storage of pressurized containers of beverages may
be permitted when:
1. The water contains at least 50 parts per million of available
chlorine or equivalent; or
2. The iced water is changed frequently enough to keep both the
water and container clean.
e. Food contact surfaces of food preparation equipment such as grills,
stoves and worktables shall be protected from contamination by dust,
customers, insects or any other source. Where necessary, effective
shields shall be provided.
f. Equipment shall be installed in such a manner that the establishment
can be kept clean and food will not become contaminated.
g. An adequate supply of water for cleaning and hand washing be
maintained in the establishment, and auxiliary heating facilities,
capable of producing an ample supply of hot water for such purposes,
shall be provided.
h. Liquid waste which is not discharged into a sewerage system shall be
disposed of in such a manner as not to create a public health hazard or
nuisance condition.
i. Adequate facilities shall be provided for employee hand washing. Such
facilities consist of a pan, water, soap and individual paper towels. Hand
washing facilities shall be provided for employee hand washing for
§ 4-3.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.11
1:117
§ 4-3.12. Inspection and Certification. [Ord. #010-09]
All mobile retail food establishments must, in addition to obtaining a
license, be inspected and certified by the Guttenberg Board of Health
Inspector. Such certification must be displayed to the public and renewed
annually.
§ 4-3.13. License Renewal and Fee. [Ord. No. 010-09; Ord. No.
20-2016; Ord. No. 27-2018]
The term and cost of each license issued under this section shall be for a
term of one year and shall be renewed each September 1 at a fee of $400.
§ 4-3.14. One-Day License. [Ord. #010-09]
The Governing Body of the Town of Guttenberg reserves the right to issue,
at any time, the above mentioned mobile food handlers license to any mobile
food handler for a one-day duration. Said mobile food handlers must meet
all of the requirements as stated in the above sections. The fee for said
one-day licenses shall be $50. All licenses issued for one day shall expire at
midnight of the day issued.
§ 4-3.15. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #010-09]
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity violating any
provisions of this section or any rules and regulations promulgated by the
mobile retail food service establishments where food products are
directly handled and fabricated, but need not be provided for mobile
units serving prepackaged foods, milk, cold sealed beverages and tea,
coffee, hot chocolate or other hot drinks at temperatures above 140° F.
j. Floors shall be of tight wood or other cleanable material, provided that
the Department of Health authority may accept dirt or gravel-covered
floors, when graded to preclude the accumulation of liquids and
covered with removable cleanable, wooden platforms or duckboards.
k. Walls and ceilings shall be so constructed as to minimize the entrance
of flies and dust. Temporary construction may be accepted. Ceilings
may be of wood, canvas or other materials which protect the interior of
the establishment from the elements, and walls may be of such
materials or of sixteen-mesh screening or equivalent. When flies are
prevalent, counter-service openings shall either be equipped with selfclosing,
flytight doors or the opening protected by effective fans. Where
fans are used for this purpose, the size of the opening shall be so limited
that the fans employed will effectively prevent the entrance of flies.
l. No exposed fruits or vegetables shall be available for sale.
m. Any other requirement deemed necessary by the Department of Health
to protect the public health in view of the particular nature of the food
service operation shall be met.
§ 4-3.11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-3.15
1:118
Town pursuant hereto shall be punished by one or more of the following:
a fine not exceeding $2,000; imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days; and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction shall be heard. Each
and every violation and nonconformance with this chapter on each day that
any provision of this section shall have been violated shall be construed as
a separate and distinct violation hereof.
§ 4-4. TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING.
§ 4-4.1. Title. [Ord. #21-10]
The Code of the Town of Guttenberg is hereby amended to add a new
section, specifically § 4-4, entitled "Tattooing and Body Piercing," and
providing as follows.
§ 4-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #21-10]
APPRENTICE — Shall mean any person that performs the art of tattooing
or body piercing under the direct supervision of a practitioner in order to
learn body art procedures.
BODY ART — Shall mean the practice of physical body adornment in
licensed establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to, body
piercing, tattooing and permanent cosmetics.
BODY PIERCING — Shall mean puncturing or penetration of the skin of
a person using presterilized single use needles and the insertion of
presterilized or disinfected jewelry or other adornment thereto in the
opening. Such definition shall not apply to medical services performed by a
licensed physician.
LEGAL GUARDIAN — Shall mean an individual who, by legal appointment
or by the effect of written law, has been given custody of a minor or adult.
PRACTITIONER — Shall mean any person that performs the art of tattooing,
permanent cosmetics and/or ear and body piercing.
TATTOOING — Shall mean any method of placing ink or other inert pigment
into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other
instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of
the skin or mucosa.
§ 4-4.3. Conformance with Regulations Required. [Ord. #21-10]
a. No person shall engage in the business of tattooing or body piercing,
whether for compensation or not, operate any establishment where
tattooing or body piercing is performed, whether for compensation or
not, or tattoo or body pierce any person, whether for compensation or
not, without complying with the requirements of this section, pursuant
to local rules and regulations, as well as the regulations of the State of
New Jersey, or regulations about to be adopted including the New
Jersey Administrative Code at N.J.A.C. 8:27.
§ 4-3.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.3
1:119
§ 4-4.4. License Required; Fee. [Ord. #21-10]
§ 4-4.5. Compliance with Health Standards Required. [Ord. #21-10]
b. No person shall display a sign or in any way advertise or purport to be a
body art practitioner or be engaged in the business of body art without
first obtaining a license or permit for the facility from the department of
health.
c. No person shall engage in the business of body piercing or tattoo or
body art without first complying with the city zoning regulations set
forth in Chapter 28, Zoning, of these Revised General Ordinances.
a. Each applicant for a license must qualify each year for a body piercing
license and shall pay an annual license fee as provided by the
Governing Body prior to the issuance of a license to engage in body
piercing.
b. Each applicant for a license must qualify each year for a tattooing
license and shall pay an annual license fee as provided by the
Governing Body prior to the issuance of a license to engage in tattooing
of the body.
c. Each body piercing license and tattooing business license issued by the
Town shall contain a registration number and no such license shall be
transferable to another person or entity.
d. Licenses issued pursuant to the provision of this section shall be valid
for 12 months from the date of issuance. No license will be issued for a
subsequent year unless the licensee makes application for, and fully
complies with, the provisions of this section.
a. Tattooing.
1. Establishments. All tattooing establishments located within the
Town shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary manner, in
compliance with practical municipal ordinance and local rules and
regulations, as well as all rules and regulations of the State which
shall be deemed applicable.
2. Procedures. All tattooing and other related procedures shall be
carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner so as to minimize
the danger of infection to the person being tattooed, including, but
not limited to: operator scrubbing hands with surgical brush, warm
water, soap and germicidal solution; the area of the customer to be
tattooed, washed and sprayed with germicidal solution and the
tattoo stencil cold sterilized with a germicidal solution.
3. Implements and Instruments. All instruments or other implements,
including, but not limited to, needles used in connection with
tattooing, shall be first sterilized by autoclaving at a minimum of
§ 4-4.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-4.5
1:120
§ 4-4.6. Tattooing of Certain Persons Prohibited. [Ord. #21-10]
§ 4-4.7. Records of Tattooing Required. [Ord. #21-10]
All persons engaged in the business of tattooing, whether for compensation
or not, or who endeavor in any manner whatsoever to tattoo any person
shall maintain, for a period of five years from the date of tattooing, records,
which shall be sequentially numbered, containing the following information:
250° for a period of not less than one hour. Such autoclaving shall
be done at the licensed premises.
4. Dyes and Solutions. No dye, solution, chemical, substance, material
or any other thing shall be used in the application of tattoos to any
person unless such solution shall be approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration or other appropriate agency of local, State or
Federal government for tattooing purposes.
b. Body Piercing: Establishments and Equipment.
1. The room in which body piercing is done shall have an area of not
less than 100 square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall have an
impervious, smooth and washable surface.
2. A toilet shall be adjacent to the area where the body piercing is
performed. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water, soap and sanitary towels.
3. All tables shall be constructed of easily cleanable impervious
material and shall be separated from waiting customers or
observers by a panel at least four feet high.
4. The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
a. No minor or incompetent may be tattooed without the written consent
of his/her parent or legal guardian, and unless the parent or legal
guardian is present with the minor at the time of the body art
procedure.
b. No one who appears to be under the influence of a drug or alcohol shall
be tattooed, and the record will so indicate.
a. The date of tattooing.
b. The name, address and sex of the person tattooed.
c. The name and address of the person performing the tattoo operation.
d. The design, color or colors and location on the body of the tattoo.
e. The dye or substance used in the marking of the skin.
f. The method of tattooing used.
§ 4-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.7
1:121
§ 4-4.8. Body Piercing: General Provisions. [Ord. #21-10]
g. If the person tattooed is a minor, as defined by law, the name, address
and relationship to the person tattooed of any person consenting to the
tattooing operation on behalf of such minor, along with the consent. It
shall not be a defense to any proceeding under this section for failure to
maintain such record that the person requesting tattooing represented
him/herself to be of legal age unless such representation shall be in
writing, signed by the person to be tattooed and accompanied by a
notation as to what means were used to obtain proof of age, provided
the appearance of the person requesting tattooing was such that an
ordinary prudent person would believe such person to be of legal age.
a. Age. It shall be a violation for anyone to pierce any body part of an
individual under 18 years of age without authorization signed by the
parent or legal guardian and witnessed by the operator and unless the
parent or legal guardian is present with the minor at the time of the
body art procedure.
Competent proof of age shall be required to be shown with application
for piercing.
b. Refusal. If the client's parents and/or legal guardians are suspected to
be under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other behavioral
modifying substance, the operator must refuse the client.
c. Application. In addition to the requirements to locate and construct a
body art establishment in the New Jersey Administrative Code at
N.J.A.C. 8:27, any person desiring to engage in body piercing or
tattooing shall apply to the Town Department of Health for such
purpose. Such form shall be duly verified by the applicant. Separate
applications and separate licenses will be required for body piercing
and tattooing. The application shall set forth:
1. The name, permanent address and telephone numbers for the
applicant.
2. The address and telephone number of the manager of the business,
if different from the applicant.
3. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, LLP or LLC, provide
the name and address of its registered agent.
4. The full business name, business address and post office address of
the proposed establishment.
5. Copy of the New Jersey Sales Tax Certificate.
6. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or firm, the Federal
Employer Identification Number (EIN), and the social security
number if the applicant is a proprietorship.
§ 4-4.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-4.8
1:122
7. A certification that the applicant is a citizen of the United States or,
if not, is a holder of documentation authorizing the alien to be
employed in the United States of America, such as an alien
registration card issued by the United States Immigration and
Naturalization Services (INS) or Form No. I-151, I-551, I-94 with an
endorsement authorizing employment in the United States of
America.
8. If the applicant is a partnership, firm or corporation, all information
required by the application shall apply not only to the partnership,
firm or corporation, but also to each officer, director or holder of
10% of the issued stock, if a corporation, and to all members of a
partnership or firm.
9. Proof of general liability insurance equal to the amount of
$1,000,000 of liability coverage for the applicant, operator and/or
owner of the establishment; and proof of malpractice liability
insurance equal to the amount of $1,000,000 for the applicant,
operator and/or owner of the establishment. Such insurance
policies shall name the Town as an additional insured. Proof shall
include a certificate of insurance issued to the applicant by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey.
10. Each licensee performing piercing shall have completed a First Aid
Certification Course sponsored by the American Red Cross, or
equivalent agency. Each licensee shall possess a First Aid
Certification.
11. The owner, operator, practitioner and apprentice shall provide
proof of at least 12 months experience.
(a) The owner/operator proof shall include a signed statement
from the previous employer, a business license, business
records, purchasing records and one or more samples of the
applicant's advertising.
(b) The practitioner proof shall include 1,000 hours of experience
for piercing 2,000 hours of experience for tattoos, three
certifications original signed statements from previous clients,
the original photographs of piercing, tattoos and completion of
a blood borne pathogen course.
(c) The apprentice proof shall include an established written
apprentice program and the amount of hours completed in the
apprentice program. An apprentice is required to complete
2,000 hours of direct supervision.
12. A written agreement from the applicant in a form approved by the
Town's Corporation Counsel indemnifying and holding the Town
harmless from any and all claims, losses, judgments or sums of
§ 4-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.8
1:123
§ 4-4.9. Body Piercing Procedures. [Ord. #21-10]
money of whatsoever kind and nature arising in, from or in
connection with the applicant's body art business.
d. Guidelines; Approval of Local Health Authority. Written guidelines shall
be established for the care of the site after piercing and shall be
approved by the local health authority. Each client shall receive a
written copy of the guidelines for care of body piercing sites.
e. Proof of Immunity of Operator. Hepatitis B pre-exposure or proof of
immunity is required for all body piercing operators who use needles.
Any accidental needle stick injury shall be reported to the Health
Department. If a person cannot obtain the vaccination for medical
reasons, (s)he shall submit to the Health Department a letter from his/
her physician certifying that the individual does not have Hepatitis B
and the vaccination contraindicated.
f. Training Program for Operator. All body piercing operators shall attend
a training program sponsored by the Health Department to assure basic
knowledge of sterile technique and universal precautions.
a. The operation of a body piercing establishment by the operator shall be
carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner so as to minimize the
danger of infection to the person being pierced, including, but not
limited to:
1. Scrubbing hands with antiseptic and water.
2. Gloves being worn during the procedure.
3. Washing the area to be pierced with water and antiseptic liquid
soap.
Requirements for the body piercing procedures shall be
established by the Health Department and a copy shall be given to
each licensee upon obtaining the annual license.
b. All instruments shall be sterilized and maintained in a sanitary manner.
The sterilization shall include all instruments used for body piercing,
which shall be steam sterilized before use on any customer. Needles
shall be single use only. Other methods of sterilization shall be
approved by the local Health Department. The proper procedures for
sterilization and minimum guidelines for body piercing shall be set
forth in the rules established by the Health Department.
c. The disposal of waste from this procedure shall be in accordance with
the statutes, rules and regulations established for the disposal of
medical wastes.
§ 4-4.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-4.10
1:124
§ 4-4.10. Inspection. [Ord. #21-10]
All records and facilities of any establishment in which tattooing or body
piercing is performed, whether for compensation or not, shall be open for
inspection by the Town Health Officer, or such person designated by the
Department of Health, with or without notice.
§ 4-4.11. Implied Endorsement Prohibited. [Ord. #21-10]
No person or operator of any establishment or other place where tattooing
or body piercing is performed, shall state, represent, warrant, advertise
or imply to a customer, potential customers or to the public at large that
the establishment is endorsed, regulated or approved by the Town, or any
department thereof, or is conducted in compliance with the terms of this
section.
§ 4-5. AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT GAMES.
§ 4-5.1. Definition. [Ord. 2/45 § II; Ord. 3/15/82 § 1]
As used in this section:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT GAMES — Shall mean and include all so called
electronic video games, pin ball machines and all other types of amusement
equipment or games, by whatever name known.
§ 4-5.2. License Required. [Ord. 2/45 § I]
The operation of all automatic amusement games of the type commonly
known and designated as bagatelle, baseball, or pin amusement games, or
similar machines or devices, operated, maintained or used in any public or
quasi-public place or in any building, store or other place where the public
is invited, or wherein the public may enter, and particularly but not by way
of limitation, all coin-operated automatic amusement devices, of the type
commonly known as bagatelle games, baseball games or pin amusement
games, or similar machines or devices, operated, maintained or used as
aforesaid, may be licensed by the Town, and shall not be placed, operated,
maintained or used within the Town without first having obtained a license
for that purpose; provided, however, that no license shall be issued to any
person who shall have been convicted of a crime, or a violation of any Town
ordinance involving gambling, and provided further, that if a license has
been issued and the person to whom it has been issued shall thereafter
be convicted of a crime, or a violation of any Town ordinance involving
gambling, said license shall immediately be revoked by the Town.
§ 4-5.3. Application. [Ord. 2/45 § IV]
A separate application for each machine shall be filed on a form to be
furnished by the Town, which form shall show the name of the applicant,
post office address, whether or not the person making the application
has ever been convicted of a crime or a violation of any Town ordinance
§ 4-4.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.3
1:125
involving gambling, and such other information as the licensing committee
shall deem necessary and proper, and the fee for the license shall be
payable with the filing of the application. If the application is rejected, the
fee is to be returned to the applicant. The License Inspector shall have
sole discretion as to the applicant who shall receive a license. The license,
when issued, shall be signed by the License Inspector and countersigned
by the Town Clerk, and no license shall be issued without inspection by the
Licensing Committee or such member thereof as may be designated by it to
make such inspection.
§ 4-5.4. Duration; Fee. [Ord. 2/45 § III; Ord. 2/19/45]
The license for the placing, operation, maintenance or use of such
amusement devices or machines, mentioned aforesaid, shall be issued to
and in the name of the proprietor of the premises wherein the machine is to
be installed, and shall be issued for one year from the date of such issuance,
and the fee for the issuance of a license shall be $50, for the period of one
year, or any part thereof.
§ 4-5.5. Display of License. [Ord. 2/45 § V]
No device or machine as specified in this section shall be placed, operated,
maintained or used, until the license issued by the License Inspector shall
be affixed thereto, in a conspicuous place, so that the same shall be easily
and quickly identified. The license shall, on its face, disclose the name and
post office address of the licensee and the amount of money required to
operate the machine or device, and shall briefly state that the machine or
device to which the same is affixed, is licensed for operation by the Town.
§ 4-5.6. Transferability. [Ord. No. 2/45 § VI]
The holder of a license shall be permitted to transfer the license within the
year for which it was issued to any other like machine operated in the same
premises in place of the machine from which the license is transferred,
the licensee, however, to immediately notify the License Inspector of such
purpose and to communicate to him the type of machine.
§ 4-5.7. Number of Machines Limited. [Ord. 2/45 § VII; Ord. 10/15/
79 § 1]
No more than two machines or devices of any type shall be permitted to be
used or operated in any one place, location or premises.
§ 4-5.8. Gambling Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2/45 § VIII]
Any person who shall use, or permit to be used, any of the machines or
devices licensed hereunder, for the purposes of gambling, shall be deemed
to be guilty of a violation of this section and shall be liable, upon conviction,
to the penalty stated in § 1-5.
§ 4-5.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-5.9
1:126
§ 4-5.9. Persons Under the Age of 16. [Ord. 2/45 § IX; Ord. 10/15/79
§ 1]
Any person who shall knowingly permit a minor under the age of 16 years
to play or operate any of the machines or devices licensed by this section
shall be deemed to be guilty of a violation of this section and shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5. No premises
shall be licensed within a radius of 200 feet of any school.
§ 4-5.10. Purpose. [Ord. 2/45 § X]
This section is enacted for the regulation and control of automatic
amusement games of the type commonly known and designated as
bagatelle, baseball or pin amusement games, or similar machines and
devices.
§ 4-5.11. Penalty. [Ord. 2/45 § XI]
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, §
1-5.
§ 4-6. PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT.
§ 4-6.1. Findings. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
Guttenberg is one of the most densely populated communities in the State
of New Jersey. As such, the concentration of large numbers of persons in
any one location in the Town which is in close proximity to another location
in the Town used for a similar purpose with similar congestion could lead
to an endangerment of the public safety and welfare by reason of traffic,
personal crowding, and parking congestion of the streets and traffic control
facilities as well as increased noise, dirt, refuse and crowd control of the
Town. In addition, the concentration of large numbers of persons in public
amusement structures located closely together would create a threat to the
safety and welfare of the occupants of these structures in the event of an
emergent police, fire or safety condition requiring immediate simultaneous
evacuation of those structures. The regulation of the proximity of locations
of place of public amusement including, but not limited to mechanical
device amusement centers, arcade centers, so-called family amusement
centers, or places of similar activity, is necessary to promote and protect
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the population of the Town
to limit noise, crowding, refuse and crowd control problems, pollution and
traffic.
Licensing and regulating such places of public amusement within the Town
is essential for the health, safety, welfare and protection of the citizens of
the Town.
§ 4-5.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.2
1:127
§ 4-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
As used in this section:
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean any person who leases or rents out or places
under any kind or type of arrangement one or more automatic or
mechanical amusement machines or devices designated in this section.
OWNER OR OPERATOR OR LESSEE — Shall mean any person who owns
or operates individually or otherwise one or more of the automatic or
mechanical amusement machines or devices designated in this section.
PERSON — Shall mean and include corporations, companies, associations,
societies, firms, partnership and joint stock companies as well as
individuals, unless restricted by the context to an individual as
distinguished from a corporation.
PINBALL MACHINE, AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE, ELECTRONIC
DEVICE AND VIDEO GAME OR SIMILAR MACHINE OR DEVICE — Shall
mean any mechanical device or contrivance which, by means of the
insertion of a coin, token, slug, pale, disc or other article into a slot,
crevice, opening or attachment connected with or forming a part of any
such device or contrivance, activates the operation thereof for use as a
game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
It shall include such devices known as pinball machines, computer games,
electronic games and all games, machines, operations or transactions
similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT AND LICENSED PREMISES — Shall
mean any place of public assemblage in which 20 or more persons gather
for purposes of amusement or entertainment including but not limited to
"game rooms", "arcades", ice skating rink, roller rink, discotheque or disco
parlor and places of similar import, but excluding restaurants or other
places where people gather for the predominant purpose of consuming food
or beverages, and excluding any other type of use which is governed and
regulated by existing municipal ordinance or State law.
§ 4-6.3. License Required; License Fees. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
§ 4-6.4. Application Procedure; Required Information. [Ord. 3/15/82
§ 2]
Applications for license shall be filed with the Licensing Department of the
Town setting forth the following information:
a. No person shall operate or conduct a place of public amusement as
heretofore defined, without having first obtained from the Town a
license to do so, and upon payment to the Town of an annual license fee
of $300 per machine or mechanical device. Each license shall expire on
February 1 of each year.
b. Distributor's license fee shall be $1,500 per year.
§ 4-6.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-6.4
1:128
§ 4-6.5. Review of Application; Grounds for Denial. [Ord. 3/15/82
§ 2]
§ 4-6.6. Licenses Not Transferable. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
a. The name, address, age and occupation of the applicant.
b. Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or
violation of a municipal ordinance involving gambling.
c. The address and exact location of the premises sought to be licensed,
together with a sketch indicating the exact dimensions and layout of the
proposed licensed area.
d. Whether the applicant is owner or lessee of the premises.
e. A brief sketch and description of the permanent entertainment facility
to be installed at the premises, showing numbers of machines or
mechanical devices to be installed.
f. In the event the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the
application shall set forth the names and addresses of all persons
interested in the application, the officers and stockholders of the
corporation financing entities, and others with an interest; and whether
or not any of such persons has ever been convicted of a crime or
violation of a municipal ordinance involving gambling.
a. All such applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate license
fee as hereinabove set forth, together with a set of fingerprints of any
person to be employed on the premises or having an interest therein,
whether as owner, lessee, operator, manager or in any other capacity,
however employed. In the event that such application shall be made by
a corporation or partnership, the fingerprints shall be submitted by
each partner, officer and director, and financing entity, thereof. Such
application shall be submitted to the Mayor and Board of Council to
grant or deny the same by the adoption of an appropriate resolution at
the earliest regular meeting of the Mayor and Board of Council;
provided, however, the Licensing Department shall first direct the
application to be thoroughly investigated by the Chief of Police and the
Fire Chief. The results of such investigation by each of the departments
shall be made in writing, together with a recommendation or approval
or disapproval, as the case may be, and submitted to the Mayor and
Board of Council for its consideration.
b. Any application which fails to conform to the requirements of this
section or which contains any misrepresentations shall constitute
sufficient grounds for the denial of the application, or should it appear
that any applicant or member of an applicant firm or corporation, as
herein set forth, has been convicted of a crime or a violation of a
municipal ordinance involving gambling, a license shall likewise be
denied to such applicant.
§ 4-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.6
1:129
§ 4-6.7. Display of License. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
§ 4-6.8. Renewal of License. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
Application for renewal of license shall be made with the Licensing
Department no later than January 1 of each year accompanied by the
required annual fee made payable to the Town.
§ 4-6.9. Suspension or Revocation of License. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
§ 4-6.10. Unsafe or Hazardous Premises Ineligible for a License.
[Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe or a fire hazard by the
written report of the Fire Department and fail to meet the requirements for
issuance of Certificate of Occupancy shall be deemed to be ineligible for a
license.
§ 4-6.11. Exceptions to Licensing Requirements. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
a. Each license shall entitle the licensee to conduct the licensed business
only at the location designated in the license and shall not be
transferable either as to person or premises, without application
therefore addressed to the Licensing Department in like manner as the
application for an original license.
b. A license shall not be transferable from person to person nor from place
to place, and shall be maintained only at the place and by the person
designated in the license.
a. The license herein provided for shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein
the device is to operate or maintained to be operated.
b. Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine at the same location after application and approval by
the Director of the Department of Public Safety to such effect and the
giving of the description and the serial number of the new machine or
device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license
and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for
each and every machine displayed or operated by him.
a. The license may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor and Board of
Council for violation of any of the terms and provisions of this section or
for any other just and good cause; provided the licensee is likewise
served with notice of charges and given an opportunity to be heard.
b. In the event any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not
be entitled to the return of any portion of the license fee.
a. This section shall not apply to any premises for which a retail plenary
liquor consumption license has been theretofore issued, any duly
§ 4-6.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-6.11
1:130
§ 4-6.12. Liability Insurance. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
No premises licensed under the terms of this section shall be operated
unless there is in force a public liability insurance policy to cover any
injuries suffered as a result of the operation of the licensed premises in the
amount of not less than $100,000 for any one occurrence and not less than
$50,000 for injury to any one person and including a clause to the effect that
the policy cannot be canceled during the license year without notification
being given to the Town.
§ 4-6.13. Hours of Operation. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
The hours of operation of such licensed premises shall be between 9:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. except Friday and Saturday evenings of each week, on which
evenings the licensed premises may remain open until 12:00 midnight.
However, children under the age of 16 years will be forbidden to loiter in
such premises or patronize same or play the machines. Children ages 16
to 18 shall be forbidden by licensee, his agents, servants, or employees, to
play any video or other mechanical devices or games between 9:00 a.m. and
3:30 p.m. when public or parochial schools are in session.
§ 4-6.14. Space Requirements. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2; Ord. #007/01]
incorporated social club or association, religious, charitable,
benevolent, or non-profit association or corporation or fraternal
organizations having a membership in excess of 100 members. (Except
that all such organizations as described aforesaid must be bona fide
in character and not intended or created for the purposes of evading
or defeating the regulations prescribed by this section.) Such religious,
charitable or other nonprofit organizations shall be required, however,
to comply with the terms of this section in all other respects.
b. This section shall not apply to any social event in a private residence
provided that no fee or cost, direct or indirect, is charged for same.
c. This section shall not apply to events or amusements sponsored or
conducted by the Town.
a. Each existing place of public amusement shall be required to comply
with this section in the event it seeks to expand its present building or
structure to accommodate more than 10 persons in excess of its present
assembly capacity on the effective date of this section.
b. Each existing place of public amusement which shall seek to relocate its
activities to another location in the Town or acquire additional sites or
locations within the Town shall be required to comply with this section.
In the event of additional sites or locations, the requirements of this
section shall only apply to the new site or location.
c. Each person or entity seeking to establish a new place of public
amusement in a building or structure not heretofore authorized or
§ 4-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.14
1:131
§ 4-6.15. Employment of Minors Prohibited. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in a licensed
premises.
§ 4-6.16. Gambling Prohibited; Grounds for Revocation. [Ord. 3/15/
82 § 2]
Proof of gambling in any licensed premises shall constitute sufficient reason
for the revocation of such license by the Mayor and Board of Council;
provided, however, that not less than five days' written notice of hearing
shall have been served upon the licensee, either in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and after the licensee shall have been
afforded an opportunity to be heard in his defense.
§ 4-6.17. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2]
No licensee, or any agent or employee of a licensee, shall allow, suffer or
permit or cause to be allowed, suffered or permitted;
licensed by the Town for this activity shall be required to comply with
this section.
d. Each place of public amusement shall provide private off-street parking
facilities of one car space nine feet wide and 20 feet in length for every
five persons or fraction thereof who shall be able to be accommodated
in the structure at any single assemblage (i.e., if the structure is
determined to accommodate 100 persons, then there shall be 20 offstreet
private parking facilities), and the parking facilities shall be
located in the Town.
e. The off-street private parking facility required in Subsection d shall be
located within a two block radius from the site of the place of public
amusement.
f. A place of public amusement which is not presently located in a
structure which is presently licensed for that purpose by the Town shall
be prohibited from locating within a 1/4 mile radius of any other place
of public amusement as hereinbefore defined.
g. The appropriate officials of the Town shall file with the License
Inspector a schedule listing the name and address of each place of
public amusement located within the Town and listing the number of
persons which can presently congregate in the structure on any single
occasion in compliance with fire safety and health standards codes.
h. (Reserved)
i. Each and every mechanical machine or device shall be located at least
20 feet from any entrance or exit so that it does not interfere or obstruct
the free and unfettered passage of patrons, invitees or users of the
game room.
§ 4-6.14 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-6.17
1:132
§ 4-6.18. Penalty. [Ord. 3/15/82 § 2; New]
§ 4-7. PUBLIC ACCESS COMPUTER CENTERS.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. #005/05]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
COMPUTER — Shall mean a machine consisting of a processor, storage
medium, monitor and input devices, such as mouse, keyboard and/or
joystick, with software to control the machine and allow for various
programs to reside on such system.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who owns, leases, rents operates any
public access computer center on or at which any public access computer is
kept, placed or exhibited for use or operation by the public.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm corporation, partnership,
association or entity.
PREMISES — Shall mean any building, business, store, restaurant, tavern
or other place to which the public is invited or may enter.
PUBLIC ACCESS COMPUTER — Shall mean any computer for which
payment of any price is rendered to allow access to software programs and/
or to the internet or may be operated by the public generally.
PUBLIC ACCESS COMPUTER CENTER (PACC) — Shall mean any premises
having three or more public access computers.
SERVER — Shall mean any computer used to administer public access
computers.
a. Any gambling in any form in or at the licensed premises.
b. Any intoxicated or disorderly person to be admitted to the licensed
premises or to remain therein.
c. Any entrance or exit to be locked during legal hours of operation.
d. Any persons on licensed premises, other than during the hours set forth
herein, excepting those directly operating or employed in the licensed
premises.
e. Any activity upon the licensed premises which is or may be detrimental
to the public health, safety, welfare or morals, or otherwise unlawful.
f. Any person to cause noise or loudness of such nature as to disturb the
peace and quiet in, upon, and around the licensed premises.
a. Any person, corporation or other entity violating this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
b. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 4-6.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.2
1:133
§ 4-7.2. Licensing of Operators. [Ord. #005/05]
§ 4-7.3. Operation of Public Access Computer Center (PACC). [Ord.
#005/05]
a. No person shall keep, place or exhibit any public access computer for
use or operation by the public on or at any premises without first
obtaining an operator's license for said premises.
b. Application.
1. The application shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, date, home address and business address, home
telephone number and business address and telephone
number of the applicant.
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the registered
agent of the applicant or person upon whom service of process
is authorized to be made.
(c) The number and nature of machines to be maintained at each
location.
2. The application may be made, and the license may be approved
subject to the applicant obtaining a valid Certificate of Occupancy
(CO) issued to the present owner/occupant by the Office of Code
Enforcement of the Town of Guttenberg. The Town Clerk will not
issue the license to the applicant until such a valid CO is provided
to the Clerk.
3. The licensing fee for the number of computers indicated in the
application will be submitted upon presentation of the application
and will be refunded should the application be denied.
c. The person operating the premises where the machine is located shall
be liable and responsible for the proper operation thereof, regardless of
whether or not he/she is the actual owner of the machine or has rented
the same, but this shall not in any way release the actual owner of the
machine or device from liability or responsibility for violation of this
section or any ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
d. No operator's license shall be transferable from operator to operator
nor from place to place by an operator of public access computers. It
shall be valid only at the location and by the operator designated in the
license.
a. A public access computer center is required to implement rules and
regulations to prevent users from violating Federal, State and/or local
laws and to prohibit minors from accessing gambling or pornographic
sites. Said rules and regulations shall be posted conspicuously in the
public access computer center, and patrons will be required to sign an
acknowledgement of receipt of the rules and regulations prior to their
§ 4-7.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-7.3
1:134
§ 4-7.4. General Regulations. [Ord. #005/05]
use of said facility. If the patron is a minor, then said acknowledgement
shall be signed by the minor's parent or guardian.
b. Public access computer centers shall be required to monitor each user's
Internet use to insure that the user is not violating any of the rules and/
or regulations established by the public access computer center and to
enforce the same.
a. The operator shall not permit, suffer or allow any person to be or
gamble in any form or manner on the licensed premises and shall
prevent any immoral or illegal conduct or activity from occurring.
b. No operator shall knowingly permit, suffer or allow the unlawful sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises.
c. No operator shall permit the operation of any public access computer
between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
d. The operator shall at all times maintain good order upon the licensed
premises and shall not permit, suffer or allow any disturbance,
congestion or loitering upon the licensed premises.
e. No device shall be operated in such a manner as to be heard outside the
public access computer center.
f. No song shall be played or words spoken on any device in a public
access computer center, which violates the obscenity statutes of the
State of New Jersey, including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1 et seq.
g. No device in a public access computer center shall be permitted to
cause any unnecessary or unwanted noise or commotion nor otherwise
interfere with the public health, welfare and morals.
h. Licensee may organize competitions for accomplishing a skill level with
programs offered on the public access computers. These may in no way
be games of chance or involve gambling of any kind.
i. No public access computer shall be located in a back room nor in any
part of the licensed premises which is not open to the general public.
j. No licensee nor any of his/her agents, officers or services shall by
threats, promises or intimidation seek to control or direct the
placement or removal of any device or to control the placement of any
such device from any location within Town of Guttenberg, and any such
threats, promises or intimidation shall be reported immediately to the
Police Department and to the Town Clerk.
k. No licensee shall neglect or fail to report promptly to the Police
Department and Town Clerk any violation of any law or ordinance
occurring on the licensed premises, nor shall any licensee neglect or
§ 4-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.4
1:135
§ 4-7.5. License. [Ord. #005/05]
fail to report promptly to the Town Clerk any conduct or activity
prohibited by this chapter.
l. Each licensee or operator shall promptly report, in writing, to the Town
Clerk any change or addition or deletion of the information furnished on
the license application and all material attached thereto, and this
obligation shall be a continuing obligation during the term of any
license or the renewal thereof.
m. No licensee shall refuse to cooperate fully with all Town officials or any
law enforcement officer or agency, nor shall any such licensee, operator
and/or owner-operator refuse to produce and make available all records
relating to the purchase or distribution of such devices. No such
licensee and/or operator shall refuse access to its premises to the Town
Clerk nor to any member of the Departments of Police, Fire, Health or
Housing, nor to any law enforcement officer or agency. All public access
computers licensed by the Town of Guttenberg must be available at all
times during licensure for hard drive inspection by an authorized
representative of the Town Clerk. No public access computer shall be
fastened, locked or secured in such a manner that the licensee or
person in charge of the licensed premises cannot immediately provide
access to the hard drive and directories of said machine upon the
request.
n. Aisles and exit corridors in a public access computer center shall be
maintained in accordance with the Building and Fire Codes of the Town
of Guttenberg.
a. Each license, when issued, shall designate the number of public access
computers operated on the premises.
b. The licensee shall supply to the Town Clerk the serial numbers or other
identifying information regarding the public access computers located
on the premises.
c. All license fees shall be paid to the Town Clerk prior to the issuance of
the license, and all licenses issued hereunder shall be issued for a term
of one year commencing on July 1 and expiring on June 30 next
following.
d. Each license issued shall be posted prominently and conspicuously in
the licensed premises.
e. Public access computers may be added to the PACC upon application to
the Town Clerk and submission of appropriate fees as established in
Subsection 4-7.6.
§ 4-7.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-7.6
1:136
§ 4-7.6. License Fees. [Ord. #005/05]
The fee schedule for this section shall be on an annual basis the payment
to the Town of $125 for the first computer and $25 for each additional
computer in the Public Access Computer Center.
§ 4-7.7. Revocation of License; Hearing. [Ord. #005/05]
Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation if any of the
following occur:
§ 4-7.8. Age of Applicant. [Ord. #005/05]
No license under this section shall be issued to any applicant who is under
21 years of age.
§ 4-7.9. License Applications to Be Kept on File. [Ord. #005/05]
The owner of any premises in which a license for one or more public access
computers is required shall be required to keep on file each application
for a license. Such information shall be kept on file in an orderly fashion
in a location known to all owners of said premises and personnel who are
employed in said premises. Upon request by any law enforcement official of
the Town of Guttenberg, any owner of said premises or any employee at said
premises shall furnish such information to said law enforcement official.
§ 4-7.10. Compliance with Other Regulations. [Ord. #005/05]
Every person seeking licensure hereunder shall comply with all State
statutes, municipal ordinances and regulations prior to receiving a license
or licenses hereunder.
a. The violation of any of the provisions of this section.
b. Any misstatement or omission in the license application or in any
information submitted therewith or the failure to notify in writing the
Town Clerk of any changes by addition or deletion or amendment to
said application or information during the term of said license or
renewal.
c. A license issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the Mayor
and Council after a hearing. The licensee shall be given 10 days' notice
of said hearing, and such notice shall state the ground or grounds for
the revocation of the license. At such hearing, the licensee may submit
relevant information on his behalf. The rules of evidence shall not apply
to such hearing; however, the licensee and the Town officials shall be
afforded the opportunity to present testimony and/or documents in
support of their respective positions. Any appeal from the decision of
the Mayor and Council shall be to the Superior Court of New Jersey.
§ 4-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.11
1:137
§ 4-7.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #005/05]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-8. LAUNDROMATS AND LAUNDERETTES.
§ 4-8.1. Definition. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 1]
As used in this section:
LAUNDROMAT AND LAUNDERETTE — Shall mean any commercial
establishment within the Town where the washing and/or drying of wearing
apparel or other textiles or laundry is done by the customer directly or
where such washing and/or drying is done by employees of the
establishment and the articles washed and/or dried are taken away by the
customers and shall apply to such establishments whether the laundry is
automatic or semi-automatic and coin-operated or operated by employees
of the establishment, but shall not apply to residential buildings where coinoperated
machines are supplied for the convenience of residents only of the
building.
§ 4-8.2. Standards. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 1]
a. The inspection, licensing and regulation of such establishments as
respects fire hazards shall have particular regard, among other things,
to the installation and operation of such establishments and the
equipment therein with respect to fire safety and prevention including
adequacy of electrical wiring and safe operation to eliminate and
prevent the likelihood of fire and to promote the discovery and
combating of fire and fire hazards.
b. The inspection, licensing and regulation of such establishments as
respects public safety hazards shall have particular regard, among
other things, to the installation and operation of such establishments
and the equipment therein with respect to public safety of all persons
lawfully within such establishments at any time from any hazards to
safety as regards the operation of the equipment therein or other
hazards or dangers growing out of the establishment and operation of
such business and the prompt discovery of injury and the promotion of
prompt assistance to injured or threatened persons therein.
c. The inspection, licensing and regulation of such establishments as
respects health hazards shall have particular regard, among other
things, to the installation and operation of such establishments and the
equipment therein with respect to the prevention of all dangers or
hazards to health and the prevention and suppression of conditions of
uncleanliness, odor, vibration, noise, the possible spreading of disease
and the promotion of prompt discovery, elimination and alleviation of all
matters or things affecting the health of the neighboring premises and
§ 4-7.11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-8.2
1:138
§ 4-8.3. License Required. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, operate or use in
any place where the public is invited any laundromat or launderette without
first obtaining a license for the premises and the washing machines and
drier machines therein from the Board of Health as hereinafter provided.
§ 4-8.4. Application; Fee. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 3; Ord. #20-11]
Licenses shall be applied for upon application showing the name of
applicant and all partners and stockholders with their resident addresses;
the location of the premises to be licensed; the number of machines to
be licensed, and such other information as the Board of Health may deem
necessary under the standards above set forth with respect to fire, safety,
health and law enforcement hazards which license or renewal thereof shall
be for one year and shall expire on July 1 of each year. A license fee of $250
plus $25 for each machine to be licensed, whether it be a washer or a drier,
shall accompany each application for license or renewal, payable upon filing
of application.
§ 4-8.5. Suspension or Revocation. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 8]
The Health Department or its duly authorized agent may suspend or revoke
any license issued hereunder for a violation of any of the provisions hereof
or any regulation or order of the Board of Health made to expedite or
perform or carry out the provisions of this section, provided the licensee
shall have notice of such rule or regulation or of the violation for which
the license is to be revoked, in which case the licensee shall be given an
opportunity to show cause to the Board of Health why the license should
not be suspended or revoked or that the violation has been corrected. Any
licensee whose license has been suspended or revoked may appeal such
suspension or revocation to the Mayor and Board of Council for review
at which the Mayor and Board of Council may affirm, modify or reverse
the findings and action of the Board of Health. The Board of Health shall
the community, including customers and employees of the
establishment.
d. The inspection, licensing and regulation of such establishments as
respects law enforcement hazards shall have particular regard, among
other things, to the installation and operation of such establishments
and the equipment therein with respect to the prevention of crime and
disorderly conduct in and about the premises, particularly the
protection of women and children in and about the premises, be they
customers or employees and the prompt discovery and the protection
against all threatening crime and disorderly conduct and the promotion
of effective police action in the event of same. Each such establishment
shall be so physically arranged as to afford adequate lighting
throughout and a clear, unobstructed view of the entire premises from
the nearest street on which the premises abut.
§ 4-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8.5
1:139
have the power to promulgate such rules and other regulations as may be
necessary to effectuate and enforce the performance of this Ordinance with
respect to all of the hazards and other matters provided for herein.
§ 4-8.6. Conformance Required. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 4]
All places used as laundromats or launderettes shall conform to the Sanitary
Code and Uniform Construction Code of the Town and other relevant State
and local ordinances as determined by prior inspection and approval of
the Guttenberg Board of Health. Also required prior to approval shall be
favorable report of the Fire Department and Police Department under the
above standards. Inspection and approval shall be a condition precedent to
the issuance of any license or renewal thereof.
§ 4-8.7. Location. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 5]
No laundromat or launderette shall be conducted in any building devoted
exclusively to any residential occupation or use except that the washing,
laundering and drying facilities may be used provided same are for the sole
convenience and services of bona fide residents of that building without
services to any other member of the public. Such facilities in residential
buildings shall be established, maintained, operated and used, as near as
may be, to the conditions and regulations set forth under this ordinance but
licenses therefor shall not be required.
§ 4-8.8. Hours of Operation. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 6]
No laundromat or launderette shall be open for business between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, unless the owner or operator
of the business shall employ and have continuously present on the premises
during the hours a person familiar with the operation of all equipment upon
the premises.
§ 4-8.9. Authorized Agent. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 7; New]
No laundromat or launderette shall operate at anytime unless the license
is posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises and unless the name,
address and telephone number of the owner or operator or of a duly
authorized agent of the owner or operator who may be contacted in an
emergency is conspicuously posted on the premises and this information is
kept on current file with the Police and Fire Departments.
§ 4-8.10. Penalty. [Ord. 2/1/60 § 9]
Any person violating the provisions of this section or failing to do any matter
or thing that is required under this section shall be liable to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-9. MASSAGE PARLORS.
§ 4-8.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-9.1
1:140
§ 4-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. #16-13]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MASSAGE PARLORS — Shall mean any business offering the activity of
structured touch which includes holding, applying pressure, positioning
and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by manual technique and use of
visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating skills to assess the body for
purposes of applying therapeutic massage, body work or somatic principals.
Such application may include the use of therapy such as heliotherapy or
hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external applications, external
application of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription
drugs, explaining and describing miofascial movement, self-care and stress
management as it relates to massage, body work and somatic therapies.
Massage, body work and somatic therapy practices are designed to affect
the energetic systems of the body for the purpose of promoting and
maintaining the health and well being of the client. Massage, body work
and somatic therapies will not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness,
disease, impairment or disability.
§ 4-9.2. License Required; Application Procedure; Term of License;
Restrictions on Location. [Ord. #16-13]
a. It shall be unlawful to operate any massage parlor in the Town of
Guttenberg, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, without first
obtaining a license therefor. The owner of a massage parlor desiring a
license shall make written application to the Municipal Clerk of the
Town of Guttenberg, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, setting
forth the name of the applicant, location of the places sought to be
licensed, whether or not the applicant is registered by the New Jersey
State Department of Health and any other facts which the Municipal
Clerk may consider pertinent. Each such application shall forthwith be
transmitted to the Health Officer of the Town of Guttenberg for
investigation and the Health Officer shall within 30 days thereafter,
endorse its approval or disapproval or additional questions on the
application. Upon approval by the Health Officer, the license to operate
massage parlor shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk. There shall be a
paid fee for each license as established by the Town of Guttenberg fees
which sum will accompany the application, and be returned if the
license is not granted.
b. Any application which fails to conform or to comply with the
requirements of this section or which contains any misrepresentations
shall constitute sufficient grounds for the denial of the application and
any license which may be issued with an intentional misrepresentation
contained in the application shall be subject to suspension or revocation
in addition to penalties hereinafter mentioned.
c. Each such license shall become effective January 1 of any given year
and will be renewable by mail annually.
§ 4-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9.2
1:141
d. Annual Fee. The applicant shall pay a $500 fee upon filing an initial
application for the operation of a business engaged in providing
massage therapy services and any individual applicant (as opposed to a
business entity) who wishes to be licensed for massage therapy
purposed under this section shall pay an initial application fee of $100.
All licenses shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed
for additional one-year period upon the filing of a new application which
must comport with the requirements of this section. All provisions of
this section, including the requirement of filing fees, shall apply to
renewals in the same manner as they apply to applications for initial
licenses,
e. These licenses are not transferable.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the massage and/or
somatic therapy business without a license pursuant to this subsection,
in violation of any requirement set forth in this section.
g. No person shall be engaged or employed (every business entity and
each person employed by that entity or performing massage therapy
services at the business location of that entity shall be required to
obtain a license pursuant to this section) in the Town of Guttenberg as a
massage or somatic therapist for which any form of compensation is
charged or accepted, without first obtaining a license from the
Municipal Clerk of the Town of Guttenberg. The license, when issued,
shall be personal and shall not be constructed or construed to grant a
Certificate of Occupancy or approval for the use of any premises or
location for the provision of massage therapy services.
h. Requirements for Massage Parlor Licenses. A license shall not be issued
to a business entity or person unless he/she/it meets the following
conditions:
1. Owners, corporate officers, partners, limited liability members
submit a completed application as required by this section.
2. Is at least 18 years of age.
3. Is licensed/certified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. (the
Massage, Body Work and Somatic Therapy Certification Act) and
regulations promulgated thereto.
4. Submits a certification in lieu of licensure pursuant to that Act.
5. Submits a certification from a duly licensed physician of the State
of New Jersey stating that the applicant is free from contagious and
communicable disease, dated within 30 days of the date of the
application.
6. Applicant submits three recent photographs that shall be
approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
§ 4-9.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-9.2
1:142
§ 4-9.3. Lists of Suppliers. [Ord. #16-13]
Every owner of a massage parlor upon request of the Board of Health shall
furnish to the Health Officer the names and addresses of any person, firm or
corporation supplying them with any item that is used in its establishment
for the purpose of enabling the Health Officer to examine the sanitary and
hygienic conditions under which said materials are handled.
§ 4-9.4. Water Supply. [Ord. #16-13]
Every massage parlor upon request of the Health Officer shall contain hot
and cold running water.
§ 4-9.5. Use of Linen. [Ord. #16-13]
It shall be unlawful to wash or dry in the licensed premises any towels that
were used or that have come into contact with a patron. It shall be unlawful
to use covering cloths on more than one person successively, except when
either a clean towel or a paper neck is applied next to the skin between each
covering cloth and the skin to prevent contact of the skin with such covering
cloth.
§ 4-9.6. Sign Stating Hours of Operation, Required. [Ord. #16-13]
All massage parlors shall have a sign not less than 18 inches wide by
16 inches long on which shall be prominently stated the hours of the
premises. The said sign shall be displayed in such a manner that all persons
frequenting the said location shall have an unobstructed view thereof.
§ 4-9.7. Inspections. [Ord. #16-13]
Each applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Director of Public
Safety or his designee and shall undergo a background check by
the Police Department, which cost shall be borne by the applicant.
The applicant completes an application in a form maintained on file
with the Municipal Clerk, Town of Guttenberg.
7. The applicant has not been convicted or pled guilty to violating any
provisions of the Criminal Code included in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1 et seq.
and/or N.J.S.A. 2C:14-2 or their equivalent in another jurisdiction.
8. Has not made a false statement in connection with an application
for licensure under this section.
a. The Health Officer or his/her designee shall enter said premises at any
time with no advance warning. The premises must be inspection ready
at all times. The Health Officer, Public Health Investigator, Guttenberg
Police Department are the other authorities that may enter said
premises for complaints or general inquiries. All findings will be
reported to the Health Officer as soon as possible.
§ 4-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9.7
1:143
§ 4-9.8. Licenses Must Be Displayed. [Ord. #16-13]
All licenses issued by the Municipal Clerk must be posted and available to
all patrons entering said location. In the locations where there is additional
licensing (by the State of New Jersey), all individual licenses of operators
and owners must be posted at the said premises and must be valid. (The
personal information that is on the license may be blocked out, but must be
accessible to the inspecting individual.)
§ 4-9.9. Appeals. [Ord. #16-13]
In the event that any applicant for a license shall have been refused a
license or in the event that any license shall have had his/her license
revoked or suspended by the Health Officer, said person shall have the right
and privilege to appeal from such refusal to grant license or suspension
or revocation of license to the Municipal Clerk of the Town of Guttenberg
provided however that not less than 14 days' written notice of such appeal
shall have been served upon the Municipal Clerk either in person or
registered mail return receipt requested and a date of hearing before the
Municipal Clerk shall be fixed no later than 30 days after the receipt of said
notice of appeal. Thereupon the Municipal Clerk shall notify said person of
the place, date and time of hearing.
§ 4-9.10. Fines. [Ord. #16-13]
Any massage parlor that violates any part of this section shall be fined as
follows and be paid within 10 days of said violation.
1st offense $100
2nd offense $250
3rd offense Not more than $500 (3rd violation requires a review
meeting with the Health Officer)
If licensee fails to correct any violation within the given time period, the
license may be revoked until such corrections are made.
§ 4-9.11. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. #16-13]
A licensee shall not perform:
b. Each massage parlor will be inspected at least one time annually, where
a certificate of inspection (pass or fail) will be posted. This certificate
must be posted in clear view of all patrons entering said locations.
c. At which time an inspection is made and it is found to be of
unsatisfactory condition, it will put the said location on notice and
schedule a reinspection and a reinspection fee of $40 will be charged.
a. Colonic irrigation;
b. Prostate massages;
§ 4-9.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-9.11
1:144
§ 4-9.12. Sexual Misconduct Unlawful. [Ord. #16-13]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate any establishment as a
massage parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact by
the licensee or any employee of the licensee is provided resulting in sexual
misconduct. Sexual misconduct shall be defined as follows:
c. Vaginal or penile massages;
d. Decongestive therapy;
e. Manual lymph drainage used as part of decongestive therapy;
f. Animal therapies prohibited by the Veterinary Medical Act, N.J.S.A.
45:16-1 et seq.;
g. Any application of electrical current to the body;
h. Ultrasound therapy; and
i. Treatment or diagnosis of illness, disease, impairment or disability.
a. The purpose of this subsection is to identify licensee's conduct which
shall be deemed sexual misconduct.
b. As used in this subsection, the following terms have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CLIENT — Shall mean any person who is the recipient of massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy.
CLIENT-THERAPIST RELATIONSHIP — Shall mean a relationship
between a licensee and a client wherein the licensee owes a continuing
duty to the client to render massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
services consistent with his or her training and experience.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Shall mean the knowing touching of a person's
body directly or through clothing, where the circumstances
surrounding the touching would be construed by a reasonable person
to be motivated by the licensee's own prurient interest or for sexual
arousal or gratification.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Shall mean and include, but is not limited to, the
imposition of a part of the licensee's body upon a part of the client's
body, sexual penetration, or the insertion or imposition of any object
or any part of a licensee or client's body into or near the genital, anal
or other opening of the other person's body. "Sexual contact" does
not include the touching of a client's body which is necessary during
the performance of a generally accepted and recognized massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy procedure.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT — Shall mean solicitation of any sexual act,
physical advances, or verbal or nonverbal conduct that is sexual in
nature, and which occurs in connection with a licensee's activities or
role as a provider of massage, bodywork or somatic therapy services,
§ 4-9.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9.12
1:145
and that either: is unwelcome, is offensive to a reasonable person,
or creates a hostile workplace environment, and the licensee knows,
should know, or is told this; or is sufficiently severe or intense to be
abusive to a reasonable person in that context. "Sexual harassment"
may consist of a single extreme or severe act or of multiple acts and
may include, but is not limited to, conduct of a licensee with a client, coworker,
employee, student or supervisee whether or not such individual
is in a subordinate position to the licensee.
SPOUSE — Shall mean the husband, wife or fiancee of the licensee
or an individual involved in a long-term committed relationship with
a licensee. For purposes of the definition of "spouse," a long-term
committed relationship means a relationship which is at least six
months in duration.
c. A licensee shall not engage in sexual contact with a client with whom he
or she has a client-therapist relationship. The client-therapist
relationship is ongoing for purposes of this subsection, unless the last
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy was rendered more than three
months ago.
d. A licensee shall not seek or solicit sexual contact with a client with
whom he or she has a client-therapist relationship and shall not seek or
solicit sexual contact with any person in exchange for professional
services.
e. A licensee shall not engage in any discussion of any intimate sexual
nature with a person with whom the licensee has a client-therapist
relationship, unless that discussion is directly related to a proper
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy purpose. Such discussion shall
not include disclosure by the licensee of his or her own sexual relations.
f. A licensee, shall provide privacy and therapy conditions which prevent
exposure of the unclothed body of the client. Appropriate draping
measures shall be employed to protect the client's privacy.
g. A licensee shall not engage in sexual harassment either within or
outside of the professional setting.
h. A licensee shall not engage in any other activity which would lead a
reasonable person to believe that the activity serves the licensee's
personal prurient interests or which is for the sexual arousal, or sexual
gratification of the licensee or client or which constitutes an act of
sexual abuse.
i. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent a licensee from
rendering massage, bodywork or somatic therapy to a spouse,
providing that the rendering of such massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy is consistent with accepted standards of massage, bodywork or
somatic therapy and that the performance of therapy is not utilized to
exploit the spouse for sexual arousal or sexual gratification of the
licensee.
§ 4-9.12 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-9.12
1:146
§ 4-9.13. Sleeping Quarters. [Ord. #16-13]
No part of any quarters of any massage and/or somatic therapy business
shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping quarters, nor
shall any person sleep in such massage and/or somatic therapy business
except for limited periods incidental to and directly related to a massage
or bath. This provision shall not preclude the location of a massage and/
or somatic therapy business in a separate quarters of a building housing a
hotel or other separate business or clubs.
§ 4-9.14. Equipment Standards. [Ord. #16-13]
§ 4-9.15. Term of License. [Ord. #16-13]
A license shall be issued for one calendar year beginning with the year in
which the license was issued.
§ 4-9.16. Display of License. [Ord. #16-13]
All licenses issued hereunder shall be exhibited in a prominent place inside
the business establishment.
§ 4-9.17. Revocation of License. [Ord. #16-13]
§ 4-9.18. Revocation Procedure. [Ord. #16-13]
j. It shall not be a defense to any action under this subsection that:
1. The client solicited or consented to sexual contact with the
licensee; or
2. The licensee is in love with or held affection for the client.
a. All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, except reception and
administrative areas, shall be made of nonporous materials which may
readily be disinfected.
b. Closed containers shall be provided for wet towels and waste materials.
a. The conviction of any applicant or licensee of any criminal offense,
quasi-criminal offense or sanitary code violation related to the
licensee's business, or any sex-related offense may constitute a
forfeiture of the license and said license shall be deemed revoked.
b. Each licensee shall be deemed responsible for a clean and safe business
operation on the premises. The violation of any law at said premises or
any provisions of this section may be grounds for the revocation of the
license to operate massage therapy on the premises.
a. Licenses issued under this section may be revoked by the Town Clerk,
Town Administrator, Construction Code Official or Director of Public
Safety for violations of any terms or conditions of this section.
§ 4-9.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9.18
1:147
§ 4-9.19. Appeal. [Ord. #16-13]
The applicant or licensee may appeal any denial or revocation of a license
within 30 days of receiving written notice of such denial or revocation by
submitting to the Municipal Clerk a written request for a hearing by the
Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall hold a hearing within 45
days within the date of request for a hearing. The Mayor and Council shall
issue a decision to the applicant or licensee within 10 days of its decision or
within 45 days of the hearing whichever is sooner. The time provided may
be extended and/or waived on a mutually agreeable basis by the Mayor and
Council and the applicant and/or licensee.
In the event of any appeal, the license will remain in effect until the Mayor
and Council renders its discussion.
§ 4-9.20. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #16-13]
§ 4-9.21. Non-Preemption. [Ord. #16-13]
This section is intended to be read in pari materia with any and all State
regulations appertaining to the same or similar subject matter, including,
but not by way of limitation, any and all regulations established by the
Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Examining Committee operating
under the New Jersey Board of Nursing (P.L. 1999, c, 19, approved February
8, 1999, Assembly Bill No. 843).
§ 4-9.22. Repealer. [Ord. #16-13]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are repealed as
to such inconsistencies.
b. Notice of an informal hearing for revocation of a license before any of
the individuals identified in Subsection a above, shall be given in
writing setting forth the grounds of complaint and time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed by registered letter to the licensee at his last known address at
least five days prior to the date set for hearing.
c. In the event of a revocation of license, the Town Clerk, Town
Administrator, Construction Code Official or Director of Public Safety
shall report his/her findings and reasons therefor to the applicant/
licensee in writing.
a. The Town of Guttenberg may, in lieu of revocation, impose a fine or
suspend a license. The fine may not exceed $1,250. Each day the
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and each day shall be subject to such a fine.
b. A violation of any section of this section may also be grounds for
revocation of any license, certificate of occupancy or permit issued by
the Town for the premises.
§ 4-9.18 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-9.23
1:148
§ 4-9.23. Severability. [Ord. #16-13]
If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is
for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
§ 4-9.24. Effective Date. [Ord. #16-13]
This section shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law and shall be applicable to any new applications or renewal applications
for existing massage therapy establishments.11
§ 4-10. EMBROIDERY SHOPS AND KNITTING MILLS.
§ 4-10.1. Definition. [Ord. 4/22/45 § 6]
As used in this section:
PLANT — Shall mean any building in which an embroidery machine or
machines, or a knitting machine or machines are used or operated. Shop
and mill shall be of the same meaning as "plant," above.
§ 4-10.2. License Required. [Ord. 4/22/46 § I]
In order to permit fullest employment in the embroidery and knitting goods
industries, to protect residents of the Town against the disturbance of their
rest at night, by the operation of the industries under certain conditions,
and also in order to protect the health and morals of the employees
employed in the manufacturing establishments known as the knitting goods
and embroidery industries; no embroidery shop and no knitting mill shall
operate such shop or mill or employ any person in such shop or mill
before the hour of 7:00 a.m. and after the hour of 11:00 p.m., without
procuring a license in the manner hereinafter set forth and complying with
the regulations provided for in this section.
§ 4-10.3. Application; Fee. [Ord. 4/22/46 § II]
Any person desiring to operate any embroidery shop or knitting mill in the
Town between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall make application
therefor to the Mayor and Board of Council, and the body, after due and
proper investigation, may direct the Clerk to issue a license therefor, which
license shall remain in effect until May 1 after the date of issuance, subject
to revocation for violation of the provisions of this section, or the rules or
regulations laid down by the Mayor and Board of Council for the operation
of the industries during the prescribed period. The license fee for
embroidery shops shall be the sum of $100 for each 15 yard machine
therein contained and the sum of $75 for each 10 yard machine therein
11.Note: Ordinance No. 16-13, codified herein, was adopted June 24, 2013.
§ 4-9.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.3
1:149
contained. The license fee for knitting mills shall be $250. The licenses shall
run from May 1 in each year to May 1 in the succeeding year.
§ 4-10.4. Factors Considered; Issuance. [Ord. 4/22/46 §§ III, X]
In the operation of an embroidery shop or knitting mill between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and before a license is issued, the governing
body shall give consideration to the following factors: the black-out of lights
in the plant; the sound proofing of walls in the interior of the plant; the
air conditioning of the plant; the ability of the manufacturer to keep all
windows in the plant closed, so as to eliminate any noises emanating from
the plant and annoying persons residing in the adjacent properties, and the
absence of undue vibration.
If upon investigation, the Mayor and Board of Council shall be of the opinion
that the operation of the plant shall not affect the health and welfare of
the citizens of the Town or the employees of the plant, they shall direct the
Clerk to issue the license.
The license hereinabove prescribed shall be issued by the Town Clerk
upon direction of the Mayor and Board of Council upon such forms and
applications as may be prescribed.
§ 4-10.5. Revocation. [Ord. 4/22/46 § VII]
Mayor and Board of Council may rescind or revoke the license issued under
this section upon satisfactory proof that the operator, owner or employees
of the plant have not taken such steps as may be necessary to eliminate
undue vibration or the emission of light or noise from the plant, or have
not taken adequate and proper steps for the protection and safeguard of
the employees working in the plant or factory during the evening period
governed by the license, or have violated the regulations promulgated by
the Mayor and Board of Council, concerning the premises.
§ 4-10.6. Committee on Industry. [Ord. 4/22/46 § VIII]
The Mayor and Board of Council are hereby authorized to appoint a
committee of one or more persons who may be either a member of the
body or a member of the Police Department or Board of Health to make
investigations in behalf of the Board and to report the findings thereof to the
body and also to institute and prosecute in behalf of the Board any action
required to be taken under this section. The Committee shall be designated
as the "Committee on Industry."
§ 4-10.7. Compliance Required. [Ord. 4/22/46 § IV]
The Mayor and Board of Council may promulgate such regulations as shall
be deemed necessary for the operation of such plants during the period
of time covered by the license, and the licensee shall comply therewith.
The failure to comply therewith shall be deemed to be a violation of the
provisions of this section and shall be punishable, upon conviction, in the
§ 4-10.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-10.7
1:150
manner hereinafter specified, in addition to subjecting the license to
cancellation or revocation.
§ 4-10.8. Collecting Violations. [Ord. 4/22/46 § V]
If upon inspection of the licensed premises, the Committee appointed by
virtue of the authority of this section shall determine that the operation
of the plant during the licensed hours shall be injurious to the health and
welfare of the citizens of the Town or the employees of the plant, said
Committee may direct what steps shall be taken to correct the violation and
the licensee shall immediately comply therewith; if no steps can be taken
which will eliminate the violation, the licensee shall cease and desist from
operating the plant during the licensed hours until the further order of the
Mayor and Board of Council.
§ 4-10.9. Regulations. [Ord. 4/22/46]
§ 4-10.10. Illegal Operation; Penalty. [Ord. 4/22/46 § IX]
Any person who shall operate an embroidery shop or knitting mill of any
kind whatsoever between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. without
a license as prescribed by this section or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section or the regulations propounded hereunder shall be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
a. No radio or other musical instrument shall be played or operated
during the hours between 11:00 p.m. at night and 7:00 a.m. in any
embroidery shop or knitting mill operating under a license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
b. In the operation of any plant, during the hours specified, vibration shall
be kept at a minimum.
c. During the hours specified in this section, the windows in the plant shall
remain closed so as to prohibit the emission of any noise from the plant.
d. During the hours of operation of the plant, the windows shall be
covered or otherwise blacked out so as to prohibit the emission of light
from the plant.
e. Air-conditioning of such plant is recommended and shall be installed if
reasonably possible.
f. Insulation of the plant so as to deaden noise within the plant and to
keep the same at a minimum on the outside of the plant is
recommended and shall be installed if reasonably possible.
g. Licensee shall comply with the directions of the Committee on Industry
for the purpose of eliminating noise, the emission of light and vibration.
Inspection of the plant is required whenever recommendations are
made.
§ 4-10.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-11
1:151
§ 4-11. BARBERSHOP, BEAUTY SALON, NAIL SALON.
§ 4-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
As used in this section:
BARBERSHOP — Shall mean any place wherein any person, firm or
corporation represents to the public that the person, firm or corporation
is engaged in the occupation or business of shaving, clipping, cutting,
shampooing or trimming of hair and/or the massaging of the faces or scalps
of the patrons thereof.
BEAUTY SALON — Shall mean any place wherein any person, firm or
corporation represents to the public that the person, firm or corporation
is engaged in the occupation or business of waxing, clipping, threading,
cutting, dyeing, shampooing or trimming of hair and/or the massaging of
the faces or scalps of the patrons thereof.
NAIL SALON — Shall mean any place wherein any person, firm or
corporation represents to the public that the said person, firm or
corporation is engaged in the occupation or business of clipping and styling
nails of the hands and feet.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm or corporation.
§ 4-11.2. License Required; Application Procedure; Term of License.
[Ord. No. 16-2016]
a. It shall be unlawful to operate any barbershop, beauty and nail salon in
the Town of Guttenberg, County of Hudson, without first obtaining a
license therefor. The owner of a barbershop, beauty and nail salon
desiring a license shall make written application to the Building
Department of the Town of Guttenberg or its representatives, setting
forth the name of the applicant, the location of the places sought to be
licensed, whether or not the applicant is registered by the New Jersey
State Department of Health and any other facts which the Building
Department of the Town may consider pertinent. Each such application
shall be forthwith transmitted to the Building Department or assigned
representatives for investigation, and the Building Department shall,
within seven days thereafter, endorse its approval or disapproval on the
application. Upon approval, the license to operate a barbershop, beauty
and/or nail salon shall be issued by the Building Department. There
shall be paid for each license a fee, as established by § 4-50 which sum
shall accompany the application and be returned if the license is not
granted.
b. Any application which fails to conform or to comply with the
requirements of this section or which contains any misrepresentations
shall constitute sufficient grounds for the denial of the application; and
any license which may be issued upon any misrepresentation contained
in the application shall be subject to suspension or revocation in
addition to penalties hereinafter mentioned.
§ 4-11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-11.2
1:152
§ 4-11.3. Employment of Diseased Persons Prohibited. [Ord. No.
16-2016]
No person shall be in charge of or operating a barbershop, beauty and/
or nail salon, or be employed therein, if said person is suffering from
any sexually transmitted disease, tuberculosis or any other infectious,
contagious or communicable disease.
§ 4-11.4. Lists of Suppliers. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
Every owner of a barbershop, beauty and/or nail salon, upon request of
the Health Officer or approved representatives, shall furnish to the Health
Officer or its representatives the name and address of any person, firm or
corporation supplying linens, towels or equipment used in said barbershop,
beauty and nail salon for the purpose of enabling the Health Officer or
approved representatives to examine the sanitary and hygienic conditions
under which said materials are handled.
§ 4-11.5. Rendering of Service to Persons Suspected of Being
Diseased. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
It shall be unlawful for any person employed in a barbershop, beauty
and/or nail salon to shave any person or perform any barbering service
when the area to be shaved or otherwise treated is inflamed, or contains
pus, or in any way gives indication of the possibility of communicating or
spreading disease, unless such person is provided with his own equipment
or apparatus for the rendition of the barbering service required and such
personally provided equipment only shall be used.
§ 4-11.6. Use of Linen. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
It shall be unlawful to wash or dry in the licensed premises any towels used
in barbering, or to use any towel or washcloth which has not been properly
laundered subsequent to its last use on any other person, and it shall
be unlawful to use covering cloths on more than one person successively,
except when either a clean towel or paper neck piece is applied next to the
skin between such covering cloth and the skin, to prevent contact of the
skin with such covering cloth.
c. Each such license shall become effective on the first day of January of
each year and shall be renewed annually.
d. Any person who shaves, clips, cuts, shampoos or trims hair and/or
massages faces or scalps in a barbershop; any person who waxes, clips,
cuts, dyes, shampoos, threads or trims hair and/or massages faces or
scalps in a beauty salon; any person who clips and/or styles nails of the
hands or feet in a nail salon shall apply for a license on an annual basis,
and the fee for said license shall be $50.
§ 4-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-11.7
1:153
§ 4-11.7. Water Supply. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
Every barbershop, beauty and/or nail salon shall contain hot and cold
running water.
§ 4-11.8. Sterilization of Equipment and Instruments; Use of
Medication. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
All shaving brushes, razors, scissors, clipping machines, pincers, needles
and any other instrument or equipment used in a barbershop, beauty and/or
nail salon upon the person of any customer, or otherwise, shall be sterilized
before usage. Any material or medication used to stop the flow of blood, or
otherwise to be applied in treatment of facial or skin injury, shall be of a
safe character and shall be applied in a sterile manner per manufacturer's
instructions.
§ 4-11.9. Separation of Living Quarters. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
No part of the premises used as a barbershop, beauty and/or nail salon shall
be occupied or used or furnished for sleeping quarters, and rooms in the
rear or to the side of a barbershop, beauty and/or nail salon, which may
be used as living quarters, shall be separated from the barbershop by a
permanent partition extending from ceiling to floor, and any door leading
thereto shall be kept closed at all times, except as used for ingress and
egress. Nor shall any pets and/or animals be permitted in the business.
§ 4-11.10. Sign Stating Hours Required. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
All barbershops shall have a sign not less than 18 inches wide by 16 inches
long on which shall be prominently stated the hours hereinafter mentioned
during which said barbershops shall be open. The sign shall be displayed
in such a manner that all persons frequenting the barbershop shall have an
unobstructed view thereof.
§ 4-11.11. Itinerant Barbers Prohibited. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an itinerant barber and solicit
or perform barbering work by going from house to house. The provisions
of this section, with respect to performing barbering services away from
the licensed premises, shall not be deemed to apply to licensed owners of
barbershops or their employees, licensed as above required, called upon to
render barbering service to a customer or patron outside the barbershop,
who, because of illness or for other good reason, is unable to come to said
barbershop.
§ 4-11.12. Inspection. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
a. The Health Officer or approved representatives shall, at all times, have
the power to inspect licensed premises.
b. There shall be no amusement games or devices on the premises.
§ 4-11.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-11.12
1:154
§ 4-11.13. Licenses Must Be Displayed. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
All licenses must be exhibited by owners and employees in a prominent
location near the entrance of the business.
§ 4-11.14. Appeals. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
In the event that any applicant for a license shall have been refused a
license or in the event that any licensee shall have had his license revoked
or suspended, said person shall have the right and privilege to appeal from
such refusal to grant a license or suspension or revocation of a license to
the Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg; provided, however, that
not less than five days' written notice of such appeal shall have been served
upon the Municipal Clerk, either in person or by registered mail, return
receipt requested, and a date of hearing before the Mayor and Council shall
be fixed no later than 30 days after the receipt of said notice of appeal.
Thereupon, the Municipal Clerk shall notify said person of the place, date
and time of hearing.
§ 4-11.15. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 16-2016]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in Chapter 1 § 1-5.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this section, and each day the same
is violated, shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 4-12. through § 4-19. (RESERVED)
§ 4-20. FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 4-20.1. Authorization; Purpose and Objective. [Ord. #9/16/92B,
Preamable]
The Mayor and Board of Council have determined that fire alarm systems
including protective signaling systems serve a useful function, and the State
Construction Code governs the installation and the State Fire Code requires
maintenance of such systems.
Maintenance inspections do not reveal all problems with such systems and
no State standard governs the use and control of fire alarm and protective
signaling systems. The incidence of false alarms attributable to defective
equipment or failure to monitor and maintain such systems results in a
response which creates a needless risk of injury to both fire suppression
personnel and the public as well as a cost in time, efficiency, equipment and
funds.
In order to reduce risks and costs as well as increase fire suppression
efficiency, the Mayor and Board of Council seek to promulgate operational
c. Each barbershop, beauty and/or nail salon shall have an unobstructed
view of the premises; approved decorations will be allowed.
§ 4-11.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-20.1
1:155
requirements for the use and control of fire alarm and protective signaling
systems, and to establish remedies and penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 4-20.2. Definitions. [Ord. #9/16/92B § 1]
As used in this section:
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any fire alarm causing direct notification to
a fire department through an alarm panel, switchboard or alarm lines, in a
case where no fire exists.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean a system containing automatic
detecting device(s) which actuate an alarm signal, requiring a response by
fire suppression forces, including but not limited to, Protective Signaling
Systems or devices designed to transmit alarms and/or trouble signals to
alert fire suppression forces of the need to respond to protect life and
property.
§ 4-20.3. Alarm System Permit Required. [Ord. #9/16/92B § 2]
§ 4-20.4. Annual Inspection of Alarm Systems. [Ord. #9/16/92B § 3]
The Fire Official shall annually inspect each fire alarm system to determine
whether or not the system is operational. Any violations as set forth in the
following subsection, or operational defects in the alarm system shall be
noted by the Fire Official and a copy of the citation given to the owner and/
or operator of the fire alarm system as well as to the owner of the building
on which or in which the alarm system is located. Twenty days shall be
allowed from the date of notification to correct the violation.
§ 4-20.5. Investigation of False Alarms; Notice of Violations. [Ord.
#9/16/92B § 4]
The Fire Official shall investigate or cause to be investigated each false
alarm and keep a record of all false alarms on file. If the investigation
discloses that the false alarm was due to equipment misuse, accident,
improper supervision, or equipment malfunction, the Fire Official shall
provide notice and order immediate corrective action. The Fire Official shall
serve on the owner and/or operator of the fire alarm system as well as on
the owner of the building a written order stating the nature of the violations
and the date by which action must be taken to prevent future false alarms.
§ 4-20.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #9/16/92B; Ord. #012-7]
a. Any person or other legal entity desiring to install a fire alarm system
on any premises located in the Town shall apply for an alarm system
permit through the Construction Official.
b. Any person or other legal entity owning and/or operating and/or
protected by an existing fire alarm system shall register same with the
Fire Official of the Town within 30 days of the effective date of this
section.
§ 4-20.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-20.6
1:156
§ 4-21. through § 4-39. (RESERVED)
§ 4-40. PUBLIC TELEPHONES.
§ 4-40.1. Permit Required. [Ord. 3/3/93 § 1]
No pay telephone or telephones shall be placed on or above any public
sidewalk or other public way or place in the Town unless a permit for such
placement has been secured from the Town Clerk; provided, however, that
no such permit shall be required for any pay telephone or telephones or the
installation thereof which are subject to an agreement with the Town for the
payment of an annual commission and/or franchise tax to the Town.
§ 4-40.2. Fee. [Ord. 3/3/93 § 2]
The permit fee for pay telephones which are subject to the provisions of this
section shall be $75.
§ 4-40.3. Permit Approval; Issuance; Expiration. [Ord. 3/3/93 § 3]
All permits issued pursuant to this section shall expire on June 30 annually
regardless of when issued. No permit shall be issued by the Town Clerk
for the placement or continuance of the placement of any pay telephone
or telephones unless the location of same shall first have been approved in
writing by the Construction Official.
a. The first three false alarms in any given calendar year from the same
premises, the Guttenberg Fire Prevention Bureau shall issue a warning
to the owner of the premises, which warning shall include a copy of this
section. The Fire Official shall file or cause to be filed a complaint in the
Guttenberg Municipal Court for any further false alarms from the
premises during that calendar year.
b. Upon a finding by the Municipal Judge of more than three false alarms
from the same premises during the same calendar year, the Court shall
impose fines upon the owner in accordance with the following schedule:
The fee for the 4th through 6th false alarm shall be $100 per false
alarm.
The fee for the 7th through 10th false alarm shall be $300 per false
alarm.
The fee for the 10th through 15th false alarm shall be $500 per false
alarm.
For each alarm after the 15th false alarm, a fine not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000 shall be charged at the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge.
§ 4-20.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-40.4
1:157
§ 4-40.4. Revocation of or Refusal to Renew Permit. [Ord. 3/3/93
§ 4]
The Town reserves the right to revoke or refuse to renew any permit; or to
restrict service at any pay telephone or telephones to outgoing calls only.
The above actions may be taken, at the discretion of the Mayor and Board
of Council, if the Chief of Police advises that a pay telephone or telephones
have created or contributed to illegal activity or are likely to create or
contribute to illegal activity.
A presumption that a pay telephone or telephones will create or contribute
to illegal activity shall arise whenever, during any permit year, two incidents
of illegal activity are associated with a particular pay telephone or
telephones.
§ 4-40.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 3/3/93 § 5]
Any person or other legal entity who places a pay telephone or telephones
on or above any public sidewalk or other public way in the Town without
obtaining a permit for such placement pursuant to the terms of this section
shall be subject to the following fines:
§ 4-41. through § 4-49. (RESERVED)
§ 4-50. LICENSE FEES. [Ord. 4/18/77 §§ 1-8; Ord. 9/19/77 § 1; Ord.
#32/99; Ord. 27/00; Ord. #005/01; Ord. #025/02; Ord. #28-11]
a. The fee for a first offense shall be no less than $25.
b. The fee for a second offense shall be no less than $50.
c. The fee for third and subsequent offenses shall be no less than $100 per
each offense.
a. The License Inspector shall collect the fees established below. The
following schedule of fees for licenses issued or services performed in
the Town is hereby established as follows:
Type of License Annual Fee
Abattoirs or slaughterhouse $1,000
Bakery $250
Beauty and barber shops $250
Candy stores $250
Day care/nursing homes $250
Delicatessen $250
Fat, bones, etc., pickup $250
Fish market $250
§ 4-40.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-50
1:158
Type of License Annual Fee
Flammables license $250
Food or beverage processing plant $250
Food vending machines:
1. Refrigerated or hot food per machine (milk,
soda, juice, soup, coffee, etc.)
$50
2. All other machines (gumball, candy, nuts,
etc.) weighing, etc.
$50
Health spa (pool, gymnasium and related
facilities)
$500
Industrial, mechanical, manufacturing $100
Laundromats — $250 license plus, each machine $25
Massage parlor $500
Movie theater or legitimate theater:
1. Seating capacity up to 200 $500
2. Seating capacity from 200 to 500 $750
3. Seating capacity over 500 $1,000
Nail Salon $250
Private garbage pickup $250
Professional (doctors, lawyers, dentists, real
estate, insurance, etc.)
$250
Retail food establishment other than below $250
Restaurants seating 40 to 59 persons $500
Restaurants seating 60 persons or over $750
Supermarkets having area from 2,500 square
feet to 4,000 square feet
$500
Services, repair, retail $250
Swimming pools (public or multifamily only) $500
Taverns serving food $250
b. Fee for analogous license or service shall be similar to the above
schedule, even though not specifically named as to product or service.
c. Minimum fee for any other license or service shall be $50, unless
otherwise established under any valid State or Federal law or
regulations.
d. Unless otherwise specifically set forth on the license or receipt, period
for operations under above fee schedule, shall be January 1 to
December 31, annually.
§ 4-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-50
1:159
§ 4-51. through § 4-59. (RESERVED)
§ 4-60. NEWSRACKS.
§ 4-60.1. Definitions. [Ord. #019/04]
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean the person, corporation, employee, servant or
agent responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a public street
as herein defined.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean any newspaper, whether distributed for free or
sold, of general circulation as defined by law, any newspaper duly entered
with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with
Federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with
any recording officer as provided by law.
NEWSRACK — Shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container,
storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display
and/or sale of newspapers or other news periodicals.
ROADWAY — Shall mean that portion of a street improved, designated or
ordinarily used for vehicle travel.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — Shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes, and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways,
alleys and sidewalks.
§ 4-60.2. Permit Required. [Ord. #019/04]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place,
maintain or operate on any public street in the Town of Guttenberg any
e. No person or entity shall conduct or engage in the activities or operate
the equipment, article or service, without first obtaining necessary
permit or license, and payment of appropriate fee.
f. Other fees shall remain collectable and in force under other codes or
ordinances.
g. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, § 1-5.
h. Failure to Renew License; Fines. Any person or other legal entity, who
after receiving notice of renewal, fails to renew the business license by
January 31, shall be subject to the following fines.
Failure to renew above license by
February 15th
$100
Failure to renew above license by
March 15th
$250
§ 4-50 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-60.2
1:160
newsrack without first having obtained a permit from the License Inspector
specifying the exact location of such newsrack. One permit may be issued
to include any number of newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 4-60.3. Application for Permit. [Ord. #019/04]
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the License
Inspector upon such form as shall be provided by them, and shall contain
the name and address of the applicant and the proposed specific location of
said newsrack and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 4-60.4. Conditions for Permit Issuance. [Ord. #019/04]
a. Permits may be issued for the installation of a newsrack without prior
inspection of the location, but such newsrack and the installation, use
or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon compliance with the
provisions of this section. An annual permit fee of $50 per newsrack is
required.
b. Permits shall be issued within five business days after an application
which contains all requisite information and submissions has been filed
with the License Inspector.
c. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year on a calendar-year
basis, commencing on January 1, and shall be renewable on January 1 of
any subsequent year.
d. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
and any other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose
behalf the application is made by filing such application do represent,
stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and severally defend,
indemnify and hold the Town of Guttenberg harmless against liability
for any and all claims, for damage to property or injury to or death of
persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
the control, maintenance or ownership of the newsrack permitted.
e. Before the License Inspector may issue a newsrack permit to any
person, that person must execute an indemnification agreement
substantially as follows:
"The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or
corporations on whose behalf the application is made represent,
stipulate, contract and agree that they do jointly and severally defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Guttenberg against liability
for any and all claims for damage to property, injury to or death of
persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
the control, maintenance or ownership of the newsrack."
f. Before the License Inspector may issue a newsrack permit to any
person, that person shall file with the License Inspector an insurance
policy of a company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of this State in the sum of $100,000 for one person, and
§ 4-60.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-60.4
1:161
§ 4-60.5. Standards for Maintenance and Installation. [Ord. #019/
04]
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk, roadway or street shall comply with the following standards:
for more than one person $1,000,000, insuring against loss from
liability imposed by law upon the distributor for damages on account of
bodily injury or death suffered, and in the sum of $50,000 against loss
on account of property damage suffered by any person or persons as a
result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership, control or
maintenance of the newsracks permitted, and no license shall continue
effective unless such insurance, in the full and collectible amount of
$100,000 for one person and $1,000,000 for more than one person for
bodily injuries or death and $50,000 for property damages shall remain
in effect during the entire term of the license. Such insurance policy
shall provide for the payment of any final judgment recovered by any
person on account of the ownership, maintenance and person suffering
loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
a. No newsrack shall exceed 48 inches in height, 24 inches in width; or 20
inches in thickness unless publications are made available at no cost.
b. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspapers or news periodicals sold therein.
c. Unless publications are made available at no cost, each newsrack shall
be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the
machine to secure an immediate refund in the event he is unable to
receive the publication paid for. The coin-return mechanisms shall be
maintained in good working order.
d. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the
event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the
notices provided for in this section.
e. Each newsrack shall be maintained by the distributor in a neat and
clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be
serviced and maintained so that:
1. It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
2. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
3. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
§ 4-60.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-60.5
1:162
§ 4-60.6. Location and Placement. [Ord. #019/04]
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon or any portion of a
public street or sidewalk or projects onto, into or over any part of a public
street or sidewalk shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection.
4. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, are reasonably free
of tears, peeling or fading.
5. It shall not have any structural parts which are broken, unduly
misshapen or otherwise dangerous.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any publication
or material which is obscene as defined by the United States Supreme
Court in Miller vs. California 413 U.S. 15(1973) and/or as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2.
g. Each newsrack shall be maintained to prevent the newspapers from
being scattered about the area.
a. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests wholly
or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
b. No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
1. Endangers the safety of persons or property;
2. Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
3. Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
4. Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
c. Newsracks shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent their
being blown down or around the public street or sidewalk, but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants or mailboxes, except to other newsracks or private property
with the consent of the owner. The Town of Guttenberg hereby
expressly denies any permission for any newsrack to so affixed or
attached to its municipal property.
d. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that the group of
newsracks shall not extend for a distance of more than eight feet along
a curb.
e. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
§ 4-60.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-60.6
1:163
§ 4-60.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #019/04]
Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 or to confinement for not more than 90 days
in jail, or both. Each newsrack violation will constitute a separate violation.
Each day of said violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 4-60.8. Storage After Removal; Fee. [Ord. #019/04]
For any newsrack that is removed in accordance with this section and then
stored by the Town, the Town shall charge a storage fee of $10 per day.
§ 4-61. through § 4-69. (RESERVED)
§ 4-70. PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
§ 4-70.1. Definitions. [Ord. #020/04]
The following words, as used herein, shall have the definitions and
meanings set forth herein:
MOTORCADE — Shall mean an organized procession containing 10 or more
vehicles, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or
alley.
PARADE — Shall mean any procession or march intended to proceed along
any street or in any public place in an orderly fashion.
1. Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
2. Within 18 inches of a curb.
3. Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
4. Within five feet of any driveway.
5. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
6. Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
7. Within 500 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the
street, containing the same issue or edition of the same publication.
8. Within 10 feet of any standby or sprinkler connection or related
safety or fire equipment.
9. Within 10 feet of any building, unless written permission is secured
from the property owner and filed with the application.
f. No newsrack shall be permitted in any location zoned as exclusively
residential.
§ 4-60.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-70.2
1:164
§ 4-70.2. Permit Required; Exceptions. [Ord. #020/04]
§ 4-70.3. Permit Application. [Ord. #020/04]
a. Required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start
any parade unless a parade permit shall have first been obtained from
the Town Clerk, or his/her designee.
b. Exceptions.
1. Funeral processions.
2. Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
3. Any procession or parade of any body of police or firefighters of the
Town, militia of the State or troops of the United States of America.
4. Any parade planned and sponsored by the Town.
a. Filing with Town Clerk. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit
shall file an application with the Town Clerk, or his/her designee, on
forms provided by the Clerk.
b. Filing Period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Town Clerk, or his/her designee, not less than 30 days before the
proposed date of the parade.
c. Contents of Application. The application for parade permit shall set
forth the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
2. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
3. The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will
be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its
conduct.
4. The date when the parade is to be conducted.
5. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
6. The approximate number of persons, animals, vehicles and floats
which will constitute such parade, and a description of the vehicles
and floats.
§ 4-70.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-70.3
1:165
§ 4-70.4. Fee. [Ord. #020/04; Ord. #21-11]
There shall be a fee of $500 for the issuance of the parade permit.
§ 4-70.5. Standards for Issuance. [Ord. #020/04]
The Town Clerk, or his/her designee, shall issue a permit as provided for
hereunder when (s)he finds that:
7. The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
8. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
9. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade and
of any stages or reviewing stands to be used by parade participants
or parade spectators.
10. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly areas.
11. The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
12. If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Town Clerk, or his/her designee, a communication, in
writing, from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing
the applicant to apply for the permit on his/her behalf.
13. Any additional information with the Town Clerk, or his/her
designee, shall find reasonably necessary with regard to the health,
safety and welfare of the participants of the parade and of the
citizens of the Town to make a determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
14. The Town Clerk, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to
consider any application hereunder which is filed less than the time
required under Subsection b, above.
d. Date and Time Stamped. Applications for permits shall be date and time
stamped. Applications will be reached in order of filing.
a. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
b. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Town to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the Town.
§ 4-70.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-70.5
1:166
§ 4-70.6. Time Limit for Action on Application. [Ord. #020/04]
The Town Clerk, or his/her designee, shall act upon the application for a
parade permit within 72 hours after the filing thereof. If the Town Clerk, or
his/her designee disapproves of the application(s), shall immediately notify
the applicant within 24 hours after the date upon which the application was
filed. The Town Clerk, or his/her designee, shall state the reasons for the
denial of the permit.
§ 4-70.7. Alternate Permits. [Ord. #020/04]
The Town Clerk, or his/her designee, in denying an application for a permit,
shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a
time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An alternate
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the
effect of, a parade permit.
§ 4-70.8. Notice of Issuance. [Ord. #020/04]
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Town Clerk, or his/
her designee, shall send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 4-70.9. Contents of Permit. [Ord. #020/04]
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
c. The concentration of persons and vehicles at assembly points of the
parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas.
d. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire.
e. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays in route.
f. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for
private profit, provided, however, that the prohibition against
advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs
identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring floats or
transportation for the parade.
a. The Police Director.
b. The Director of the Department of Public Works.
a. The date of the parade.
b. The parade route.
c. The starting time.
§ 4-70.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-70.9
1:167
§ 4-70.10. Duties of Permitted: Possession of Permit. [Ord. #020/
04]
The chairperson, or other person heading or leading such activity, shall
carry the parade permit upon his/her person during the conduct of the
parade.
§ 4-70.11. Public Conduct During Parade. [Ord. #020/04]
§ 4-70.12. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. #020/04]
The Police Director, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to revoke
a parade permit issued hereunder upon his/her determination that there
are material differences between the conditions set forth in the application
and the conditions of the actual parade which adversely effect the ability of
law enforcement and firefighting personnel to protect the public safety and
welfare.
§ 4-71. through § 4-79. (RESERVED)
d. The ending time.
e. The maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of
the parade.
f. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
g. The number of persons, motor vehicles and floats that will be in the
parade.
h. Such other information as the Director, or his/her designee, shall find
necessary for the proper enforcement of this section.
a. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
b. Driving Through Parades. No driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless
trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade
when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
c. Parking on Parade Route. The Police Director or his/her designee, shall
have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict
the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting a part
of the route of a parade. The Director, or his/her designee, shall post
signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be
liable for parking on a street not posted in violation of this section.
§ 4-70.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-80
1:168
§ 4-80. OUTDOOR SIDEWALK CAFES. [Ord. #004-09]
The Code of the Town of Guttenberg is hereby amended to add specifically
§ 4-80, entitled "Outdoor Sidewalk Cafes," and providing as follows.
§ 4-80.1. Definitions. [Ord. #004-09]
As used in this section the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADJACENT BUILDING — Shall mean the building whose principal facade
fronts on the sidewalk where the outdoor sidewalk cafe is or is proposed to
be located.
OUTDOOR SIDEWALK CAFE OR CAFE — Shall mean a restaurant (as
defined herein) serving food to be consumed by the public at tables located
within that more or less rectangular portion of the sidewalk which lies
within the area bounded by the public street, the principal facade of the
adjacent building and the imaginary perpendicular lines running from the
outer edge of such principal facade to the public street.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association
or other entity.
PRINCIPAL FACADE — Shall mean that portion of the facade of a building
which fronts on a public street.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an establishment actually located within the
adjacent building, the primary activity of which is the preparation and
serving of food for consumption by the public whether free or for cost.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean the paved surface provided for the exclusive use
of pedestrians and situated between and extending from any building to the
curb of any street (excluding therefrom any unpaved area).
§ 4-80.2. Application; Layout Plan. [Ord. #004-09]
a. The applicant shall file an application describing the layout plan and file
the application in the Building Department. The layout plan is to
include:
1. A description of the proposed design and location of the outdoor
sidewalk cafe and all temporary structures, equipment and
apparatus to be used in connection with its operation, including
tables, chairs, planters, awnings, lighting and electrical outlets (if
any).
2. A statement of seating capacity of the proposed outdoor sidewalk
cafe and of the existing restaurant actually operated by the
applicant in the adjacent building.
3. A diagram demonstrating that pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk
upon which the outdoor sidewalk cafe is proposed to be located will
§ 4-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-80.2
1:169
§ 4-80.3. Insurance Required. [Ord. #004-09]
in no way be impeded, and that the provisions of Subsection 4-80.8
shall be satisfied.
4. A description of the proposed location of the outdoor sidewalk cafe
showing the actual dimensions of the area to be utilized and the
building, street and sidewalk upon which it fronts and on which it is
to be located, including the area of frontage and distance from the
facade to the curb.
5. A minimum of six feet of paved surface must be available for
pedestrian traffic adjacent to the outdoor dining area.
6. Tables within the outdoor dining area shall be no larger than two
feet in diameter with no more than four chairs per table. The
minimum allowable space for each table and chair placement shall
be six feet and shall be placed adjacent to the exterior front wall of
the establishment. Only a single row of tables and chairs is
permitted. Neither tables nor chairs shall be attached or chained to
any tree, post, sign, curb, sidewalk or property within or near the
eating establishment.
b. The layout plan shall be referred to the Director of Public Safety, or
other appropriate official designated by the Mayor and Town Council
from time to time to review such plans, who shall thereupon
recommend approval, disapproval or modification of the layout plan
within 10 business days following its submission to the Town. The
Building Department may also refer the layout plan to the Fire
Inspector, the Health Officer and the Municipal Engineer for their
review and recommendations for approval by the Mayor and Town
Council of the Town of Guttenberg.
a. No outdoor sidewalk cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee
shall have first filed with the Building Department a certificate of
insurance, issued by a company duly authorized to transact business
under the laws of the State of New Jersey, providing for the payment of
not less than $500,000 to satisfy all claims for damage by reason of
bodily injuries to or the death of any person as a direct or indirect result
of the operation of the outdoor sidewalk cafe or for injury to any person
occurring on the premises occupied by such cafe, and further providing
for the payment of not less than $10,000 to satisfy all claims for
property damage occurring as a direct or indirect result of the
operation of such cafe.
b. The insurance policy shall provide that the Town of Guttenberg shall be
named as an additional insured and that the insurance company shall
notify the Town of Guttenberg 10 days prior to cancellation or
substantial change in coverage.
§ 4-80.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-80.4
1:170
§ 4-80.4. Indemnification Agreement Required. [Ord. #004-09]
No outdoor sidewalk cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall
have first executed and filed with the Building Department an
indemnification agreement pursuant to which the licensee, in further
consideration of the issuance of the license, shall agree to forever defend,
protect, indemnify and save harmless the Town of Guttenberg, its officers,
agents and employees from and against any and all claims, causes of action,
injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and costs arising out of or which
may arise out of the licensee's operation of such outdoor sidewalk cafe.
§ 4-80.5. Maintenance Agreement Required. [Ord. #004-09]
§ 4-80.6. License Fee. [Ord. #004-09]
The fee for an outdoor sidewalk cafe license shall be $200 per season.
§ 4-80.7. Term of License; Renewals. [Ord. #004-09]
All outdoor sidewalk cafe licenses shall be issued for the six-month period
commencing May 1 and ending October 31 of the particular year. Licenses
may be renewed annually by the filing of an application in accordance with
the provision of this section.
§ 4-80.8. Rules, Regulations and Specifications. [Ord. #004-09]
An outdoor sidewalk cafe authorized and operating pursuant to this section
shall comply with all of the following rules and regulations and such others
as may be adopted from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council
of the Town of Guttenberg:
a. No outdoor sidewalk cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee
shall have first executed and filed with the Building Department a
maintenance agreement pursuant to which the licensee shall agree, at
the option of the Town, to either repair at its sole cost and expense any
damage caused to the sidewalk by the operation of the care or to
reimburse the Town in full for all costs and expenses incurred by it in
making any such repairs.
b. The Building Department may require a bond to be filed by the licensee
in an amount to be fixed by the Town.
a. The cafe shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the
layout plan as finally approved.
b. No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in
connection with the operation of the outdoor sidewalk cafe shall be
located in such a way as to impede the safe and speedy ingress and
egress to or from any building or structure.
c. No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in
connection with the operation of the outdoor sidewalk cafe shall be
§ 4-80.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-80.8
1:171
§ 4-80.9. Alcoholic Beverages. [Ord. #004-09]
Patrons of an outdoor sidewalk cafe that has been authorized to operate
pursuant to the section shall not be permitted to carry onto or consume
alcoholic beverages.
§ 4-80.10. Notice of Violation; Failure to Comply. [Ord. #004-09]
located in such a way that less than six feet of paved sidewalk remains
for the exclusive use of pedestrians (the "required pedestrian
passageway"), nor shall any such furniture, apparatus, decoration or
appurtenance project or protrude into, on or above the required
pedestrian passageway.
d. Service in the outdoor sidewalk cafe shall be provided by persons
engaged or employed for that purpose and shall be furnished to seated
patrons only.
e. The sidewalk area utilized for the cafe shall be kept clean and free of
litter. Trash receptacles shall be provided as required and approved
from time to time by the Town.
f. Noise shall be kept at such a level as to comply in all respects with the
provisions of the Code of the Town of Guttenberg.
g. Outdoor sidewalk cafes shall be permitted to operate only from 7:00
a.m. until 10:00 p.m. during the months of April to October, inclusive.
h. Within 30 minutes after the closing of the outdoor sidewalk cafe, the
operator shall have all furniture, apparatus, decoration and
appurtenances and any other items used in connection with the
operation of such outdoor sidewalk cafe removed from the sidewalk. All
such materials shall be stored in a safe and secure interior location.
i. The operator shall comply with all the requirements of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et
seq., Sanitation in Retail Food and Food Vending Machines, and N.J.S.A.
24:15-1 et seq.
j. The outdoor sidewalk cafe shall be actually operated and maintained by
the same person who operates and maintains the related restaurant of
which the cafe is a part and an extension.
k. The operator shall comply with all other ordinances of the Town of
Guttenberg.
a. Upon a determination by an officer or employee of the Town of
Guttenberg charged with the responsibility for enforcing the provisions
of this section that a licensee has violated one or more of such
provisions, such officer or employee shall give written notice to the
licensee to correct such violation within 24 hours of the receipt of such
notice by the licensee. In the event that the licensee fails or refuses to
§ 4-80.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 4-80.10
1:172
§ 4-80.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #004-09]
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or 90 days' imprisonment, or
both. Each violation of a section or subsection of this section, and each day
that a violation continued, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 4-80.12. Severability. [Ord. #004-09]
If any provision of this section is for any reason determined to be unlawful
or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this
section, all of which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 4-80.13. Repealer. [Ord. #004-09]
All ordinances or part of ordinance inconsistent with the provisions of this
section are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 4-80.14. When Effective. [Ord. #004-09]
This section shall take effect immediately after final adoption.
§ 4-81. LEGALIZED GAMES OF CHANCE. [Added 11-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 28-19]
§ 4-81.1. Issuing Authority.
The Town Clerk of the Town of Guttenberg is hereby designated as the
"issuing authority" pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1 and is authorized and
directed to issue licenses as permitted by law and the regulations adopted
thereunder.
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 5-1. DOGS.
§ 5-1.1. License Required. [New]
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Town without first
applying for and obtaining a license for the dog from the Town. The
correct such violation within such period, the licensee's outdoor
sidewalk cafe license shall thereupon and automatically be revoked.
b. Upon the revocation of such license, the licensee, upon written request,
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and Council of the Town
of Guttenberg within 14 days of the date of its request.
§ 4-80.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1.1
1:173
licensing and registration of dogs shall be in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 5-1.2. Time for Applying for License. [New]
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or any dog which
attains licensing age shall make an application for a license and registration
tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 5-1.3. Application; Contents. [New]
The application for the license shall be in such form as shall make possible,
from the description of the dog, the identification thereof, and also the name
and address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor the dog.
§ 5-1.4. Fees. [Ord. 4/18/77 § 1; Ord. 8/20/84 § 1; Ord. #22-11; Ord.
No. 19-2015]
The license fee for dogs shall be $15 for dogs spayed or neutered and $25
for dogs not spayed or neutered. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3, dogs used
as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye dogs", dogs
used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs"
and dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear"
dogs shall be licensed as in the same manner as other dogs but are exempt
from the fees provided for in this section.
§ 5-1.5. Dogs Brought into Municipality. [New]
§ 5-1.6. Running at Large. [Ord. 1/3/79 § 1]
Any person owning or controlling any animal pet, shall keep control of such
animal pet by a suitable leash or other means, so as not to allow such animal
pet to roam at large unattended, on any public or private property in the
Town.
§ 5-1.7. Curbing of Dog; Removal of Feces. [Ord. 1/3/79 §§ 2 - 5]
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this Town any
dog licensed in another State for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Town for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this Town any
unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Town for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
a. Every owner or person in control of any animal pet shall to the best
extent possible, curb such animal pet so that such animal waste, feces
and droppings are deposited, as much as possible, in the street area,
§ 5-1.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 5-1.7
1:174
§ 5-2. KENNELS AND PET SHOPS.
§ 5-2.1. License Required. [New]
Any person who keeps or operates, or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound, shall apply to the Town Clerk for a license entitling
him to keep or operate the establishment. Any person holding the license
shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs owned by the
licensee and kept at the establishment; licenses shall not be transferable to
another owner or different premises.
§ 5-2.2. License Fees. [Ord. 4/18/77 § 1; Ord. 8/20/84 § 1; Ord.
23-11]
The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses shall be as follows:
§ 5-3. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 5-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 09-2018]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the Town
of Guttenberg, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
rather than on the curb, sidewalk, intermediate areas, or any other
public or private property in Town.
b. Every owner or other person in control of any animal pet shall
immediately pick up and remove all waste, feces or droppings of said
animal, and dispose of same in a sanitary manner by suitable bag,
container or other means, so as to insure that such waste, feces or
droppings are not deposited and left on any street, sidewalk or any
other public or private property in the Town. Blind persons with seeing
eye dogs are exempt from the requirements of this section.
c. Throwing or depositing of such animal waste, feces or droppings into
any public or private sewer also is expressly prohibited.
d. Any violations of this subsection shall be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. Kennel accommodating 10 or less dogs: $250.
b. Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $500.
c. Pet shop: $250.
§ 5-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3.2
1:175
§ 5-3.2. Definitions; Word Usage. [Ord. No. 09-2018]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human, nor
domesticated.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 5-3.3. Feeding in Public and Town Owned Property; Exceptions.
[Ord. No. 09-2018]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Town of Guttenberg, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in rehabilitation center or unconfined
wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 5-3.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 09-2018]
§ 5-3.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 09-2018]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Section 1-5, General Penalty.
§ 5-4. FEEDING OF WILD OR STRAY ANIMALS.
§ 5-4.1. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 09-2018]
a. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Health
Department and Building Department.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
a. No person shall feed or attract in any public park or on any other
property, wild or stray animals which are not licensed to a resident of
Guttenberg and not under the control of any person, unless the person
has been accepted and has entered into a contract with the Town of
Guttenberg for feeding of feral cats located within a colony.
§ 5-3.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 5-4.1
1:176
§ 5-4.2. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 09-2018]
§ 5-4.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 09-2018]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Section 1-5, General Penalty.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [New]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Town of Guttenberg in accordance with the provisions of
an Act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled, "An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations
b. The definition of "wild or stray animals" shall include but not be limited
to the following: cats, dogs, waterfowl, raccoons, skunks, groundhogs,
pigeons, squirrels, deer and other birds.
c. This section shall not apply to enclosed, elevated bird feeder devices or
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in rehabilitation center
or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers). This
prohibition shall also apply to any conditions by which the feeding of
animals creates a public health risk or unsanitary conditions.
a. This section shall be enforced by the Animal Control Officer, Police
Department, Health Department, Building Department and/or any
other municipal officials of the Town of Guttenberg.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 5-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3.1
1:177
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or of the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 1]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Board of Council,
which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. Licenses Required. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 2]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Town
without obtaining a license in accordance with the Act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees; Maximum Number.12 [Ord. 12/7/42 §§ 53, 6;
Ord. 6/2/86 § 1; Ord. 11/17/86; Ord. 6/15/88; Ord. #1994-06; Ord.
#017/99; Ord. #019/01; Ord. #017/04; Ord. #004/07; Ord. No.
03-2015; Ord. No. 14-2016]
§ 6-3.5. Transfer of License. [Ord. 9/5/61 § 1; Ord. 1/7/77 §§ I - V;
Ord. #11-11]
a. The number of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the Town shall be as follows:
Class of License Number
Plenary Retail Consumption License 19
Plenary Retail Distribution License 5
b. 1. The annual fee for a plenary retail consumption license is hereby
set at $2,250 for liquor license term 2017-2018 and $2,500 for
liquor license term 2018-2019.
2. The annual fee for a plenary retail distribution license is hereby set
at $1,300 for liquor license term 2017-2018 and $1,550 for liquor
license term 2018-2019.
The above-recited fee shall apply to all new licenses, license
renewals, and license transfers which take place on or after the
effective date of Ordinance No. 14-2016.
c. The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued. The license fees shall be payable in accordance with
the revised statutes of New Jersey and rules and regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
12.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 14-2016 was adopted August 22, 2016. See also N.J.S.A.
33:1-12.
§ 6-3.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 6-3.5
1:178
a. Statement of Policy. In the municipal exercise of the Police power and in
order to better control the sale, distribution and consumption of
alcoholic beverages, the Mayor and Board of Council hereby determine
that reasonable limits on the transfer and proximity of competing
alcoholic beverage licenses are necessary in order to prevent abuses,
undue concentration of competing licenses, and related conditions
detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety while taking care to
insure reasonable convenience to the commercial interests in the
community, and to the public.
b. Classes of Competing Licenses. In the application and enforcement of
this subsection, transfer and proximity shall not be limited as between
noncompeting classes of alcoholic beverage licensed premises,
hereafter enumerated. Within each class, however, no new license shall
be issued for, or transferred to any premises within the distance
hereafter established of any other licensed premises within the same
class for which an alcoholic beverage license is outstanding, as follows:
Classes of Licensed Premises
1. Tavern: Premises containing essentially a bar, although grilled
food, sandwiches or the like may also be available; and some
entertainment may be available.
2. Package Store: Premises which consist primarily of a liquor store.
3. Restaurant: Premises which are predominantly premises for
complete dinners at tables with comprehensive menu and wine list
for dining; with or without entertainment or other subsidiary use;
with or without bar or cocktail lounge, but without counter food
service.
4. Lunch Room or Diner Type Premises: Premises devoted mainly to
limited or basic dining purposes, with counter service, but without
entertainment.
5. Club Licenses: The distance and proximity limitations are
determined not to be necessary as between club license premises.
c. Areas of Application and Distance Limitations.
1. It is hereby determined that problems of enforcement, proximity,
competition and possible abuses which may result from undue
concentration of such licensed premises are less likely to occur or
adversely affect the public health, welfare and safety in shopping
centers, shopping malls, large dwelling complexes or similarly
developed areas which are under common ownership or control;
and the public convenience in such areas, due to increased public
use, requires adequate facilities to satisfy reasonable needs of the
public; and accordingly the distance limitations governing licensed
premises within any of the classes enumerated above, in all such
areas under common ownership or control, shall be 100 feet and no
§ 6-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3.5
1:179
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 4; Ord. 1/3/77 § 1; Ord. #08/
98; Ord. #018/98; Ord. #017/99; Ord. #003/04; Ord. #029/04]
alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to or transferred to
premises within 100 feet of similar premises within such competing
class.
2. In all other areas in Guttenberg, such distance limitation shall be
250 feet.
3. Notwithstanding the distance prohibitions set forth in this section,
where the application is for approval of a license transfer, the
Guttenberg Alcoholic Beverage Control Board may, in its
discretion, but subject to all other applicable laws, rules and
regulations, grant or permit the transfer of such a license which
would otherwise be prohibited under this section upon finding as
follows:
(a) There is no undue concentration of licensed alcoholic beverage
establishments in the surrounding area or neighborhood; and
(b) The proposed location is appropriate for the type of operation
applied for; and
(c) Granting of the application would not substantially impair the
intent and purposes of the prohibitation imposed under this
section.
d. Method of Measurement of Distances. In calculating distances, such
distances shall be determined in the normal manner in which a
pedestrian would properly walk or proceed, including vertical progress,
from the nearest main walk or proceed, including vertical progress,
from the nearest main entrance of one premises licensed or sought to
be licensed to the nearest main entrance of the other premises licensed
or sought to be licensed.
e. Existing Premises Not Affected. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent
the renewal or transfer person to person for premises licensed on the
date of adoption of this subsection.
a. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages, or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
b. The holder of each plenary retail distribution license issued hereunder
shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations, to sell all alcoholic
beverages including beer and wine for consumption off the premises
only during the following hours, to wit 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. Monday
thru Saturday. The above mentioned hours of sale shall be in
§ 6-3.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 6-4.1
1:180
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 4; Ord. 1/3/77 § 1; Ord. #017/99;
Ord. #029/04; Ord. No. 13-2017]
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 4; Ord. 1/3/77 § 1; Ord.
#003/04]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in
the licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. when it
falls on a weekday. When January 1 falls on a Sunday, no alcoholic beverages
may be sold, served, delivered or consumed between the hours of 3:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon.
§ 6-4.4. Sales to Certain Persons. [New]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve, or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or person
under the legal age, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above-named persons.
§ 6-4.5. Closing Provisions. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 5]
During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed and no person shall be admitted or
permitted to remain thereon except the licensee or bona fide employees of
the licensee.
§ 6-4.6. Premises to Be Kept Clean; Lighting. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 5]
The licensed premises shall at all times be kept in safe, clean and sanitary
condition. All rooms, passageways, exits, entrances, and stairways shall be
well lighted.
§ 6-4.7. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited in
Unlicensed Premises, Except Restaurants. [Ord. #007/00; Ord.
#10-11; Ord. #06-12; Ord. #07-12]
accordance with eastern standard time or eastern daylight savings time
whichever is in effect at the time.
a. The provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On
Sundays, no consumption licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, or allow,
permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any alcohol beverages or
allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
b. The holder of each plenary retail distribution license issued hereunder
shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations, to sell all alcoholic
beverages including beer and wine for consumption off the premises, on
Sunday during the following hours of 12:00 noon to 2:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4.7
1:181
a. Definitions.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an establishment regularly and principally
used for the purpose of providing meals to the public, having an
adequate kitchen and dining room equipped for the preparing, cooking
and serving of food to its customers for on-site consumption, where
customers are provided an individual menu and served at tables by a
restaurant employee, and in which no other business, except such as is
incidental to such establishment, is conducted.
b. Consumption Prohibited in Unlicensed Commercial Establishment.
Except as otherwise provided in subsection 6.4-7d, no person shall
drink or otherwise consume any alcoholic beverage, or offer an
alcoholic beverage to another person for the purpose of consumption, in
any commercial establishment where persons congregate for any
purposes whatsoever, unless such establishment holds a valid retail
consumption license issued by the Town of Guttenberg or the New
Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
c. Owner or Operator of Establishment Shall Not Permit Consumption in
Unlicensed Commercial Establishment. Except as otherwise provided in
subsection 6-4.7d, no person owning or operating any commercial
establishment, whether or not food or beverages are sold or served on
the premises, shall serve or permit or allow the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises, unless such establishment holds a
valid retail consumption license issued by the Town of Guttenberg or
the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
d. Exception for Restaurants. The provisions contained in subsection
6-4.7b and 6.4-7c of this section shall not apply to a restaurant, as
defined in this subsection, provided that the following conditions are
met:
1. The restaurant must comply with all applicable State, Federal and
municipal rules, regulations, statutes and ordinances pertaining to
the consumption of wine or malt alcoholic beverages on premises
not licensed or permitted to sell or serve alcoholic beverages,
including without limitation, N.J.S.A. 2C:33-27.
2. The consumption of alcoholic beverages other than wine or malt
alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted in the restaurant.
3. Only patrons who are seated for meal service at a restaurant table
may consume or possess an open container of wine or malt
alcoholic beverage. No person may consume or possess an open
container of wine or malt alcoholic beverage while waiting to be
seated for service. There shall be no consumption of wine or malt
alcoholic beverages by employees of the restaurant.
4. No outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted,
except as otherwise allowed herein. The consumption of wine or
malt alcoholic beverages by patrons may be permitted only in fully
§ 6-4.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 6-4.7
1:182
enclosed indoor dining areas of the restaurant, except that a
restaurant that has zoning approval to operate an outdoor dining
area may permit the consumption of wine or malt alcoholic
beverages by patrons in such outdoor dining area, if allowed by
ordinances of the Town of Guttenberg regulating outdoor cafes.
5. The consumption of wine or malt alcoholic beverages shall be
permitted only during the hours of 12:00 noon prevailing time to
11:00 p.m. prevailing time.
6. The restaurant shall not charge any admission fee, membership
fee, or cover, corkage or service charge.
7. The restaurant shall not advertise inside or outside of the premises
or in any medium whatsoever that patrons may bring and consume
their own wine or malt alcoholic beverages into the restaurant,
e.g., no "BYOB" signs or advertising.
8. No owner, operator, or employee of the restaurant shall be
permitted to serve or distribute wine or malt alcoholic beverages in
the restaurant.
9. There shall be no storage of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
Patrons shall not be permitted to deliver wine or malt alcoholic
beverages to the premises in advance or to leave wine or malt
alcoholic beverages on the premises to be consumed or to be
picked up at a later time.
10. Patrons who desire to consume wine or malt alcoholic beverages on
the premises shall bring such beverages with them to the
restaurant for personal consumption. No delivery of alcoholic
beverages by any person, including a licensed alcoholic beverage
establishment, shall be permitted.
11. A patron shall only be permitted to bring wine or malt alcoholic
beverages to the restaurant for personal consumption and
consumption by up to seven guests at the same table.
12. Wine or malt alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted to be
stored, displayed or maintained on a service bar or service table.
Wine or malt alcoholic beverages must be kept by the patron at the
table at which the patron is seated.
13. The owner or operator of the restaurant shall not allow, permit or
suffer any alcoholic beverages to be consumed by any intoxicated
person or by any person under the age of 21 years.
14. The restaurant must have windows that allow visibility to the inside
of said restaurant from the street and may not place any
obstructions on said windows that would prevent such visibility.
15. The restaurant may not have tables seating more than the amount
allowed occupancy by Guttenberg Ordinance Regulations.
§ 6-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4.7
1:183
§ 6-4.8. Obstruction of Windows Prohibited. [Ord. #41-11]
At all time, the licensed premises shall have windows that allow visibility to
the inside of said licensed premises from the street and may not place any
obstruction on said windows that would prevent such visibility.
§ 6-5. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-5.1. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. [New]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the legal age.
§ 6-5.2. Presence. [New; Ord. #1995-10 § 1]
No minor shall be allowed in any premises where alcoholic beverages are
sold or served for consumption on the premises, unless accompanied by
his parent or guardian. This shall not apply to individuals employed by the
licensed plenary retail alcoholic beverage establishment.
§ 6-5.3. Consumption; Purchase. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to consume any
alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase
for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-5.4. Misrepresentation of Age. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age
or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal
age.
16. No restaurant that allows the consumption of alcoholic beverages
under this section may apply for or receive a permit for an outdoor
sidewalk cafe license.
e. Any restaurant, as defined above, that meets all of the criteria as
outlined above, must annually obtain a permit from the Municipal Clerk
of the Town of Guttenberg. The Municipal Clerk shall prepare an
application which must be completed by the applicant and submitted to
the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall issue the permit upon
approval by resolution of the Mayor and Council. The approved permit
shall be posted in a public area.
f. Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the general penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Section 1-5,
General Penalty.
§ 6-4.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 6-5.5
1:184
§ 6-5.5. Possession. [New]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to have in his or her
possession any alcoholic beverage unless said possession was authorized or
consented to by the parent or lawful guardian of the minor.
§ 6-5.6. Violations and Penalties. [New; Ord. #016-10]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable,
upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. In addition
to the general penalty prescribed for this offense, the Court may require any
person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who violates
this act, to participate in an alcohol education or treatment program
authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed six
months.
§ 6-6. ENTERTAINMENT.
§ 6-6.1. Prohibited Act. [Ord. 10/18/65 § 1; Ord. #017-10]
No licensee, under this chapter, or agent or other employee connected with
or employed by, or to be connected with or employed by, shall permit live
entertainment in any place within the Town of Guttenberg where alcoholic
beverages are sold or consumed except that this prohibition shall not apply
to any licensed premises that has adequate kitchen and dining room facility
and which premises are used for providing and serving food as a principal
part of its business.
§ 6-6.2. Penalty. [Ord. 10/18/65 § 2]
Violations of this section shall be punishable as disorderly person offenses
and subject to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 6-7. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. 12/7/42 § 7; New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-8. TEEN NIGHTS.
§ 6-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8.1
1:185
§ 6-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1995-09]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
TEEN NIGHT — Shall mean a scheduled dance or event held on the
premises of a licensed plenary retail alcoholic beverage establishment and
restricted to those patrons under the legal drinking age established by the
State of New Jersey.
TEEN NIGHT PARTICIPANTS — Shall mean those individuals who are less
than the legal drinking age, as established in New Jersey, who attend teen
nights as hereinabove defined. This shall not apply to individuals employed
by the licensed plenary retail alcoholic beverage establishment.
§ 6-8.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. #1995-09]
The holding of a teen night is hereby prohibited upon any duly licensed
plenary retail alcoholic beverage establishment within the Town of
Guttenberg.
§ 6-9. IDENTIFICATION CARDS FOR LICENSEES AND COVERED
EMPLOYEES. [Ord. #1995-012; Ord. #011/04; Ord. #017/05; Ord.
#015-10; Ord. #07-11; Ord. #05-12; Ord. #23-13]
This section shall provide an application fee and licensing requirements for
the issuance of identification cards for licensees and covered employees.
a. Definition. A "covered employee" is an employee or agent who either:
1. Serves alcoholic beverages as part of his/her job duties;
2. Is a waiter or waitress;
3. Is any employee that has supervisory authority; or
4. Is any employee whose duties include the performance of security
functions.
b. Identification Cards for Licensees and Covered Employees. After
approval of an application and before the license is issued, every
plenary retail consumption licensee or covered employee shall provide
full and complete answers, in writing, on a form identified as an Alcohol
Beverage Control employee application, furnished by the Guttenberg
Police Department, to all questions presented thereon as to identity,
character, antecedents and general experience of any such licensee or
covered employee. A temporary identification card may be issued
pending completion of a detailed investigation of the applicant by the
Police Department and submission of the results of that investigation
and the original application for consideration by the Mayor and Board
of Council. No such temporary identification card shall be valid for a
period greater than 90 days from the date of issuance.
§ 6-8.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 6-9
1:186
c. The licensee or covered employee shall, along with filing the
application, attach thereto one color passport photograph, two inches
by two inches. Said photograph is not to have been taken more than 30
days prior to the execution of the application.
d. The licensee or covered employee shall submit to having his/her
fingerprints taken at a New Jersey State authorized facility.
e. Two separate and distinct forms of identification shall be submitted by
the licensee or covered employee while executing the Alcoholic
Beverage Control employee application for review by an appropriate
official.
f. The applicant shall provide a money order or check payable to the Town
of Guttenberg, for the sum of $55 to defray the expense of processing
the application.
g. The applicant shall be responsible for all related costs of fingerprinting
at the New Jersey State authorized facility.
h. The licensee or covered employee, whose primary function is the
serving of alcoholic beverages or the performance of security duties,
while in the exercise of his/her duties on the licensed premises, shall at
all times conspicuously wear the presentation side of the identification
card bearing the individual's first name and identification number. For
purpose of this paragraph, a waiter, waitress or other type of employee
whose primary function is the serving of food or performing of services
that does not require the delivery of service of alcoholic beverages or
only incidentally involves the service of alcoholic beverages while
serving a meal, shall not be covered by this paragraph.
i. The licensee and/or covered employee shall renew the requirements of
this chapter on an annual basis. Said renewal shall only require the
fingerprinting of each licensee or covered employee every two years.
The licensee and/or covered employee shall be responsible for
submitting to said fingerprinting at a New Jersey State authorized
facility.
j. No licensee shall engage any covered employee connected with the
business of the licensee, unless the covered employee has conformed to
the rules and regulations set forth in this section. If new covered
employees are hired by the licensee, such new covered employee shall
comply with the regulations set forth in this section before being
permitted to work in the licensed premises.
k. If the applicant for a plenary retail consumption license is a
corporation, all the officers thereof shall comply with the regulations of
this section pertaining to the license involved; and should there be a
replacement or election of new officers during the licensed term, such
replaced or newly elected officers must comply with the requirements
of this section.
§ 6-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:187
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. WORDS AND PHRASES. [Ord. 7/7/69 § 1-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-2. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. [New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use in the Town.
§ 7-3. PARKING.
§ 7-3.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. 7/7/69 § 2-1]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive, provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 3:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-3.2. Parking During Emergencies. [Ord. 1/15/62 §§ 1-4; Ord. 10/
20/69 §§ 1-3; Ord. #02-11]
l. All renewals for identification cards for covered employees shall be
made starting on May 1st of each year. Any renewal applications filed
after June 1st shall be charged an additional $55 as a late fee for
administrative expenses. No renewal will be accepted after June 30th of
each year. Any waivers to this section must be for good cause and only
on approval by the Director of Public Safety or his/her designee.
a. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency.
1. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking
upon streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCYNO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of EMERGENCY-NO PARKING
signs when weather conditions, accidents, fire and public
celebration, dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other
conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification
that the EMERGENCY-NO PARKING signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which
has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 6-9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3.2
1:188
§ 7-3.3. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord. 7/
7/69 § 2-2; Ord. 1/5/70 § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
described streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street Side Location
68th Street South From Bergenline Avenue to Madison
Street
South From Polk Street to Adams Street
Both 68th Street from Park Avenue West, a
distance of 50 feet
68th Street
Both 69th Street East of Park Avenue, a
distance of 50 feet
70th Street South From Bergenline Avenue to J. F.
Kennedy Boulevard West
70th Street Both From Park Avenue West, a distance of
50 feet
71st Street Both East of Park Avenue, a distance of 50
feet
2. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe
and proper regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide
for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable
costs of removal and storage which may result from such removal
before regaining possession of the vehicle.
3. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs
being erected as required by law.
b. Designation of Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
1. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either
side of Park Avenue and Bergenline Avenue in Guttenberg, New
Jersey.
2. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect, after the
snow has ceased, until the streets have been plowed sufficiently
and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the flow of
traffic.
§ 7-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.4
1:189
§ 7-3.4. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [Ord. 1-5-70 § 2-3; Ord. #004/02; Ord. #002/04; Ord. #023/
04; Ord. #24-13]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below on any
day when school is in session upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets.
§ 7-3.5. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [New]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified below
on any day upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-3.6. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [New]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown below
at any time between the hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public
holidays) upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-3.7. Parking Prohibited for Certain Vehicles. [Ord. 7/7/69 §§ 2 —
4; Ord. 1/5/87 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. #018/99; Ord. #002/04; Ord. #023/04;
Ord. #24-11; Ord. No. 26-2016; Ord. No. 14-2018]
a. Penalties: Parking Prohibited (certain hours): $57.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Bergenline Avenue
Monday and
Thursday
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
6708 to 7008
Bergenline
Avenue
Bergenline Avenue
Tuesday and Friday
West 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
6707 to 7003
Bergenline
Avenue
Hudson Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From the
southwest corner
of Hudson
Avenue and 69th
Street to 289
feet south
69th Street South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From the
southwest corner
of 69th Street
and Hudson
Avenue to 332
feet west
§ 7-3.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3.7
1:190
§ 7-3.8. Residential Parking Permits. [Ord. 3/4/92; Ord. #1995-08
§ 1; Ord. #018/97 §§ 14; Ord. #036/97; Ord. #013/99; Ord. #019/99;
Ord. #008/02; Ord. #002/04; Ord. #021/04; Ord. #023/04; Ord.
#013/07; Ord. #006-10; Ord. No. 17-2015; Ord. No. 21-2016; Ord.
No. 12-2017; Ord. No. 01-2018; Ord. No. 07-2018]
a. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator to park any truck, truck
trailer, trailer, van, omnibus, livery, taxi, commercial vehicle,
noncommercial truck, commuter van, van pooling vehicle, semi-trailer,
all defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, that is over 6,000 pounds, eight feet in
height or taller, or exceeds 18 feet in length, upon any street or other
public thoroughfare in the Town, on any day of the week between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
b. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of $124 per
violation. Each one hour a particular violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
a. A Resident Parking Program is hereby instituted as follows:
At times and on the days listed below, the streets of Guttenberg will be
designated Resident Permit Parking Only, with the exception of those
areas covered by metered parking, during the hours the meters are in
operation:
1. A valid residential parking permit (sticker) shall be required
between the evening hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., seven days a
week.
2. A valid residential parking permit is also required between the day
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; however, all vehicles not having a
residential permit during this period shall be provided a four-hour
grace period, within a one block radius of the location where the
vehicle is parked at the start of the grace period. Any vehicle,
without a residential parking permit/sticker which exceeds the
four-hour limit shall be summoned and towed at the owner's
expense.
b. Rules and Regulations. The following rules and regulations shall apply
to the Guttenberg Resident.
Permit Parking Program:
1. A Resident Parking Permit of a design specified by the Mayor and
Board of Council of the Town of Guttenberg will be issued to the
resident owner of any motor vehicle. The motor vehicle must be
owned by a person residing in the Town of Guttenberg and weigh
up to and no more than 6,000 pounds and eight feet high from the
ground.
§ 7-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.8
1:191
2. Proof of residence of the owner of a motor vehicle must be
presented when applying for a permit. The following is acceptable
proof of residency:
(a) A copy of a valid New Jersey driver's license reflecting an
address in the Town of Guttenberg; or
(b) A copy of a valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration for the
vehicle for which the permit is sought showing an address in
the Town of Guttenberg. In the case of a vehicle claimed to be
leased and used by a Guttenberg resident, a copy of a valid
motor vehicle registration and a copy of the automobile lease,
utility bill, rent receipt, tax bill or rental agreement reflecting
an address within the Town of Guttenberg, shall be presented
to the Public Safety Director in lieu of the New Jersey motor
vehicle registration in the resident's name. A resident who has
not acquired a Resident Parking Permit may establish
residency for purpose of obtaining a visitor permit or a special
visitor permit by presenting a current utility bill, phone bill,
deed, apartment lease or notarized letter from the landlord
reflecting an address within the Town of Guttenberg.
(c) In addition to the proof of residency set forth in Subsection (b),
a valid Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Department
of the Town of Guttenberg in the name of the resident applying
for the permit.
3. The resident's sticker is to be placed on the back of the rearview
mirror or, in the alternative, on the back of the driver's side visor
where it is clearly visible from the outside of the vehicle by any
police officer or traffic enforcement officer (driver's side door
window, lower left-hand corner). [Amended 10-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 26-19]
4. The Public Safety Director shall have the authority to issue
temporary resident permit parking stickers: (a) To persons
claiming to be residents of the Town but who have not yet changed
their driver's license or their motor vehicle registration to reflect
their Guttenberg address; and (b) To any resident holding a current
Resident Permit whose car has been stolen or incapacitated and
who is driving a temporary vehicle. The temporary sticker shall be
valid for a period not to exceed 90 days, at which time (a) the
resident must obtain a permanent sticker by presentation of the
proofs of residency set forth in Subsection 2 above, in the case of
new residences, and (b) the temporary permit shall expire, in the
case of a temporary vehicle.
5. Any nonprofit institution or corporation which maintains an office
or other location in the Town may be issued Resident Parking
Permits for all vehicles which are registered in the name of the
nonprofit institution or corporation and which are parked or
§ 7-3.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3.8
1:192
garaged in the Town, without charge. The issuance of such permits
shall be subject to appropriate and periodic verification as to the
continued qualification for same as reasonably determined by the
Mayor and Board of Council.
c. Visitor Permits.
1. Visitor permits will be issued to residents upon application, in
person, at Town Hall.
2. Visitor permits, whenever issued, shall only be valid until the
following 7:00 a.m. time period after the permit has been issued.
3. The individual applying for a visitor permit must provide the
Guttenberg address that the individual plans to visit.
4. Visitor permit when issued will reflect the address of the place to
be visited, the date issued and the time until which the visitor
permit will be valid.
5. Visitor permits are to be used while visitors are actually visiting the
household of a resident to which the permit is issued. The
presumption shall be that any vehicle parked more than four city
blocks from the household for which the visitor permit has been
issued is not visiting such household. All visitor permits are to be
displayed on the front dashboard above the steering wheel of the
vehicle and must be fully readable from the exterior of the vehicle.
d. Business Permits.
1. Eligibility; Application Process.
(a) Business establishments located in the Town may obtain a
Business Permit for any nonresident employee of such business
establishment who commutes to work by automobile, in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Guttenberg
business establishments shall be deemed to include the Town
of Guttenberg, the Board of Education of the Town of
Guttenberg and the Housing Authority of the Town of
Guttenberg. The permit shall be limited by the Public Safety
Director to the hours during which the nonresident employee
works and shall be valid only during those times the
nonresident employee is at work.
(b) Obtaining Business Permits. In order to obtain such permits,
the business establishment must present a letter to the Public
Safety Director verifying that there is no adequate off-street
parking available to the employee. The letter shall list the
name of the employee, the vehicle identification number and
license plate of the vehicle, the driver's license number of the
employee, the normal hours of operation of the business and
such other information as may be required by the Mayor and
§ 7-3.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.8
1:193
Board of Council. In addition, the business shall supply a valid
Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Department of the
Town of Guttenberg to the Public Safety Director.
2. All written requests for Business Permits shall be executed by a
responsible officer of the employer. The Public Safety Director shall
be entitled to obtain periodic verification of all relevant information
and shall have the power to invalidate or not renew any Business
Permit issued pursuant to this subsection if the information
indicates non-entitlement to the business permit or requested
information to verify entitlement is not furnished.
3. Business Permit shall display the name and address of the
employer and the vehicle identification number and license plate of
the vehicle for which it is issued and the expiration date of the
Business Permit.
e. Deleted.
f. Deleted.
g. Abuse of Visitor or Business Permit. Any abuse in the use of a Visitor or
Business Permit will result in its revocation in the following
circumstances:
1. Any such permit is used on any vehicle owned and controlled by a
resident;
2. Any such permit is used on an employee's car other than a bona fide
Business Permit issued to a nonresident employee pursuant to
Subsection d hereof;
3. The extended use of a Visitor Permit by a visitor without prior
approval of the Public Safety Director.
h. Fees.
1. Resident Parking Permits $10 annually.
2. Business Permits $10 annually.
3. Visitor Permits.
(a) $5 fee for daily Visitor Permit or $20 for a weekly permit (a
weekly permit shall consist of seven calendar days). To
purchase a weekly permit, you must be a Town of Guttenberg
resident. A maximum of two weeks may be purchased at one
time.
4. Special Visitor Pass $10.
i. Term of Permits.
§ 7-3.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3.8
1:194
1. Resident Parking Permit - One-year term renewed in September
annually.
2. Business Parking Permit - Monthly term to be renewed on the 1st of
each month.
3. Visitor Permit - twenty-four-hour period or as stated on permit.
4. Special Visitor Permit - as stated on permit.
j. Penalties.
1. Any vehicle parked in a Resident Parking Permit Zone without a
valid Resident Parking Permit, Visitors Permit or Business Permit
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., seven days a week,
will have a four-hour grace period after which the vehicle shall be
subject to be summoned and towed. The four-hour grace period
shall apply within a one block radius of the location where the
vehicle is parked at the start of the grace period.
2. Subject to the provisions of Subsection 1, above, any vehicle
parked on a street posted "Permit Parking Only" without a valid
Resident Permit, Visitor Permit, or Business Permit shall be liable
for a fine of $63 and/or tow provided by ordinance. Persons in
possession of Resident Permits, Visitor Permits or Business Permits
who misuse them are subject to revocation of the permits for one
year and a $100 fine.
k. (Reserved)
l. Additional Rules and Regulations; Enforcement. The Public Safety
Director shall have the authority to formulate and promulgate rules and
regulations pertaining to this subsection subject to veto of the Mayor
and Board of Council, and the Public Safety Director shall be entitled in
his or her discretion to verify any information appropriate to the
enforcement of this subsection.
The Police Department shall have the power to issue summonses for
violation of this subsection; provided, however, that in the case of
a summons issued for misuse of a Resident Permit. Visitor Permit,
Temporary Visitor Permit, or Business Permit, such summons shall be
issued by the Municipal Court of the Town upon the complaint of the
Public Safety Director.
m. Exceptions. In the event that a person who is a Guttenberg resident is
issued a summons for violation of the resident parking regulations of
not having a valid residential parking permit, that resident may, at the
time scheduled for hearing in the Municipal Court, produce evidence
that such person had been issued a valid resident parking permit as of
the date of the alleged violation. This evidence shall be a complete
defense to the alleged violation.
§ 7-3.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.8
1:195
§ 7-3.9. Alternate Parking. [Ord. No. 13-2016; Ord. No. 21-2017]
No person shall park or stand a vehicle between the hours specified below
upon any of the described streets or parts of streets for the times indicated
herein and made a part of this chapter:
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
68th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Bergenline
Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
68th Street [Ord. No.
21-2017]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
68th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
68th Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
North Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Kennedy
Boulevard to
Bergenline
Avenue
68th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Between
Bergenline
Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
n. Permit Parking: No Exemption from Enforcement of State and Town
Laws. A vehicle on which is displayed a valid Resident, Business or
Visitor Parking Permit as provided for herein shall be permitted to
stand or be parked in the residential permit parking area for which the
permit has been issued without being limited by time restriction
requirements established pursuant to this subsection. However, said
vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or prohibitions
established pursuant to Title 39 of the N.J. State Statutes or Town
Ordinance for Street Sweeping, or ordinance provisions pertaining to
public safety and handicapped parking zones and other special parking
restrictions.
The creation of a residential parking area, shall have no effect upon
metered parking spaces, within the designated area. Parking metered
spaces shall be available to all vehicles, with or without a residential
permit during the posted hours of metered parking.
A Residential, Business or Visitor Parking Permit shall not exempt a
resident when parked in a metered space, from purchasing time from
the meter, at the established rate.
A Resident, Business or Visitor Parking Permit shall not guarantee or
reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space.
§ 7-3.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3.9
1:196
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
68th Street [Ord. No.
21-2017]
South Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
68th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
68th Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
South Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Kennedy
Boulevard to
Bergenline
Avenue
69th Street [Ord. No.
21-2017]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
69th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Bergenline
Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
69th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
69th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Between
Bergenline
Avenue and
Hudson Avenue
69th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
70th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Bergenline and
Hudson Avenue
70th Street [Ord. No.
21-2017]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
70th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
70th Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
North Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Kennedy
Boulevard to
Bergenline
Avenue
70th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Between
Bergenline and
Hudson Avenue
§ 7-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.9
1:197
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
70th Street [Ord. No.
21-2017]
South Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
70th Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
70th Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
South Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Kennedy
Boulevard to
Bergenline
Avenue
71st Street [Ord. No.
21-2017]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
71st Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
71st Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
North Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Palisades Avenue
and Hudson
Avenue
71st Street [Ord. No.
21-2017]
South Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
71st Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Hudson Avenue
71st Street [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
South Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Between
Palisades Avenue
and Hudson
Avenue
Adams Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
West Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
Adams Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
East Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
Bellevue Avenue [Ord.
No. 21-2017]
West Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
Bellevue Avenue [Ord.
No. 21-2017]
East Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
§ 7-3.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3.9
1:198
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
Bergenline Avenue
[Added 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
East Monday and
Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between 67th
Street and 71st
Street
Bergenline Avenue
[Added 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
West Tuesday and
Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Between 67th
Street and 70th
Street
Broadway [Ord. No.
21-2017]
East Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
Broadway [Ord. No.
21-2017]
West Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
Hudson Avenue [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
East Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between 68th
Street and 72nd
Street
Hudson Avenue [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
West Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between 68th
Street and 72nd
Street
Jackson Street [Ord.
No. 13-2016]
West Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
Jackson Street [Ord.
No. 13-2016]
East Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
JF Kennedy Boulevard
[Added 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
East Tuesday and
Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Between 68th
Street and 70th
Street
JF Kennedy Boulevard
East [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
East Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between 67th
Street and 72nd
Street
JF Kennedy Boulevard
East [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
West Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between 67th
Street and 72nd
Street
Madison Street [Ord.
No. 13-2016]
West Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
Madison Street [Ord.
No. 13-2016]
East Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
Palisades Avenue
[Added 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
East Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between 67th
Street and 72nd
Street
§ 7-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.9
1:199
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
Palisades Avenue
[Added 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
West Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
Between 67th
Street and 72nd
Street
Park Avenue [Ord. No.
21-2017]
East Monday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
Park Avenue [Ord. No.
21-2017]
West Thursday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Between
Broadway and
Boulevard East
Polk Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
West Tuesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
Polk Street [Ord. No.
13-2016]
East Friday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.
67th Street to
72nd Street
§ 7-3.10. Parking; Direction and Side of Street; Angle Parking; One-
Way Street Parking; Improper Parking. [Added 4-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 09-19]
a. The operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park the vehicle in a
roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the
direction of traffic, on the right-hand side of the road and with the curb
side of the vehicle within six inches of the edge of the roadway, except
as follows:
1. Upon those streets which have been designated by ordinance and
have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be
parked at the angle to the curb designated and indicated by the
ordinance and marks or signs.
2. Upon one-way streets, local authorities may permit parking of
vehicles parallel with the left-hand edge of the roadway headed in
the direction of traffic, on the left-hand side of the road and with
the curb side of the vehicle within six inches of the edge of the
roadway.
b. Improper Parking. The operator of a vehicle shall not park any vehicle
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed, in the direction of traffic,
outside the demarcated parking space lines in the roadway.
c. The operator of a vehicle shall not park parallel with the edge of the
roadway headed in the direction of traffic if, because of the vehicle
length, the vehicle extends past the permitted demarcated parking
space lines.
d. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of $60 per violation.
§ 7-3.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3A
1:200
§ 7-3A. COMMERICAL VEHICLE PARKING. [Added 10-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 25-19]
§ 7-3A.1. Findings.
The parking of commercial vehicles upon the streets and in driveways
of residential neighborhoods within the Town of Guttenberg ("Town")
negatively impacts the residential nature of Town neighborhoods and
worsens parking congestion within those neighborhoods. The Town finds
that there is a need to restrict the parking of commercial vehicles on the
Town streets and within residential neighborhoods.
§ 7-3A.2. Determination of "Commercial Vehicles."
For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be deemed a "commercial
vehicle" if it has any one or more of the following characteristics:
§ 7-3A.3. Parking of Commercial Vehicles Prohibited In Residential
Neighborhoods.
Except as provided in Subsection 7-3A.5, no person shall park or leave
standing a commercial vehicle upon any front yard, side yard, rear yard, or
any other private driveway or parking lot, where that vehicle is visible from
any street in the Town.
a. It is or was designed or used for the transportation of persons for hire;
b. It is or was designed or was used for compensation or profit;
c. It is or was designed or used for the transportation of property,
materials, cargo, equipment or tools;
d. It has more than four wheels;
e. It weighs more than 6,000 pounds;
f. It is more than eight feet high;
g. It is more than 18 feet long;
h. It is more than seven feet wide;
i. It has tool, cargo or equipment racks or cages in the interior or on the
exterior of the vehicle;
j. It contains commercial or business lettering, advertising or graphics;
k. It is registered as commercial, omnibus, limousine, livery, taxi, farmer,
commuter van, or school vehicle; or
l. It has characteristics typical of commuter vans, limousines,
recreational vehicles, motor-drawn vehicles, omnibuses, panel vans,
pole trailers, road tractors, school buses, semi-trailers, taxicabs, tow
trucks, trucks, or truck tractors.
§ 7-3A GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3A.4
1:201
§ 7-3A.4. Parking of Commercial Vehicles In All Neighborhoods/
Zones.
Except as provided in § 7-3A.5, no person shall park or leave standing a
commercial vehicle upon any street, public land, avenue, road, or other
public thoroughfare in the Town.
§ 7-3A.5. Exceptions to Prohibition of Commercial Vehicles.
§ 7-3A.6. Obtaining a Resident Parking Permit.
a. The prohibition as to commercial vehicles parking in areas provided for
in Subsections 7-3A.3 and 7-3A.4 shall not apply to commercial vehicles
that are in the process of rendering services to premises within said
neighborhoods.
b. The owner of a property in any street in the Town who is the subject of a
variance for business purposes or a pre-existing, nonconforming
business use shall be able to park their business commercial vehicle in
their driveway (but is not permitted to park in front of their driveway).
c. Moving trucks, utilized under a written agreement, may be parked for
up to a continuous seventy-two-hour time period.
d. The prohibition as to commercial vehicles parking in areas provided for
in Subsections 3-7A.3 and 3-7A.4 shall not apply to commercial vehicles
where the vehicle owner has obtained a valid resident permit from the
Town of Guttenberg pursuant to Subsection 3-7A.6 of this section.
e. Commercial vehicles having a valid permit may park in areas
designated by Town ordinance.
f. No provision in this section shall obviate the requirement of obtaining a
parking permit from the Town.
a. The owner of a vehicle falling within the definition of commercial
vehicle set forth in Subsection 7-3A.2 may obtain a resident parking
permit from the Town, provided the owner meets the criteria for a
resident parking permit established by Town ordinances and the
Guttenberg Police Department.
b. At a minimum, no commercial vehicle will qualify for a resident parking
permit unless:
1. The vehicle will not be used for any business or commercial
purpose, and the vehicle owner certifies to this fact;
2. The vehicle does not contain any visible cargo or equipment racks
or cages used for business purposes on the exterior of the vehicle
(tool storage units of the type recessed into the body of a pick-up
truck bed may be permissible);
§ 7-3A.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3A.6
1:202
3. The vehicle does not contain any commercial or business lettering,
advertising or graphics;
4. The vehicle is not registered as a school vehicle which has a
capacity of more than eight people; a commercial vehicle; an
omnibus; a limousine, livery, or taxi; a farmer vehicle, or a
commuter van;
5. The vehicle does not weigh more than 8,000 pounds;
6. The vehicle does not have more than four wheels;
7. The vehicle owner or lessee has neither been convicted of a
violation under Subsection 7-3A.6 or Subsection 7-3A.8, nor has
attempted to fraudulently obtain or utilize a parking permit within
the last three years; and
8. With respect to a passenger van, the van does not contain more
than two rows or less than one rear row of seats, excluding the
front seats, and does not have a capacity for more than eight
people.
c. In the event an applicant owning or leasing a commercial vehicle is
denied a resident parking permit, the applicant may appeal the
administrative decision of the Guttenberg Police Department to the
Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg. Said appeal shall be in
writing and shall be considered solely on written submissions, unless
the Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg or Town Attorney
request oral testimony or argument.
d. After having obtained a resident parking permit for a commercial
vehicle pursuant to this section, no person shall do any of the following
without first having returned their resident parking permit to the Town:
1. Change, modify or alter their permitted vehicle so that it no longer
would qualify for a resident parking permit under this section; or
2. Use their permitted vehicle, or allow the use of their permitted
vehicle, for the transportation of persons for hire, for compensation
or profit, or for the transportation of property, materials, cargo,
equipment or for any other commercial or business-related
purpose.
e. The Public Safety Department may revoke a resident parking permit
issued for a commercial vehicle for any violation of Subsection d. An
administrative decision to revoke a resident parking permit may be
appealed to the Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg pursuant
to the same procedures set forth in Subsection c. Provided an appeal is
filed within seven business days of the revocation, the revocation will be
considered stayed pending the conclusion of the appeal to the Mayor
and Council of the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 7-3A.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3A.6
1:203
§ 7-3A.7. Rules and Regulations.
§ 7-3A.8. Fraudulent Representations, Altering or Use of Permits.
f. The determination of whether a commercial vehicle qualifies for a
resident parking permit, or whether a resident parking permit should
be revoked, shall be within the exclusive discretion of the Mayor and
Council of the Town of Guttenberg, based on the criteria set forth in this
section and any Town ordinance and Police Department Rules and
Regulations.
a. The Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg are hereby
authorized to adopt rules and regulations to:
1. Effectuate the purposes of this section;
2. Add or delete streets, areas, or parts thereof, designated for
commercial parking;
3. Modify the criteria for determining whether a vehicle is a
commercial vehicle under this section; and
4. Modify the criteria on which determinations are made concerning
whether a commercial vehicle qualifies for a resident parking
permit.
b. Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg rules and regulations
shall be enforceable pursuant to this section provided:
1. They have been duly adopted by resolution of the Mayor and
Council of the Town of Guttenberg;
2. They have been submitted to the Town Administrator, and there has
been no objection from the Town Administrator within 30 days of
submission; and
3. They are consistent with the purposes and parameters of this
section.
a. No person shall falsely represent himself, herself, or their vehicle as
eligible for a parking permit; and
b. No person shall furnish false information on an application for a
parking permit; and
c. No person shall fabricate, copy, duplicate, reproduce, modify or alter a
parking permit, or allow another person to fabricate, copy, duplicate,
reproduce, modify or alter a parking permit.
d. The owners or lessees of a vehicle having a fabricated, copied,
duplicated, reproduced, modified or altered parking permit displayed
shall be in violation of this section.
§ 7-3A.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-3A.9
1:204
§ 7-3A.9. Enforcement
The Guttenberg Police Department shall have and exercise the power and
perform the duties associated with the management, operation and
enforcement of this section.
§ 7-3A.10. Violations, Penalties and Fines.
§ 7-3A.11. Severability.
If any part or parts of this section are for any reason held to be invalid, such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section.
§ 7-3A.12. Repealer.
Except as provided in Subsection 7-3A.12b, all ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent with this section are hereby repealed as to the
inconsistency thereof.
§ 7-3A.13. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as
required under the law.
§ 7-4. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. 7/21/80 § 1; Department of
Transportation letter dated 1/18/94; Ord. #12-13]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight listed below are hereby excluded
from the following described streets or parts of streets except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Location
Bellevue Avenue 26,000 pounds. Boulevard East
Bellevue Avenue 26,000 pounds. 69th Street
a. Owners of commercial vehicles parked in violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $115, nor more than $500, for each
violation.
b. Any person violating Subsection 7-3A.6d shall be subject to a fine of no
less than $250, nor more than $500, for each violation.
c. Any person who violates Subsection 7-3A.8a or b shall be subject to a
fine of no less than $250, nor more than $500, for each violation.
d. Any person who violates Subsection 7-3A.8 shall be subject to a fine of
no less than $250, nor more than $1,000, for each such violation. A
mandatory court appearance is required for an alleged violation of
Subsection 7-3A.8.
§ 7-3A.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4.1
1:205
§ 7-4.1. Vehicles Over Certain Heights Excluded from Certain
Streets. [Ord. #13-13]
Vehicles over the following heights listed below are hereby excluded from
the following described streets or parts of streets for any reason.
Name of Street Height Location
Ferry Road 12.5 feet Boulevard East
Ferry Road 12.5 feet River Road
§ 7-5. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. 7/7/69 § 4-1; Ord. 12/16/85 § 1;
Ord. 2/15/89 § 1; Ord. No. 24-2016; Ord. No. 16-2017]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Side Location
68th Street [Ord. No.
24-2016]
West From Boulevard East to
Bergenline Avenue
69th Street [Ord. No.
24-2016]
East From Bergenline Avenue to
Boulevard East
70th Street [Ord. No.
24-2016]
West From Boulevard East to
Bergenline Avenue
71st Street [Ord. No.
24-2016]
East From Palisade Avenue to
Boulevard East
Adams Street [Ord.
No. 24-2016]
South From 70th Street to the 68th
Street
Bellevue Avenue [Ord.
No. 24-2016]
South From the Town limits to 68th
Street
Hudson Avenue [Ord.
No. 24-2016]
North Entire length
Jackson Street [Ord.
No. 24-2016]
North From the 68th Street to 70th
Street
Jackson Street [Added
9-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 23-19]
North From border of West New
York to 68th Street
Madison Street [Ord.
No. 24-2016]
North From 68th Street to the Town
limits
Palisade Avenue [Ord.
No. 24-2016]
South Entire length
Polk Street [Added
9-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 23-19]
South From 68th Street to border of
West New York
§ 7-4.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-5
1:206
Name of Street Side Location
Polk Street [Ord. No.
24-2016]
South From the Town limits to 68th
Street
§ 7-6. THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS AND YIELD
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 7-6.1. Through Streets. [New]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as Through Streets. STOP
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where YIELD signs having sides 36 inches in length
are provided for in the designations.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-6.2. Stop Intersections. [New; Ord. #014/98; Ord. #004/05; Ord.
#009-09; Ord. #11-13; Ord. No. 16-2017]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. STOP signs shall
be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
68th Street and Adams Street Adams Street
68th Street and Bellevue Avenue Bellevue Avenue
68th Street and Hudson Avenue
[Ord. No. 16-2017]
68th Street
68th Street and Madison Street Madison Street
69th Street and Bellevue Avenue Bellevue Avenue
69th Street and Bellevue Avenue 69th Street
69th Street and Hudson Avenue Hudson Avenue
69th Street and Hudson Avenue 69th Street
70th Street and Adams Street 70th Street
70th Street and Adams Street Adams Street
70th Street and Bellevue Avenue
[Ord. No. 16-2017]
70th Street
70th Street and Bellevue Avenue Bellevue Avenue
70th Street and Hudson Avenue Hudson Avenue
70th Street and Hudson Avenue 70th Street
70th Street and Madison Street Madison Street
70th Street and Palisade Avenue Palisade Avenue
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6.2
1:207
Intersection Stop Sign On
70th Street and Palisade Avenue 70th Street
70th Street and Park Avenue 70th Street
71st Street and Hudson Avenue Hudson Avenue
71st Street and Palisade Avenue Palisade Avenue
71st Street and Palisade Avenue 71st Street
§ 7-6.3. Yield Intersections. [New]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. YIELD signs
having sides 36 inches in length shall be installed as provided therein.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-7. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. 9/6/83; Ord. #003/97; Ord. #011/97;
Ord. #014/97; Ord. #025/97; Ord. #031/97; Ord. #09/98; Ord. #012/
98; Ord. #01/99; Ord. #020/99; Ord. #026/99; Ord. #027/99; Ord.
#031/99; Ord. #013/00; Ord. #015/00; Ord. #016/00; Ord. #026/00;
Ord. #031/00; Ord. #038/00; Ord. #004/01; Ord. #010/02; Ord.
#003/03; Ord. #006/03; Ord. #010/03; Ord. #015/05; Ord. #010-07;
Ord. #23-10; Ord. #25-10; Ord. #1-11; Ord. #16-11; Ord. #17-11;
Ord. #33-11; Ord. #08-12; Ord. #10-12; Ord. #14-12, Ord. #21-12;
Ord. #05-13; Ord. #06-13; Ord. #15-13; Ord. #19-13; Ord. #10-14;
Ord. #11-14; Ord. No. 11-2015; Ord. No. 04-2016; Ord. No. 12-2016;
Ord. No. 22-2016; Ord. No. 29-2016; Ord. No. 10-2017; Ord. No.
19-2017; Ord. No. 23-2018; Ord. No. 30-2018]
a. In no event shall a loading zone space be created in an area in which
parking is otherwise prohibited or in an area wherein any loading zone
would interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Expiration of Previous Loading Zone Spaces. Any and all parking spaces
restricted for use as a loading zone shall expire July 1, 2000. All parking
spaces restricted for use as a loading zone shall expire July 1, yearly,
thereafter.
c. Application for Creation of Continuance; Review; Report of Findings.
On or before July 1 annually any person seeking the creation or
continuance of a restricted parking space for use as a loading zone shall
submit to the Director of Public Safety or the Director's designee proof
of his or her continued loading zone status. Upon review and approval
by the Director of Public Safety or the Director's designee, the Director
shall take one of the following actions:
1. In the event that a restricted parking space for use as a loading
zone already exists, the Director of Public Safety shall approve for
such space to continue until July 1 of the following year.
§ 7-6.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-7
1:208
2. In the event that such a restricted parking space does not already
exist, the Director of Public Safety or his designee shall issue a
written report of his/her findings to the Mayor and Council and
include in that report a request either that such a restricted
parking space for use as a loading zone be created or that such a
restricted parking space not be created.
d. Forfeiture of Restricted Space; Removal of Signage. In the event that a
person seeking continuance of a restricted parking space for use as a
loading zone as provided for in Subsection c above is found by the
Director of Public Safety to be no longer eligible for a restricted parking
space, such person shall immediately forfeit the restricted parking
space and the Director of Public Safety shall order the removal of any
signage indicating that the parking space is restricted. Upon the
removal of the signage, the parking space shall be restored to use by
the general public.
e. Fees. There shall be a $25 fee for any loading zone approved.
f. Commercial Loading Zone. There shall be a commercial loading zone
area approximately 45 feet in length at 6900 to 6904 Bergenline Avenue
for use by all business between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Thereafter the loading area may be used by individuals with residential
parking permits from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. [Added 9-23-2019 by
Ord. No. 22-19; amended 12-23-2019 by Ord. No. 29-19]
The following described locations are hereby designated as Loading
Zones.
7-7 Loading Zones
Business Name Location Time
Beef Burger Corp.
[Ord. No. 23-2018;
amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 16-19]
7013 Madison Street 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday to Friday
Benny's Liquor &
Supermarket [Ord.
No. 23-2018;
amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 16-19]
7000 Park Ave 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Monday to Saturday
Bulls Ferry Studios,
LLC [Ord. No.
23-2018]
6903 Jackson Street 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Sunday to Saturday
Deerbrook Fabrics,
Inc. [Added
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 16-19]
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday to Friday
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:209
7-7 Loading Zones
Business Name Location Time
Frank Richter Moving
[Ord. No. 30-2018]
340-68th Street 43
feet from North East
corner of 68th Street
and Palisade Ave
going North To the
start of loading zone
30 feet in length
Loading Zone on
Palisade Ave side
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to Saturday
French Upholstery,
Inc. [Ord. No.
23-2018]
429-69th Street 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday to Friday
GP's Restaurant
[Ord. No. 23-2018;
amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 16-19]
24-69th Street 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Monday to Sun
Genesis NYC DBA
Tecno Group [Ord.
No. 30-2018]
6710-12 Palisade Ave
77 feet from South
East corner of 68th
Street and Palisade
Ave going South to
the start of loading
zone 30 feet in length
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to Friday
High Accessories
[Ord. No. 23-2018;
amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 16-19]
72-68th Street 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Monday to Friday
Israel Paint &
Hardware [Ord. No.
23-2018; amended
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 16-19]
7000 Bergenline Ave 7:15 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to Saturday
Little Scholars Pre
School [Ord. No.
23-2018; amended
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 16-19]
58-69th Street 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday. to
Friday.
§ 7-7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-7
1:210
§ 7-8. TAXI STANDS. [New]
The following described locations are hereby designated as Taxi Stands.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-9. BUS STOPS. [New; Ord. No. 04-2017]
The locations described below are designated as bus stops. No vehicle other
than an omnibus picking up or discharging passengers shall occupy the area
of any bus stop, except that parking shall be permitted therein, consistent
with all other applicable traffic regulations and parking restrictions, on
every day between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following
morning for all bus stops on Park Avenue only.
Kennedy Boulevard West:
Northeast corner at 7000 Kennedy Boulevard West - extending 27 feet
Bergenline Avenue:
Southwest corner at 6727 Bergenline Avenue - extending 54 feet
Northeast corner at 6804 Bergenline Avenue - extending 50 feet
West side at 6819 Bergenline Avenue - extending 113 feet
7-7 Loading Zones
Business Name Location Time
Mundo Esoterico
Distributor [Added
8-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 11-19]
320-69th Street, north
side of 69th Street
beginning at end of
driveway line on 324
69th Street going east
towards Hudson
Avenue 30 feet
9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m.
and 4:30 p.m. to 6:30
p.m. Monday to Friday
Pinacle Supermarket
[Ord. No. 23-2018;
amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 16-19]]
6818 Bergenline Ave 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
Monday to Saturday
Rabelos Corp. [Ord.
No. 23-2018;
amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 16-19]
405-70th Street 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.
Monday to Friday
Rumba Cubana [Ord.
No. 23-2018;
amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 16-19]
6909-15 Boulevard
East
7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Monday to Sunday
Stich O Matic, Inc.
[Ord. No. 23-2018]
427-69th Street 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday to Sunday
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:211
Northeast corner at 6900 Bergenline Avenue - extending 50 feet
Northeast corner at 7000 Bergenline Avenue - extending 54 feet
Northwest corner at 7001 Bergenline Avenue - extending 49 feet
Park Avenue:
Northwest corner at 6801 Park Avenue - extending 30 feet
Northwest corner at 6901 Park Avenue - extending 31 feet
Northwest corner at 7001 Park Avenue - extending 28 feet
Northeast corner at 7100 Park Avenue - extending 22 feet
Northwest corner at 7101 Park Avenue - extending 41 feet
Southeast corner at 6812 Park Avenue - extending 29 feet
Kennedy Boulevard East:
Northwest corner at 69th Street and Kennedy Boulevard East - extending
106 feet
East side at 7000 Kennedy Boulevard East - extending 94 feet
Southwest corner at 7005 Kennedy Boulevard East - extending 84 feet
Northeast corner at 7100 Kennedy Boulevard East - extending 97 feet
§ 7-10. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. 7/7/69 § 9-1; New]
§ 7-11. NO TURN ON RED. [Ord. 2/7/77 §§ 1 — 2; Ord. #032/97; Ord.
#13-11]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any of the following
described locations.
Bergenline Avenue and
69th Street
All right turns At all times
Bergenline Avenue and
70th Street
All right turns At all times
From all approaches at the intersection of Palisade Avenue and 69th
Street from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Broadway 69th Street All right turns 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Park Avenue and 69th
Street
All right turns 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
a. No person shall make the turn listed below at any of the following
described locations.
(RESERVED)
b. No person shall make a U-Turn on any street within the Town at any
time.
§ 7-9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-11
1:212
From eastbound 69th Street to southbound Palisade Avenue from 7:30
a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday on school days only
Bergenline Avenue and
68th Street
All right turns At all times
Kennedy Boulevard and
68th Street
All right turns At all times
Jackson Street and
70th Street
All right turns At all times
Boulevard East and
71st Street
All right turns Monday to Friday 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Boulevard East and
69th Street
All right turns At all times
Ferry Road and River
Road
All right turns At all times
Kennedy Boulevard and
70th Street
All right turns At all times
§ 7-12. SPEED LIMITS. [New]
The following described streets or parts of streets shall have the speed
limits designated.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-13. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-13.1. Findings. [Ord. #5/20/92, Preamble]
§ 7-13.2. Restricted Parking Spaces Created on Streets. [Ord. 5/20/
92 § 1; Ord. 9/22/92 § 1; Ord. 10/21/92 § 1; Ord. #1994-5; Ord.
#1994-11; Ord. #1994-012; Ord. #1995-01; Ord. #1995-05; Ord.
#1995-013; Ord. #018-1995; Ord. #022-1995; Ord. #003-1996; Ord.
a. There is a shortage of on street parking spaces in the Town of
Guttenberg.
b. There is a need for parking spaces to be dedicated to the use of persons
who have certain handicaps.
c. There will be certain administrative costs associated with the creation
and maintenance of certain handicapped parking spaces which will be
dedicated for use by specific persons or vehicles.
d. The administrative costs to which reference is made in Subsection c
above should be borne by the persons who will benefit from the use of
the specifically dedicated parking spaces.
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.2
1:213
#010-1996; Ord. #011-1996; Ord. #015/96; Ord. #017/96; Ord.
#019/96; Ord. #010/97; Ord. #012/97; Ord. #015/97; Ord. #019/97;
Ord. #034/97; Ord. #037/97; Ord. #02/98; Ord. #03/98; Ord. #05/
98; Ord. #06/98; Ord. #019/98; Ord. #04/99; Ord. #06/99; Ord. #08/
99; Ord. #09/99; Ord. #012/99; Ord. #21/99; Ord. #25/99; Ord. #30/
99; Ord. #014/00; Ord. #017/00; Ord. #018/00; Ord. #019/00; Ord.
#021/00; Ord. #024/00; Ord. #025/00; Ord. #039/00; Ord. #001/01;
Ord. #003/01; Ord. #013/01; Ord. #017/01; Ord. #003/02; Ord.
#011/02; Ord. #012/02; Ord. #015/02; Ord. #016/02; Ord. #022/02;
Ord. #024/02; Ord. #001/03; Ord. #002/03; Ord. #005/03; Ord.
#011/03; Ord. #015/03; Ord. #016/03; Ord. #020/03; Ord. #001/04;
Ord. #009/04; Ord. #013/04; Ord. #025/04; Ord. #026/04; Ord.
#006/05; Ord. #014/05; Ord. #004/06; Ord. #006/06; Ord. #007/06;
Ord. #009/06; Ord. #014/06; Ord. #016/06; Ord. #020/06; Ord.
#001/07; Ord. #006/07; Ord. #001-08; Ord. #003-08; Ord. #010-08;
Ord. #011-08; Ord. #001-09; Ord. #005-09; Ord. #006-09; Ord.
#004-10; Ord. #007-10; Ord. #010-10; Ord. #011-10; Ord. #013-10;
Ord. #23-10; Ord. #25-10; Ord. #01-11; Ord. #06-11; Ord. #14-11;
Ord. #15-11; Ord. #31-11; Ord. #32-11; Ord. #37-11; Ord. #38-11;
Ord. #40-11; Ord. #11-12; Ord. #13-12; Ord. #22-12; Ord. #02-13;
Ord. #09-13; Ord. #10-13; Ord. #20-13; Ord. #21-13; Ord. #04-14;
Ord. #09-14; Ord. #2014-14; Ord. No. 05-2015; Ord. No. 10-2015;
Ord. No. 01-2016; Ord. No. 11-2016; Ord. No. 28-2016; Ord. No.
11-2017; Ord. No. 18-2017; Ord. No. 20-2017; Ord. No. 25-2017;
Ord. No. 18-2018; Ord. No. 24-2018; Ord. No. 29-2018; amended
1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 01-19;3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 03-19;
8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 15-19; 12-23-2019 by Ord. No. 30-19]
a. Vehicle Identification Card and Certificate Required. Restricted parking
spaces are hereby created on the street at the addresses shown on
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof. The restricted
parking spaces may be used only by persons who have been issued
special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles
pursuant to the provisions of Section 2 of P.L. 1949, c. 280 (N.J.S.A.
39:4-205), when using a motor vehicle on which is displayed a
certificate, for which a special vehicle identification card has been
issued, pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1949, c. 280 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-206).
b. Restricted Parking Spaces in Front of Residence; Expiration;
Restrictions. Restricted parking spaces are hereby created in front of
the residences occupied by handicapped persons at the addresses
shown on Schedule B attached hereto and made a part hereof. The
restricted parking spaces to which reference is made in this subsection
shall remain in effect so long as the handicapped person resides at the
address in front of which the restricted parking space has been created,
provided that the handicapped person is the holder of a current driver's
license issued by the State of New Jersey and further provided that the
motor vehicle to be parked in the restricted parking space is equipped
with such special attachments and devices as the Director of the
§ 7-13.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-13.2
1:214
Division of Motor Vehicles may deem necessary to provide for the safe
operation thereof by the handicapped person.
In no event shall a restricted parking space be created in an area
in which parking is otherwise prohibited or in an area wherein any
parking would interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
c. Expiration of Previous Restricted Spaces. Any and all parking spaces
restricted for use by handicapped persons created prior to the passage
of this section and not included in either Schedule A or Schedule B
attached hereto shall expire on July 1, 1992.
d. Expiration of Previous Handicapped Parking Permits. Any and all
handicapped parking permits issued prior to the passage of this section
shall expire July 1, 1992.
e. Application for Creation of Continuance; Review; Report of Findings.
On or before July 1 annually any person seeking the creation or
continuance of a restricted parking space of the type to which reference
is made in Subsection b above shall submit to the Chief of Police or the
Chief's designee proof of his or her continued handicapped status.
Upon review and approval by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee,
the Chief of Police shall take one of the following actions:
1. In the event that a restricted parking space of the type to which
reference is made already exists, the Chief of Police shall issue a
permit as provided for in Subsection g below for such space to
continue until July 1st of the following year.
2. In the event that such a parking space does not already exist, the
Chief of Police shall issue a written report of his/her findings to the
Mayor and Board of Council and include in that report a request
either that such a parking space be created or that such a parking
space not be created.
f. Forfeiture of Restricted Space; Removal of Signage. In the event that a
person seeking continuance of a restricted parking space as provided
for in Subsection e above is found by the Chief of Police to be no longer
eligible for a restricted parking space, such person shall immediately
forfeit the restricted parking space and the Chief of Police shall order
the removal of any signage indicating that the parking space is
restricted. Upon the removal of the signage, the parking space shall be
restored to use by the general public.
g. Issuance of Permit; Proofs Required; Permit Description. In the event
that the Chief of Police approves the continuance of a restricted parking
space as provided for in Subsection e above, he/she shall issue a permit
which identifies the specific motor vehicle and the location wherein the
specific motor vehicle is to be parked. Such permits shall only be issued
to persons who can prove ownership and operation of the motor vehicle
and residency at the location specified thereon.
§ 7-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.2
1:215
The permit shall be 5 1/2 inches by 8 1/2 inches in size, shall bear
the seal of the Town of Guttenberg and shall be displayed prominently
within the vehicle when it is parked so as to be seen from the middle of
the street.
h. Fees. The $10 fee for any permit shall be and hereby is waived.
Restricted Parking Spaces Created on Streets
Schedule A Location
6819 Boulevard East Northeast corner 69th Street west of
Boulevard East
7005 Boulevard East on
Bellevue Avenue
North side of 70th Street on the east
side, space #2
6900 Broadway By handicapped ramp -
Approximately 64 feet from closest
corner (70th Street) with a utility
pole within 25 feet north of proposed
lot
6815 Park Avenue on 69th
Street
South side 10 feet west of Park
Avenue
6819 Park Avenue 40 feet west of Park Avenue south
side of 69th Street
69th Street East of fire hydrant by Broadway
intersection, parking space should
be 110 feet from closest corner
(Broadway). Proposed parking space
is 1 spot east of fire zone and a fire
hydrant.
63-70th Street 25 feet west at 65-70th Street
70th Street First parking space west of 6900
Broadway rear parking lot entrance,
parking space would be 96 feet from
closest corner (70th Street). Spot is
directly across from 144-70th Street.
Proposed parking space is 1 spot
east of fire zone and a fire hydrant.
Restricted Parking Spaces Created on Streets
Schedule B
First Name Last Name Address Plate #
Albert Ahern 243-68th Street U36GKG
Prakash Bhatt 223-71st HZ6653
Jamie Cabrera 6707 Broadway HM6968
Joseph Forenza 412-69th Street FORENZA
§ 7-13.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-13.2
1:216
§ 7-13.3. Prohibition. [New]
Only a motor vehicle for which a valid permit has been issued and which has
such permit properly displayed shall be permitted to park in the restricted
parking zone indicated on such permit.
§ 7-14. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 26-2016; Ord. No.
15-2017]
There is hereby established the following parking violation schedule and
payable amounts:
Code
Number Payable Violation Description Amount
7-3.2 Parking During Emergencies $60
7-3.3 Prohibited Parking on Certain Streets at All
Times
$60
7-3.4 Prohibited Parking on Certain Streets at
Certain Hours
$60
7-3.5 Prohibited Stopping or Standing on Certain
Streets at Certain Hours
$60
7-3.6 Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets $60
7-3.7 Parking Prohibited for Certain Vehicles 6,000
pounds., 8 feet high
$124
7-3.9 Prohibited Parking on Alternate Sides of
Certain Streets on Certain Hours [Ord. No.
15-2017]
$40
7-4, 7-4.1 Prohibited Parking for Designated Weight
and Designated Height of Vehicles on Certain
Streets
$124
7-7 Prohibited Parking in Loading Zones $60
7-8 Prohibited Parking in Taxi Zones $60
Restricted Parking Spaces Created on Streets
Schedule B
Luisa Hernandez 6714 Jackson HS6454
Clara Higuita-Lopez 325-70th C89KGX
Despina Kallopoulos 63-70th HW7020
Ann Keating 74-70th HW7312
Joseph Miller 240-68th Street HH1475
Ramon Pena 114-69th Street HW5719
Barbara Reiche 6820 Polk CC2055
§ 7-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14
1:217
Code
Number Payable Violation Description Amount
7-9 Prohibited Parking in Bus Stops $60
7-10 Turns Prohibited $85
7-11 No Turn on Red $85
7-13 Handicapped Parking (See N.J.S.A. 39:4-197) $273
Chapter 8
PARKING METERS AND PARKING LOTS
§ 7-14 GUTTENBERG CODE § 7-14
1:218
ARTICLE I
Parking Meters
§ 8-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 1; Ord. 1/4/65 § 1; Ord. No.
18-2016]
§ 8-2. PARKING METER ZONES.
§ 8-2.1. Established.13 [Ord. 10/15/56 § 2; Ord. 2/2/76 § 1; 3/1/76 § 1;
5/17/76 § 2; Ord. #011/99; Ord. #04-12; Ord. No. 06-2015; Ord. No.
06-2015]
The following named and described areas and streets, or portions of streets
of the Town, together with such additional, or altered areas, streets, or
portions of streets in Guttenberg as may hereafter be included in this
subsection by a duly adopted ordinance of the Mayor and Board of Council,
shall constitute a parking meter zone.
a. For the purposes of this chapter, all definitions of all words and phrases
shall be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, as presently enacted, or
as amended hereafter, to the end that the definitions hereunder shall
conform with the New Jersey State Motor Vehicle Act, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
b. As used in this chapter:
PAID PARKING SPACE — Shall mean a space that is delineated on a
public right-of-way for which payment is required to park a vehicle.
PAID PARKING ZONE — Shall mean a group of parking spaces, on a
public right-of-way or on Town property, that are delineated by a posted
sign and for which payment is required to park a vehicle.
PARKING METER — Shall mean any mechanical or electronic device
that the Town places or erects on Town property, adjacent to a paid
parking space for the purpose of managing and controlling the use of
paid parking spaces and that requires payment for use.
PARKING OCCASION — Shall mean the uninterrupted period of time
that a vehicle is parked in a paid parking space or a paid parking zone
while paid parking time limits are in effect.
PARKING PAY STATION — Shall mean any electronic device, except a
parking meter, that the Town places or erects on Town property, for the
purpose of managing and controlling the use of paid parking spaces and
paid parking zones and that requires payment for use.
PAY AND DISPLAY STATION — Shall mean a parking pay station that
dispenses a receipt, as proof of payment, to be displayed as required.
PAY BY SPACE STATION — Shall mean a parking pay station that
measures the lawful parking occasion and its expiration for specific
paid parking spaces without issuing a receipt for display on a vehicle.
13.Not applicable on Sundays and holidays.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2.1
1:219
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Bergenline Avenue Both 2 hours** From the south
Avenue limits of
Town to the north
limits of Town
Broadway East 2 hours Beginning at the
northeast corner of
70th Street &
Broadway to the
north limits of the
Town of
Guttenberg
Broadway West 2 hours From the
northwest corner
of 70th and
Broadway to the
south west corner
of 71st Street and
Broadway
John F. Kennedy
Boulevard West
East 2 hours Beginning 34 feet
from the northeast
corner of 68th
Street & Kennedy
Boulevard
continuing to 25
feet south of the
southeast corner of
70th Street and
Kennedy
Boulevard
John F. Kennedy
Boulevard East [Ord.
No. 06-2015]
Both 2 hours From the South
Boulevard limits To
the north limits of
Town
Park Avenue Both 2 hours** From the southerly
to the northerly
boundaries of
Guttenberg
68th Street 2 hours**
North Beginning 35 feet
from the westerly
curbline of
Bergenline Avenue
to a point 58 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 8-2.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 8-2.1
1:220
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
North Beginning 50 feet
from the easterly
curbline of Bergenline
Avenue to a
point 36 feet
therefrom
South Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curbline of
Bergenline Avenue
to a point 62 feet
therefrom
North Beginning 35 feet
from the westerly
curb line of Park
Avenue to a point
36 feet therefrom
North Beginning 50 feet
from the westerly
curb line of Park
Avenue to a point
40 feet therefrom
South Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of Park
Avenue to a point
62 feet therefrom
2 hours**
North Beginning 50 feet
from the easterly
curb line of
Bergenline Avenue
to a point 58 feet
therefrom
69th Street
South Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of
Bergenline Avenue
to a point 58 feet
therefrom
§ 8-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2.1
1:221
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
North Beginning 35 feet
from the westerly
curb line of Park
Avenue to a point
62 feet therefrom
South Beginning 50 feet
from the westerly
curb line of Park
Avenue to a point
62 feet therefrom
North Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of Park
Avenue to a point
40 feet therefrom
South Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of Park
Avenue to a point
18 feet therefrom
2 hours**
North Beginning 50 feet
from the easterly
curb line of
Bergenline Avenue
to a point 40 feet
therefrom
South Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of
Bergenline Avenue
to a point 36 feet
therefrom
North Beginning 39 feet
from the westerly
curb line of
Bergenline Avenue
to a point 62 feet
therefrom
70th Street
North Beginning 35 feet
from the westerly
curb line of Park
Avenue, to a point
36 feet therefrom
§ 8-2.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 8-2.1
1:222
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
South Beginning 35 feet
from the westerly
curb line of Park
Avenue, to a point
20 feet therefrom
South Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of Park
Avenue, to a point
36 feet therefrom
2 hours**
North Beginning 35 feet
from the westerly
curb line of Park
Avenue, to a point
36 feet therefrom
North Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of Park
Avenue, to a point
58 feet therefrom
71st Street
South Beginning 35 feet
from the easterly
curb line of Park
Avenue, to a point
39 feet therefrom
*Not applicable on Sundays and holidays.
** 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday, Thursday and Friday.
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Tuesday, Wednesday and Saturday.
§ 8-2.2. Designation of Parking Spaces. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 3]
a. The Chairman of the Police Committee, when directed by the Mayor
and Board of Council, is authorized to mark off individual parking
spaces in parking meter zones designated under subsection 8-2.1 of this
section, and in such other zones as may hereafter be established. The
parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or marked on the
curbing or surface of the street, sufficient to contain one average
vehicle within such markings. At each space so marked, it shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle unless the vehicle is entirely within the
limits of the space so designated. Larger vehicles requiring more than
one such space, shall be parked only if the vehicle can be parked within
the lines of two such spaces, with the use of two parking meters, as
§ 8-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2.2
1:223
§ 8-3. PARKING METERS AND PARKING PAY STATIONS.14 [Ord. No.
18-2016]
The Department of Public Safety may use parking meters and parking pay
stations to assist in the enforcement of parking time restrictions.
§ 8-3.1. Parking Meters and Parking Pay Stations Requirements.
[Ord. No. 18-2016]
§ 8-3.2. Parking in a Paid Parking Space. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
hereinafter described. No vehicle which cannot be parked within the
lines of two such spaces, can be parked in a parking meter zone.
b. Each vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked within the
lines of such space, and with the appropriate part of such vehicle
nearest to the parking meter established for the parking space.
a. A parking meter must:
1. Be installed adjacent to the parking space it monitors or be labeled
to indicate the space.
2. Indicate the maximum uninterrupted time a vehicle may remain
parked in the space during any parking occasion.
3. Display the amount of time a vehicle may remain legally parked in
the space after the deposit of payment.
b. A parking pay station must:
1. Be installed on the same Town block or at the same Town-owned or
controlled parking lots or facilities as the paid parking space or
paid parking zone it monitors.
2. Indicate the maximum uninterrupted time a vehicle may remain
parked within the paid parking space or the paid parking zone
during any parking occasion.
c. Either a parking meter or parking pay station must:
1. Measure and store the amount of time a vehicle may remain legally
parked after the deposit of payment; or
2. Issue a receipt that indicates the amount of time a vehicle may
remain legally parked after the deposit of payment.
3. Shall indicate the hours and days that paid parking time limits are
in effect.
4. Shall indicate the amount of the fee for parking a vehicle.
14.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 10/15/56, 4/1/57, 1/4/65.
§ 8-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 8-3.2
1:224
§ 8-3.3. Time Limits on Paid Parking. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
§ 8-4. PARKING TIME LIMITS.
§ 8-4.1. Established. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 6; Ord. 4/1/57 § 2; Ord. 5/20/
74 § 1; Ord. 5/20/90 § 1; Ord. #011-09; Ord. No. 12-2015; Ord. No.
19-2016; Ord. No. 03-2018]
a. A person must park a vehicle completely within the delineated parking
space.
b. A person may not park a vehicle in a paid parking space that is legally
occupied by another vehicle.
a. Paid parking time limits are in effect as posted.
b. The Mayor and Council shall establish the maximum uninterrupted time
a person may continuously park a vehicle for each parking occasion.
c. When paid parking time limits are in effect, a person may not park a
vehicle for more than the maximum parking time limit established by
the Town for each parking occasion.
d. A vehicle may not be moved and reparked in the same paid parking
space or paid parking zone to avoid violating the maximum parking
time limit for each parking occasion.
e. When paid parking time limits are in effect, a person may not allow a
vehicle to remain parked in a paid parking space or a paid parking zone
when the authorized parking time has expired.
a. Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated parking space in parking
meter zone where a parking meter has been placed under this article
shall be lawful for a maximum period of 120 minutes only upon the
deposit of lawful and genuine coin of the United States of America in
the amount of $0.25 for each thirty-minute period or part thereof of
parking or standing a vehicle.
1. A person parking a vehicle in a paid parking space or paid parking
zone shall immediately pay the parking fee due.
2. A person must deposit U.S. coins in denominations accepted by the
parking meter or parking pay station to pay the parking fee. A
credit card payment must be for the maximum payment allowed.
3. If parking a vehicle in a space monitored by a pay and display
station, a person shall immediately locate the pay station receipt on
the dashboard inside of the vehicle's windshield adjacent to the
driver side.
4. The receipt must be placed in a position so that it is as close to the
street as possible and can be read from outside of the vehicle while
standing on the street.
§ 8-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4.1
1:225
§ 8-4.2. Enforcement; Penalty. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 7; Ord. 1/4/65 § 3;
Ord. 12/6/71 § 1; Ord. 5/21/84 § 1; Ord. #002/04; Ord. #023/04]
5. No more than one receipt shall be displayed in the windshield at a
time.
6. No other items shall be placed in proximity of the displayed receipt
in such a way that they are confusing or impair the ability to read
the receipt.
7. A person may not park in a paid parking zone monitored by a pay
and display station without a receipt from the nearest operable pay
and display station.
b. The parking meters and parking time limits hereunder shall apply and
be operative in the parking meter zones on Mondays, Tuesdays,
Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. local time, with Sundays and legal holidays
excepted.
Holidays shall mean the following days only: New Year Day, Memorial
Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas of each
year, and such other days as are designated by the Guttenberg Mayor
and Council as legal holidays.
c. At all parking meters for the Town of Guttenberg, any Guttenberg
resident with a valid Guttenberg residential parking permit, shall be
permitted, without penalty, to park at any Guttenberg parking meter
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and 10:00
p.m. except Sundays and legal holidays. At all other times, all persons,
including Guttenberg residents with valid residential parking permits,
shall follow all rules and regulations as set forth in this subsection
concerning the enforcement of Guttenberg parking meters.
a. The legal practice and procedure under this article shall be as set forth
under Part VIII of the Rules Governing Practice and Procedure in Local
Criminal Courts as presently existing or as hereafter amended and set
forth in the "Revised Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New
Jersey" promulgated by the Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey.
b. Such police officer shall attach to such vehicle a summons or notice that
such vehicle has been parked in violation of this article, and instructing
the owner to appear in the Municipal Court in regard to such violation.
Such owner may, within 48 hours of the time that such notice was
attached to such vehicle, exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays, pay to
the Municipal Court as a penalty and in satisfaction of such violation,
the sum of $29. The failure of such owner to make such payment within
that time, shall render such owner, on proof of such violation, subject to
the penalties hereinafter provided. The notice or summons and report
thereof shall bear corresponding serial numbers and such other
material as is required by law.
§ 8-4.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 8-4.3
1:226
§ 8-4.3. Towing of Illegally Parked Vehicles. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 9]
Any vehicle unlawfully parked within any parking meter zone in excess of
30 minutes may at the direction of the Mayor and Board of Council, or
the Chairman of the Police Committee, or the Chief of Police be taken into
possession by the Town and towed to some proper storage place, and there
held until the penalties provided under this article are paid, and until a
reasonable towage, or all reasonable storage charges, shall also have been
paid.
§ 8-5. COLLECTION.
§ 8-5.1. Procedure. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 8]
Each parking meter shall contain a removable cylinder for receiving
deposited coins, which cylinders shall be collected at such times, and in
such manner, as the Mayor and Board of Council shall designate. The
collections of coins shall be counted and recorded, in the manner and form
designated by the Mayor and Board of Council, with such safeguards as
the Mayor and Board of Council direct, and the funds shall be ultimately
delivered to the Town Treasurer at the time and in the manner specified
by the Mayor and Board of Council, for ultimate deposit in the general
fund in the Town. Payment for the purchase of the parking meters and the
installation thereof, when authorized by the action of the Mayor and Board
of Council, shall be made from the funds and such other funds duly provided
in accordance with law.
§ 8-5.2. Use of Money Collected. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 10]
The coins to be deposited as required herein are hereby levied and shall be
used to defray the cost of procuring and installing the parking meters and
repair and maintenance of same; the cost of Police regulation, inspection,
operation, control and use of said parking meters and designation of
parking spaces; and applicable signs; and for general purposes of the Town.
§ 8-6. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 8-6.1. Enforcement. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 13]
It shall be the duty of the Chairman of the Police Committee to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 8-6.2. Reservations of Powers. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 14]
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the Town from
providing bus stops, taxicab stands and all other matters of street and
traffic regulations, including the loading and unloading of vehicles, and all
other related matters, and all powers are reserved.
§ 8-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6.3
1:227
§ 8-6.3. Exercise of Police Power. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 17]
This entire article shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the
Police power of the Town for the regulation of traffic and the preservation
and protection of public safety, and all of its provisions shall be liberally
construed to effectuate such purposes.
§ 8-7. OPERATION OF METERS AND PARKING AREAS. [Ord. No.
27-2016]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article I for any
person:
§ 8-8. PENALTIES. [Ord. 10/15/56 § 2; Ord. 1/4/65 § 4; Ord. No.
27-2016]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of Section 8-7 shall be deemed guilty of violating those provisions and be
assessed a payable fine of $60.
§ 8-9. (RESERVED)15
a. To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space
or in such a position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the
area designated by such lines and markings.
b. To deface, injure, damage, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy
or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or parking pay station or
parking meter assembly or pay station assembly, installed under the
provisions of this chapter.
c. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or parking pay
station, any slug, device, or any other matter or substance whatsoever
other than lawful coins or other lawful payment as specified in this
chapter.
15.Editor's Note: Section 8-9 Fines containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1994-04, 1994-07,
35/97 and 011/00 was deleted and repealed by Ordinance No. 27-2016.
§ 8-6.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 8-9
1:228
ARTICLE II
Permit Parking Lots
§ 8-10. DESIGNATION OF PERMIT PARKING AREAS AND SPACES.
[Ord. #003/06]
§ 8-11. ISSUANCE OF PARKING PERMITS. [Ord. #003/06]
The Town Administrator or her designee is hereby authorized to issue
to persons applying and qualifying therefor, a permit placard which shall
entitle the holder thereof to park any passenger motor vehicle in a
designated parking space within the permit parking area of 68th and 71st
Street Parking Lots that has been set aside and designated for that purpose.
§ 8-12. QUALIFICATIONS FOR PERMITS. [Ord. #003/06]
A parking permit placard shall be issued to any Guttenberg residents as
defined in subsection 7-3.8b and who completes and files the required
application and who pays the designated fee thereof.
§ 8-13. TERM OF PERMIT. [Ord. #003/06]
Regular parking permit placards may be for a period of one month,
commencing on the 15th day of each month and terminating on the 14th
day of the next month.
§ 8-14. FORM AND DISPLAY OF PERMITS. [Ord. #003/06]
All regular permits shall be in the form of placard. Every regular permit
placard shall be placed upon the dashboard of the driver's side of the
vehicle, in such a manner and position as to be clearly visible from the
exterior of the vehicle.
§ 8-15. FEES. [Ord. #003/06]
a. The Town Administrator is hereby authorized to set aside and to
designate, in the 68th Street and 71st Street Parking Lots of the Town,
certain parking spaces as permit parking areas.
b. The Town Administrator shall set aside and designate, in the permit
parking areas of the 68th Street and 71st Street Parking Lots, such
number of parking spaces as may be reasonably necessary to
accommodate the needs of the public.
a. The fees for the issuance for the aforesaid parking permit placard shall
be $100 per month or the pro rata share of the remaining part of the
first month when issued.
b. The monthly fee for the parking permit is due on the 15th day of the
month. If the fee is not paid after the 15th day but before the 25th day
of each month, there shall be a $10 late fee, which must be paid with
the monthly fee. If the fee is not paid by the 25th day, then the parking
§ 8-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:229
§ 8-16. IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES. [Ord.
#003/06]
Any vehicles parked in violation of these provisions may be removed from
the public parking lot by any towing company so authorized by the Police
Department.
§ 8-17. VIOLATIONS. [Ord. #003/06]
Any person parked in a designated parking spot in either the 68th Street or
71st Street Guttenberg Parking Lot without a valid permit placard, shall be
liable for a fine of $60 and/or towed as provided by this Article.
permit is revoked and the space shall be available to any member of the
public.
§ 8-15 GUTTENBERG CODE § 8-17
1:230
Chapter 9
(RESERVED)
Chapter 10
(RESERVED)
Chapter 11
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 11-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE.
§ 11-1.1. Enforcing Agency. [Ord. 4/18/77 § 1; Ord. 4/6/81 § 1]
a. There is hereby established in the Town, a State Uniform Construction
Code enforcing agency to be known as Building Department, consisting
of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official,
and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall thereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency, and the Mayor and Board of Council shall make such
appointments, and issue such supervisory or jurisdictional regulations
as required to implement appropriate State laws, codes and
regulations.
b. There are established the positions of Deputy Construction Official;
Deputy Building Subcode Official; Deputy Plumbing Subcode Official;
Deputy Electrical Subcode Official; Deputy Fire Subcode Official; and
deputy subcode official of such other additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of Community Affairs of New Jersey may in the future
adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code.
Such deputy shall act in any case of absence, disability or other inability
of the appropriate construction code or subcode official to act; by virtue
of any condition, event, law, rule or regulation.
c. Each official position created in Subsection a thereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217 as
amended and NJAC 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to NJAC 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, C.217 and NJAC 5:23 to hold each such position.
§ 8-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.1
1:231
§ 11-1.2. Hudson County Construction Board of Appeals. [New]
Decisions of the Construction Official and appropriate subcode officials
shall be appealed to the Hudson County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 11-1.3. Fees. [Ord. 4/18/77 § 3; Ord. 11/7/77 § 1; New; Ord. 010/98;
Ord. #020/05; Ord. 014/96; Ord. 014/99; Ord. 024/99; Ord. #012-10;
Ord. #08-13; Ord. No. 12-2018]
d. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
a. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsections 1 through 7 hereto, and shall be paid before the
permit is issued.
1. The building subcode fee shall be:
(a) For new construction, $0.0270 per cubic foot of building or
structure volume; provided that the minimum fee shall be $65.
(b) For renovations, alterations and repairs, $25 per $1,000 of
estimated cost of the work; provided that the minimum fee
shall be $65.
(c) For additions, $0.0270 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume for the added portion; provided that the minimum fee
shall be $65.
(d) For combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of the
fees computed separately as renovations and additions.
(e) The fee for asbestos abatement shall be a flat fee of $70.
(f) The fee for lead hazard shall be a flat fee of $140.
(g) The fee for a permit demolition of a residential and accessory
structure shall be $150. All other use groups, the fee shall be
$300.
(h) The fee for a removal of one building from one lot to another or
another location on the same lot shall be $25 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of a new foundation and all work necessary to
place the building in its completed condition in the new
location, The minimum fee shall be $150.
(i) The permit fee to construct a sign shall be $2.50 per square
foot of the surface area of the sign, provided the minimum fee
shall be $65. In the case of double-faced signs, the area of the
surface of only one side of the sign shall be used for purposes
of the fee computation.
§ 11-1.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-1.3
1:232
2. The plumbing subcode fee shall be as follows:
(a) Total number of fixtures and stacks $15 each. This shall include
but not limited to all sinks, urinals, water closets, bathtubs,
shower stalls, laundry tubs, drinking fountains, dishwashers,
garbage disposals.
(b) Clothes washers, hot water heaters, tankless heaters, back
flow valve, interceptor or separator the fee shall be $25 each.
(c) Roof drains, floor drains and yard drains the fee shall be $25
each.
(d) House sewer and house drains of all sizes, sump pumps the fee
shall be $65 each.
(e) Catch basin (each): $65.
(f) Manhole (each): $65.
(g) Indirect connection (each): $15.
(h) Total number of special devices $65 each. This shall include
but not limited to grease traps, oil separators, water cooled air
conditioning units, utility service connections.
(i) Mechanical Systems Equipment (Ducts Etc. for H.V.A.C.
equipment Not including Mechanical Units)
Fee shall be calculated at 10% of Building Permit Fee.
3. The electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
(a) For the first block consisting of one to 50 receptacles, fixtures
or devices, the fee shall be $55; for each additional block
consisting of up to 25 receptacles, fixtures or devices the fee
shall be $15. For the purpose of computing this fee,
receptacles sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and heat
detectors, communications outlets, light-standards eight feet
or less in height including luminaries, emergency lights,
electric signs, exit lights or similar electric fixtures and devices
rated 20 amperes or less including motors or equipment rated
less than one horsepower (hp) or one kilowatt (kW).
(b) For each motor or electrical device rated from one hp or one
kW to 10 hp or 10 kW; for each transformer or generator rated
from one kW or one kva to 10 kW or 10 kva; the fee shall be
$25.
(c) For each motor or electrical device rated from greater than 10
hp or 10 kW to 50 hp; for each transformer, generator motor or
electrical device rated from greater than 10 kW or 10 kva to 45
kW or kva; and for each utility load management device, the
fee shall be $65.
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.3
1:233
(d) For each motor, transformer, generator or electrical device
rated from greater than 50 hp up to 100 hp or 45kW to 112.5
kW; the fee shall be $100.
(e) For each motor, transformer, generator or any electrical device
rated greater than 100 hp or 112.5 kW or 112.5 kva the fee
shall be $576.
(f) For each service equipment, panel board, switch board, switch
gear, motor control center or disconnecting means rated up to
200 amperes the fee shall be $65.
(g) For each service equipment, panel board, switch gear, motor
control center or disconnecting means rated greater than 200
amperes up to 300 amperes the fee shall be $120.
(h) For each service equipment, panel board, switch board, switch
gear, motor-control-center or disconnecting means rated
greater than 300 amperes, the fee shall be $576.
(i) For installations consisting of multi-meter stacks, the fee shall
be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and not upon
the number of meters or rating of disconnects on the meter
stack. Individual load side panel boards shall be charged in
accordance with Chapter 11, Subsection 11-1.3a,3(f),(g),(h).
There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent
installation of individual feeder conductors.
(j) For photovoltaic systems, the fee shall be based on the
designated kilowatt rating of the solar photovoltaic system as
follows:
(1) 1 to 10 kW, the fee shall be $25.
(2) 11 to 45 kW, the fee shall be $65.
(3) 46 to 112.5 kW, the fee shall be $100.
(4) 113 kW and above, the fee shall be $576.
(k) The fee for a permit to construct a permanent private
swimming pool shall be $126 for each above-ground pool and
$189 for each in-ground pool. The fee for commercial
swimming pools is to be calculated using the alteration
construction rates as provided in Chapter 11, Subsection
11-1.3a,1,(b).
(l) The fee for annual pool inspection shall be $100.
(m) The minimum fee for any electrical work shall be $65.
4. Fire protection subcode fees.
(a) 1-25 sprinkler heads $100.
§ 11-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-1.3
1:234
(b) 26-75 sprinkler heads $150.
(c) 76-100 sprinkler heads $200.
(d) 101-400 sprinkler heads $500.
(e) 401-1,000 sprinkler heads $700.
(f) Over 1,000 sprinkler heads $900.
(g) Each standpipe $250.
(h) Each independent pre-engineered system $200.
(i) Each gas or oil fired appliance which is not connected to a
plumbing system $75.
(j) Each kitchen exhaust system $100.
(k) Each control smoke system $65.
(l) The fee for 1 to 25 alarm, supervisory or signaling devices shall
be $50; for each 50 devices in addition to this the fee shall be
$100.
(m) The minimum fee for any fire protection application shall be
$65.
5. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be charged
before the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be
credited toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the
construction permit.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.27 in case of a discontinuance of a
building project, plan review fees are not refundable.
6. Certificate of occupancy fees.
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for new commercial
construction shall be $200 except for one- and two-family
residences when the fee shall be $100 per unit. There shall be
no fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted to change of use
for residential use groups shall be $100 per unit and for any
commercial use group the fee shall be $200.
(c) The fee for a continued certificate of occupancy inspection, the
use group fees, shall be as follows: [Amended 4-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 08-19]
(1) Townhouse/condominium/one-family: $100.
(2) Two-family house: $125.
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.3
1:235
(3) Three-family house: $145.
(4) Four-family house: $160.
(5) Five-family house: $170.
(6) Commercial use: $200.
(7) Industrial use: $250.
(8) All properties which contain more than five units shall pay
$170, along with an additional $10 for each additional unit
over the fifth unit.
(9) Expedited certificate of continued certificate of occupancy
inspection fee (inspection completed within three business
days) is $50, along with the fee referenced above.
(10) Re-inspection fee for any of the above use groups [for any
inspection that fails and requires additional inspection(s)
to be performed] shall pay an additional $40 for each reinspection
conducted.
(d) The fee for a continued certificate of occupancy shall be $100
for any type of Use Group.
(e) The fee for a certificate of clearance for lead hazard shall be
$28.
(f) The fee for zoning determination shall be $50 per
determination.
7. All fee totals contained herein shall be rounded off to the nearest
dollar.
8. (a) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $10.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use shall be $10.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy covering new
construction shall be 10% of the construction permit fee.
9. The fee for a permit for installation of an elevator shall be $100.
10. The fee for inspection of an elevator shall be as follows:
(a) Fees for witnessing acceptance tests and performing
inspections on new, and altered elevator devices are as follows:
(1) The basic fees for elevator devices in structures not in use
group R-3 or R-4, or in an exempted R-2 structure, shall
be:
Traction and winding drum elevators:
§ 11-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-1.3
1:236
1 to 10 floors $243
Over 10 floors $405
Hydraulic elevators $216
Roped hydraulic elevators $243
Escalators, moving walks $216
Dumbwaiters $54
Stairway chair lifts, inclined and
vertical wheelchair lifts and manlifts
$54
(2) Additional charges with the following features:
Oil buffers (each) $43
Counterweight governor and safeties $108
Auxiliary power generator $81
(b) Fees as follows for a six month routine inspection:
Traction and winding drum elevators:
1 to 10 floors $151
Over 10 floors $194
Hydraulic elevators $108
Roped hydraulic elevators $151
Escalators, moving walks $151
(c) The fee for the one-year periodic inspection and witnessing of
tests, which shall include a six-month inspection:
Traction and winding drum elevators:
1 to 10 floors $216
Over 10 floors $259
Hydraulic elevators $162
Roped hydraulic elevators $216
Escalators, moving walks $346
Dumbwaiters $86
Manlifts, stairway chair lifts, inclined and
vertical wheelchair lifts
$130
Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator
devices equipped with the following features:
Oil buffers (each) $43
Couterweight governor and safeties $86
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.3
1:237
§ 11-2. DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, WALLS OR STRUCTURES.
§ 11-2.1. Dangerous Buildings a Nuisance. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 1]
Any building, wall or structure erected on any lot, tract or parcel of land
in the Town, which because of lack of repairs or because of a dilapidated
condition or because of any other reason becomes dangerous to life or
health or might tend to extend a conflagration shall constitute a nuisance.
§ 11-2.2. Determination; Complaint. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 2]
Whenever the Board of Council shall determine that any such building,
wall or structure as aforesaid is because of lack of repair or because of
dilapidated condition or because of any other reason detrimental to the
health or safety of the public or is unusually liable to take fire or to cause
any other building or other structure in its vicinity to take fire or might
tend to extend a conflagration or is uninhabitable, it shall be the duty of the
Board of Council making such determination to make and file a complaint in
writing with the Town Clerk setting forth the existing conditions pertaining
to any such building or other structure. The complaint shall state whether
or not in the opinion of the Board of Council, the condition complained of
can be remedied by making repairs to the building or other structure or
whether the same should be demolished; and if it is the judgment of the
Board of Council that the existing condition can be remedied by the making
Auxiliary power generator $54
(d) The fee for the three- or five-year inspections:
Traction and winding drum elevators:
1 to 10 floors (5-year inspection) $367
Over 10 floors (5-year inspection) $410
Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators:
3-year inspection $270
5-year inspection $162
11. An application shall be filled out for placement of a construction
debris container. Container shall mean and include dumpsters,
receptacles or bins. All applications shall be approved by the
Director of Public Safety or his designee. A $75 fee will be charged
for each container. The permit shall be for three days.
b. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Board of Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency, and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 11-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-2.2
1:238
of certain repairs, the complaint shall set forth in detail the nature of the
repairs to be made.
§ 11-2.3. Notice to Remove. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 3]
The Board of Council shall, upon making and filing of the complaint required
to be made by the provisions of the preceding subsection, proceed to
consider the complaint, and if in the judgment of a majority of its members
present at any regular, special or adjourned meeting at which any such
complaint is considered, it is deemed advisable and for the best interests
of the public that any such building, wall or structure described in the
complaint should be removed or destroyed or repaired, the Board of Council
shall declare such building, wall or structure dangerous to life or health
or unusually liable to create or extend a conflagration, by adoption of a
resolution containing such a declaration and instructing the Town Clerk to
give notice of the contemplated removal or destruction of such building,
wall or structure to the owner of the land to be affected thereby. Which
notice shall contain a description of the property affected, sufficiently
definite in terms to identify it, as well as a description of the manner in
which the removal or destruction is to be carried out, and the notice shall
further contain a statement that unless such building, wall or structure
is removed or destroyed or repaired, if it is the judgment of the Board
of Council that the existing condition can be remedied by making certain
repairs, within 30 days after the service of the notice, that the Town will
proceed with such removal or destruction or cause it to be proceeded with
in accordance with State statutes in such case made and provided, and
will charge the cost and expenses thereof as a municipal lien against the
premises. The notice may be served upon an owner resident in the Town,
in person or by leaving the same at his usual place of residence with a
member of his family above the age of 14 years; if the owner shall not reside
in Town, the notice may be served upon him personally or by mailing the
same to him at his last known address by registered mail, or the notice
may be served upon the occupant of the property or upon the agent of the
owner in charge thereof; if the owner of the property is unknown or service
of the notice cannot for any reason be made as above directed, the notice
shall be published at least once, not less than 30 days before the proposed
removal or destruction, in a newspaper published in the County, State and
circulating in the Town. Notice to the owner of several different parcels
of land may be inserted in the advertised notice. Notice to infant owners,
or owners of unsound mind, shall be served upon their guardians. Where
lands are held by joint tenants, tenants in common or tenants by the entirety
service upon one of the owners shall be sufficient and deemed to be taken
as notice to all. Proof of service of such notice shall be filed within 10 days
thereafter with the officer having charge of the record of tax liens in the
municipality, but failure to file the same shall not invalidate the proceedings
if service has actually been made as herein provided.
§ 11-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2.4
1:239
§ 11-2.4. Failure to Comply. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 4]
In the event that the owner of the building, wall or structure fails to remove
or destroy such building, wall or structure, or fails to make certain repairs
thereto, if in the judgment of the Board of Council, the existing condition
can be remedied by making certain repairs, in compliance with the notice
and within the time stated therein, the Board of Council shall pass a
resolution noting such failure and shall file the resolution with the Town
Clerk and immediately upon the making and filing of such resolution, the
Board of Council shall have full power and authority to effect the removal or
destruction of the building, wall or structure in such manner and through
such agency and by such means as the Board of Council may determine
by resolution. Such resolution shall state specifically how such building,
wall or structure shall be removed or destroyed and may provide that the
Town Clerk shall advertise for bids in order that a contract for the removal
or destruction of such building, wall or structure shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder.
§ 11-2.5. Assessment of Costs. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 5]
When any such removal or destruction shall have been undertaken, the
Board of Council shall keep an accurate account of the cost and expenses
thereof, and when any such removal or destruction shall have been
undertaken and completed, a true statement of the cost and expenses
thereof under oath or affirmation shall be filed by the Board of Council
with the Town Clerk, together with a description of the lands affected,
sufficiently definite in terms to identify the same and the lot, tract or parcel
of land whereon such building, wall or other structure was removed or
destroyed, and also the name of the owner of the lot, tract or parcel of
land or the agent in charge thereof. The Board of Council shall examine
the account and if it is properly made, shall confirm it and file it, together
with a report of its confirmation, with the Town Clerk, who shall record it
in a book to be kept for that purpose. The Town Clerk shall file a certified
copy thereof with the Tax Collector and from the time of the filing of such
certified copy with the Tax Collector, the cost and expenses of removing
or destroying such building, wall or other structure shall be a lien on the
lot, tract or parcel of land whereon such building, wall or other structure
has been removed or destroyed hereunder and the lien shall be assessed on
notice by assessment commissioners in the same manner as improvement
assessments are made and the lien shall be enforced and collected in the
manner set out in State statutes in such case made and provided.
§ 11-2.6. Appeal. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 6]
Any property owner or property owners who desire to appeal from any
action taken by virtue of the provisions of this section shall within 30 days
from the date of giving of notice of the proposed removal or destruction
of any such building, wall or other structure of which they are owner, as
provided in Subsection 11-2.3 of this section, shall file an application in
writing for review and revocation or modification of such action with the
§ 11-2.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-2.6
1:240
Town Clerk. The Board of Council shall then grant the property owner a
hearing at such time and upon such notice as it shall determine. Such
property owner shall after such hearing be notified in writing of the action
taken by the Board of Council and shall within five days from the date of
mailing the notice of the action taken proceed to do the necessary acts to
fully comply with the original notice as affirmed or modified.
§ 11-2.7. Nuisance. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 7]
Whenever it shall come to the attention of the Board of Council that due
to conditions existing on any lot, tract or parcel of land in the Town, a
nuisance detrimental to the safety, health and general welfare of the public
is created, the Board of Council may pass a resolution declaring that the
conditions complained of constitute a nuisance within the meaning of this
section and providing for the abatement thereof in the same manner as
provided herein.
§ 11-2.8. Records. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 8]
The Town Clerk shall keep a book in which he shall record and file all
proceedings required to be taken by virtue of the provisions of this section.
§ 11-2.9. Supervision. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 9]
All work in connection with repairing, altering, fire-proofing, removing or
destroying of any building, wall or other structure by virtue of the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the supervision of the Board of Council.
§ 11-2.10. Right of Entry. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 11]
The Board of Council, its members and duly authorized agents, shall have
the right and privilege to enter into and upon any lands in the Town
whereon any building, wall or structure is or may be erected and of entering
into any such building, wall or structure for the purpose of examining the
condition of the same and to determine whether the condition thereof is
such as to constitute a nuisance as defined in this section.
§ 11-2.11. Penalty. [Ord. 2/4/52 § 10]
Any person failing to obey the provisions of this section or the orders of the
Board of Council issued by virtue hereof within 30 days after receiving the
notice herein provided for, shall be guilty of a violation of this section and
upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, §
1-5.
§ 11-3. HOTEL AND MULTIPLE DWELLING STANDARDS.
§ 11-3.1. Adoption of Standards. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 1]
The Town of Guttenberg hereby adopts the provisions of the Hotel and
Multiple Dwellings Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. and the regulations
§ 11-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3.1
1:241
promulgated thereunder entitled, "Regulations for Maintenance of Hotel
and Multiple Dwellings" and amendments thereto which are set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq. as the standards for the maintenance of such
structures within the Town. Where said rules and regulations conflict with
the standards set forth in the regulations for the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., the most strict standard shall
prevail.
§ 11-3.2. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 3]
§ 11-3.3. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 3]
Any person who violates or causes to be violated any provision of Subsection
11-3.2a shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than
$500 for each violation. Where any violation of Subsection 11-3.2a is of a
continuing nature, each day during which such continuing violation remains
unabated after the date fixed by the Housing Inspector in any order or
notice for the correction or termination of such continuing violation shall
constitute an additional, separate and distinct violation.
§ 11-4. CERTIFICATES OF CONTINUING OCCUPANCY UPON SALE
OR CHANGE IN USE OR OCCUPANCY.
a. No person shall:
1. Obstruct, hinder, delay or interfere with, by force or otherwise, the
Housing Inspector in the exercise or discharge of his powers or
duties.
2. Prepare, utter or render any false statement, report, or document
permitted or required to be prepared, uttered or rendered under
the provision of the aforesaid regulations.
3. Render ineffective or inoperable any protective equipment installed
or intended to be installed in any hotel or multiple dwelling.
4. Refuse or fail to comply with any lawful ruling, action, order or
notice issued by the Housing Inspector.
5. Violate or cause to be violated any of the provisions of the aforesaid
regulations.
b. For the purposes of this section, any person shall be deemed to have
violated or to have caused to be violated any provision of Subsection a
above whenever any officer, agent or employee thereof, under the
control of and with the knowledge of said person, shall have violated or
caused to be violated any of the provisions of Subsection a of this
subsection.
§ 11-3.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-4.1
1:242
§ 11-4.1. Findings. [Ord. #07-21-1993 § 1]
The Mayor and Board of Council find that periodic inspections of buildings
and portions thereof used for residential, commercial and industrial
purposes are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The
Mayor and Board of Council also find that such periodic inspections and
the requirement of a Certificate of Continuing Occupancy prior to change
in ownership, use or occupancy, will assist in the enforcement of and the
insuring of compliance with various ordinances of the Town, the Uniform
Construction Code, the Fire Safety Act and other laws relating to the use,
maintenance and repair of buildings.
§ 11-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #07-21-1993 § 2]
§ 11-4.3. Requirement of Certificate of Continuing Occupancy. [Ord.
#07-21-1993 § 3; Ord. #009/02; Ord. #024/04]
No person shall occupy or use, or permit to be occupied or used, any
building or portion thereof for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes, after such building or portion thereof has been vacated or sold,
or for which there has been a change in use or a change in occupancy,
until the Construction Official, Fire Official or the Fire Inspector of the
Town of Guttenberg shall have issued a Certificate of Continuing Occupancy
therefor. This requirement shall be the obligation of the person owning the
property at the time of application.
§ 11-4.4. Application for Certificate of Continuing Occupancy. [Ord.
#07-21-1993 § 4]
a. The term "portion" shall mean that part of a building which is occupied
by a different occupant than the occupants occupying other parts of the
building.
b. The term "person" shall include an individual, a partnership, a
corporation, or an association.
a. Every application for a Certificate of Continuing Occupancy shall be
made in writing and be signed by the owner or the owner's authorized
agent, and shall state the use or intended use of the building, or the
portion thereof, for which the Certificate of Continuing Occupancy is
applied for.
b. If the application relates to a portion of a building then such portion
shall be, to the satisfaction of the Construction Official, precisely
specified in the application, which shall include an approximate
drawing depicting the floor space of the portion and its relation to the
building in its entirety.
c. If the building is a multiple family dwelling for which N.J.S.A. 46:8-28
requires the filing of a Certificate of Registration, then a true and
§ 11-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-4.4
1:243
§ 11-4.5. Application Fee. [Ord. #07-21-1993 § 5]
The application fee shall be:
§ 11-4.6. Issuance of Certificate of Continuing Occupancy. [Ord.
#07-21-1993 § 6]
Upon receipt of the application, with annexed copy of the Certificate of
Registration (if applicable), and the application fee, the following procedure
shall apply:
legible copy of the filed and validated Certificate of Registration shall
be annexed to the application for a Certificate of Continuing Occupancy.
d. The application shall also state the full and exact name of the person
who will be the occupant after the issuance of the applied for Certificate
of Continued Occupancy. In the event the identity of such occupant is
not known at the time of the application, such name shall be
subsequently supplied to the Construction Official, in writing, and
signed by the owner or the owner's authorized agent, when such name
becomes known.
a. $25 for a one family house or a single residential apartment;
b. $50 for a two or three family residential house;
c. $75 for a commercial building or portion thereof; and
d. $100 for an industrial building or portion thereof.
a. The Construction Official shall cause the building or applicable portion
thereof to be inspected by the Subcode Officials of the Town of
Guttenberg and, if residential, also by the Town Housing Inspector,
which officials and inspector shall issue to the Construction Official
written notice of discovered violations of the various safety codes and
ordinances they enforce.
b. If the inspection relates to a portion of a building then the inspections
may include any common areas or common equipment serving more
than one area or occupant of the building.
c. The Construction Official shall also determine if the intended use of the
building or applicable portion thereof is permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg.
d. If the inspections disclose no violations and the intended use is
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance, the Construction Official shall issue
a Certificate of Continuing Occupancy specifying the building or
portion thereof for which the Certificate is issued, the intended use, the
name of the owner of the building or portion thereof, the name of the
occupant of the building or portion thereof, and the date of issuance.
§ 11-4.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-4.6
1:244
§ 11-4.7. Access for Inspections. [Ord. #07-21-1993 § 7]
An applicant shall provide the Construction Official, his agents, Subcode
Officials and inspectors with access to the building or portion thereof, and
to the common areas of the building, for purposes of compliance with this
section.
§ 11-4.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #07-21-1993 § 8]
Every person who shall violate any provision of this section shall for each
and every violation be subject, at the discretion of the Municipal Court of
the Town of Guttenberg, upon a finding of guilt, to a fine not to exceed
$500 and imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this
section.
§ 11-4.9. Notice Included in Tax Searches. [Ord. #07-21-1993 § 9]
To assist in the enforcement of this section, a notice shall be included
on all tax searches and added assessment searches prepared by the Tax
Collector of the Town of Guttenberg stating that a Certificate of Continuing
e. If the identity of the occupant is not disclosed in the application, then
the Certificate shall be issued but not be delivered to the owner until
such name is supplied and included on the Certificate.
f. If the Construction Official determines that the intended use is not
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance, the Construction Official shall deny
the application by notifying the applicant in writing specifying the
reason, which denial may be appealed by the applicant to the Board of
Adjustment of the Town of Guttenberg within 20 days of receipt of the
notice of denial, by filing with said Board a written Notice of Appeal
specifying the basis of the appeal, a copy of which the applicant shall
serve on the Construction Official, and by payment to the Board of a
filing fee of $50. Upon receipt of such Notice of Appeal the Board shall
promptly schedule the matter for a hearing.
g. If the inspections reveal violations of safety codes and ordinances then
the Construction Official shall provide the applicant a reasonable
amount of time to correct said violations before issuing the Certificate
of Continuing Occupancy. If the Construction Official determines,
however, that the violations are minor in that they would not unduly
jeopardize the health or safety of an occupant, then the Construction
Official may issue a Temporary Certificate of Continued Occupancy for
such period of time that the Construction Official determines is
appropriate, but for no longer than six months.
h. If no occupancy occurs within six months following the date of issuance
of the Certificate of Continuing Occupancy then such Certificate shall
be null and void and the owner shall be required to file a new
application for which new inspections shall be made.
§ 11-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-4.9
1:245
Occupancy is required for a change in use or occupancy or sale of any
building or portion thereof used for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes within the Town of Guttenberg, provided however, that a failure
to affix such notice shall not constitute a defense for a failure to obtain a
Certificate of Continuing Occupancy in violation of this section.
§ 11-4.10. Exemptions. [Ord. #07-21-1993 § 10]
The requirement of a Certificate of Continued Occupancy shall not apply to
conveyances made:
§ 11-5. PROHIBITING DEMAND FOR AND RECEIPT OF RENTAL
PAYMENTS FOR UNLAWFULLY OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL
PREMISES.
§ 11-5.1. Prohibition. [Ord. #007/05]
No person shall charge, demand, receive or accept any rent or other
payment from the use of occupancy of any residential premises within the
Town of Guttenberg which are used or occupied in violation of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg. Each such charge, demand, receipt of
acceptance of such rent or other payment in violation hereof shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 11-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. #007/05]
For the purpose of this section, an "illegal apartment" is defined as follows:
a. Pursuant to the order of any Court of competent jurisdiction;
b. Pursuant to operation of intestate laws or the administration of a will;
and
c. Between spouses or parents and children.
a. An apartment for which no Certificate of Occupancy has been issued;
b. An apartment which fails to meet the requirements of any regulation
affecting the health, safety and welfare of the public;
c. An apartment which fails to meet the requirements of the State Tenant
Housing Law;
d. An apartment which is created by a landlord without the necessary
plumbing, electrical and/or building permits;
e. Any other apartment which shall be in violation of any State, County or
municipal statute regulation and/or ordinance;
f. The word "landlord" shall be deemed to be the fee owner of the
property in question irrespective of their residency within the building
which houses the illegal apartment.
§ 11-4.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-5.3
1:246
§ 11-5.3. Posting of this Section upon Notice of Abatement. [Ord.
#007/05]
Within 10 days following receipt of a notice to abate an unlawful occupancy
in violation of this section or of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Guttenberg or prior to the institution of dispossession proceedings to
correct an illegal occupancy, whichever first occurs, the owner of the
residential premises within the Town of Guttenberg shall serve upon all of
the unlawful occupancy using or occupying said residential premises a copy
of the within section and shall post a copy of this section in a common area
of the premises accessible to all the occupancy thereof for inspection.
§ 11-5.4. Violation and Penalty.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine of up to $500 per day. Each twenty-four-hour period shall
be deemed a separate offense. The Construction Code Official shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this section.
§ 11-5.5. Responsibility for Moving Expenses. [Ord. #007/04]
In addition to the foregoing, any person convicted of violating the provisions
of Subsection 11-5.1 of this section shall be liable to the tenant of an
illegally used premises for the costs of moving, up to an amount not to
exceed six times the displaced person's monthly rent.
§ 11-5.6. Rent Placed in Escrow Account. [Ord. #007/04]
Upon written notification by the Construction Code Official that the
apartment is illegal, the landlord shall place all prospective rental income in
an interest-bearing escrow account until finalization of the municipal action.
For example, if the landlord is issued a summons on the 15th of the month
for an illegal apartment, the landlord is required prospectively from the
day of receipt of the summons, to deposit the prorated rental from the
remaining period of the month in escrow (interest-bearing account) for the
benefit of the tenant.
Additionally, all future rent payments shall be placed in escrow until
finalization of the Municipal Court action, and exhaustion of all appeals.
§ 11-5.7. Variance; Right to File. [Ord. #007/05]
a. Landlord shall have the right to file a variance application with the
Zoning Board of Adjustment relative to the illegal apartment. This
zoning application must be completed within 120 days of receipt of the
summons or the Municipal Court shall presumptively determine that
the landlord has waived this alternative remedy. During the zoning
appeal process, the landlord must deposit all monthly rental sums into
escrow per the provisions of this section.
§ 11-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-5.7
1:247
§ 11-5.8. Conviction of Violation of Section. [Ord. #007/05]
If the landlord is convicted of violating this section, he/she shall, upon
exhaustion of appeal periods, tender all sums in escrow plus any accrued
interest to the tenant.
§ 11-5.9. Failure to Have Committed Funds in Escrow Account.
[Ord. #007/05]
Failure to have committed the funds in escrow shall result in an Order
of Restitution, payable to the tenant by the landlord inclusive of statutory
interest. All restitution payments must be made within one year of
finalization of the appeal process.
§ 11-5.10. School Age Children Residing in Illegal Apartments.
[Ord. #007/05]
Upon conviction and exhaustion of all statutory appeal periods, the landlord
shall also be liable to the Town of Guttenberg, as an additional fine, the cost
of per pupil tuition chargeable by the Board of Education for each schoolage
child residing within said apartment who is enrolled in the Guttenberg
Public Schools. The actual per pupil dollar figure shall be equal to the per
pupil cost annually established by the Guttenberg Board of Education.
§ 11-5.11. Failure to Comply with Subsection 11-5.10. [Ord. #007/
05]
If the landlord fails to pay the additional penalty per Subsection 11-5.10
hereof within the time periods prescribed by the Municipal Judge which in
any event shall not exceed one year, the Court Clerk shall tender a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs (tuition) and the amount so due shall be
filed with the Tax Assessor or other custodian of the record tax liens and
with the Town Tax Collector as a lien against the fee estate. Upon docketing
of the lien, the Court Clerk shall be required to forward a certified copy of
the lien to the landlord per this section.
§ 11-5.12. Service of Lien. [Ord. #007/05]
A lien filed pursuant to this section shall be served upon the owner and/or
parties in interest either personally, evidenced by an Affidavit of Service, or
by certified mail, return receipt requested.
b. If the landlord is acquitted of the violation or, in the alternative, obtains
a variance from the Board of Adjustment to utilize this apartment, all
escrowed rental payments, inclusive of interest, shall be used for the
benefit of the landlord.
a. Proof of Escrow Account. The landlord shall have an affirmative
obligation to produce proof of this account to the Municipal Court Judge
on the return date of the section, violation.
§ 11-5.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-5.13
1:248
§ 11-5.13. Recording of Lien. [Ord. #007/05]
An original of the Order Liening the Fee Estate shall be duly recorded in the
Office of the County Clerk.
§ 11-5.14. Powers Conferred by this Section Supplemental to Other
Laws and Ordinances. [Ord. #007/05]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the Municipal Court of the Town or any department of the Town to
enforce any of the provisions of the Charter of the Town, or of its ordinances
or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violators thereof. The powers
conferred by this section shall be in addition and supplemental to the
powers conferred by any other law or ordinance.
§ 11-5.15. Severability. [Ord. #007/05]
Any sentence, clause or other portion of this section or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be adjudged by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
impair or repeal the remainder of this section.
§ 11-5.16. Section to Be Liberally Construed. [Ord. #007/05]
This section being necessary for the welfare of the Town and inhabitants
shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 11-6. LOCKING MECHANISM IN RESIDENTIAL ONE- AND TWOFAMILY
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.
§ 11-6.1. Locking Mechanism Prohibition. [Ord. #22-13]
Locking mechanisms such as dead bolt, dead latch, dead lock, and mortise
locks are prohibited in all dwelling units within residential one- and twofamily
dwellings and all multiple dwellings with the exception of the
dwelling unit entrance doors, cellar entrance door and storage areas.
§ 11-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. #22-13]
DEAD LATCH — Shall mean a locking device, usually spring-operated, that
incorporates a feature to render the latch rigid in its locked position and
incapable of release by prying or by the turning of an outside doorknob or
handle or similar door-opening device.
DEAD LOCK — Shall mean a locking device incorporating a lock that cannot
be pushed or retracted into a door by the use of tools inserted between the
frame of the door and the door itself. Except as otherwise indicated, a dead
lock may be equipped with a dead bolt or dead latch.
DEADBOLT — Shall mean a locking device using a fixed bolt that, when
in the locked position, cannot be retracted by a doorknob or handle or
§ 11-5.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6.2
1:249
other normal door opening device or by the application of force against the
penetrating end of bolt.
DWELLING UNITS — Shall mean a room or rooms, suite(s) or apartment(s)
that are occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling
purposes by one or more persons.
MORTISE LOCK — Shall mean a lock mortised into a door, rather than
applied to its surface.
§ 11-6.3. Penalty. [Ord. #22-13]
Failure of the owner or landlord to comply with the provisions of this section
shall subject the owner, tenant and/or landlord to a fine not exceeding
$1,000.
§ 11-7. HEATING FACILITIES.
§ 11-7.1. Facilities Required. [Ord. No. 25-2016]
Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
§ 11-7.2. Residential Occupancies. [Ord. No. 25-2016]
Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a
room temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking
appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented fuel-burning space
heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating.
§ 11-7.3. Heat Supply. [Ord. No. 25-2016]
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied,
to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period
from October 15 to April 15 to maintain a minimum temperature of 68° F.
(20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
§ 11-7.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 25-2016]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, § 1-5.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this section, and each day the same
is violated, shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 11-8. CRANE REGULATIONS.
§ 11-6.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-8.1
1:250
§ 11-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 30-2016]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — Shall mean the Crane Operators License Advisory Board
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Shall mean certification from the National Commission
for the Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSIONER — Shall mean the Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — As used in this section, shall be defined in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 through 45:26-17 (Licensure of Crane Operators Act),
hereafter referred to as the Crane Operator Licensure Act and the 1926
OSHA Crane and Derricks in Construction also known as OSHA Subpart CC.
CRANE OPERATOR — Shall mean an individual engaged in the operation of
a crane.
CRANE RELATED EXPERIENCE — Shall mean operating, inspecting,
training and maintenance experience acceptable to the board.
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — Shall mean an examination demonstrating
the applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of
crane. Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
categories: the lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC), lattice boom truck
cranes (LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, Swing Cab) & (TSS, Fixed Cab),
tower cranes and overhead cranes.
§ 11-8.2. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 30-2016]
a. Five days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the Town of Guttenberg, a
permit shall be obtained. In emergent situations the Building Inspector
may waive this requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator
meets the balance of the requirements of this section.
b. The permit will be maintained with the Town of Guttenberg as well as
with the crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be
produced on the work site when requested.
c. The following documents must be provided to the Town of Guttenberg
in order to be granted a permit:
1. Copy of crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO);
§ 11-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.2
1:251
§ 11-8.3. Crane Operators; Requirements. [Ord. No. 30-2016]
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP);
(c) Crane Institute of America Certification.
2. New Jersey Crane License.
3. Current Medical Examiner's Card.
4. A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection; (Crane
owner).
5. Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily Injury:
(1) For any one person in the amount of $500,000.
(2) For any occurrence in the amount of $1,000,000.
(b) Property Damage:
(1) For any one accident in the amount of $500,000.
(2) For any aggregate of occurrences in the amount of
2,000,000.
6. Proof that crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program.
7. Proof of completion of Signal Person Qualification or Certification
course.
8. Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance
with the requirements of this section, the Building Department
shall issue or deny the requested permit within five business days.
If the application is denied the reasons for the denial are furnished
to the application in writing.
a. Licensure of Crane Operators, Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-7.
1. No person shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself for
employment as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act,
present or represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as
such under the provisions of this Act [N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 et seq.]
2. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for
which the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice
boom crawler crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT),
telescopic boom cranes (TLL, Swing Cab) & (TSS, Fixed Cab),
tower cranes and overhead cranes.
§ 11-8.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-8.3
1:252
§ 11-8.4. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 30-2016]
The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each permit is valid for 60
days and may be extended and/or renewed provided that compliance with
the requirements of this section continues to be met. Fee for an extended or
renewal permit is $50.
§ 11-8.5. Notification of Accident or Safety Issue — Required. [Ord.
No. 30-2016]
The owner of the building shall immediately notify the Town of Guttenberg
of every accident causing personal injury or damage to property involving
a construction crane covered by this section and shall afford the municipal
official every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident
involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the
apparatus, it shall be unlawful to use such device until after an examination
by the Town of Guttenberg is made and approval of the equipment for
continued use is granted. It shall be the duty of the Town of Guttenberg to
make a prompt examination into the cause of the accident and to enter a full
and complete report thereof in the records of the Town of Guttenberg. Such
records shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours.
§ 11-8.6. Safety Equipment — Required; Inspections. [Ord. No.
30-2016]
3. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the Town of
Guttenberg, an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
(a) Be at least 18 years of age;
(b) Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization
found by the board to offer an equivalent testing and
certification program meeting the requirements of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME B30.5 and
the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies;
(c) Have at least 1,000 hours of crane-related experience; and
(d) Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
The crane operator should reside in the Town of Guttenberg.
If not, they should reside in the same County as the Town of
Guttenberg is located. The crane operator must reside in New
Jersey.
a. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
b. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
§ 11-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.6
1:253
§ 11-8.7. Administration; Enforcement. [Ord. No. 30-2016]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Town of Guttenberg
Building Department.
§ 11-8.8. Unsafe Cranes. [Ord. No. 30-2016]
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to properly working order.
c. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Town of
Guttenberg must be adhered to at all times.
d. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee if such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month.
Such inspection shall include but not be limited to all blocks, shackles,
sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master
boom, controls and breaking mechanisms.
e. A written, dated and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
Town of Guttenberg. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a
written designation naming the competent employee or authorized
agent. Such attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee
of such.
f. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
g. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
a. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which involves inadequate
maintenance shall be deemed in unsafe condition by the Municipal
Engineer. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or removed or made
safe, as the Municipal Engineer deems necessary and as provided for in
this section.
b. The Municipal Engineer shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
crane. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
c. If an unsafe condition is found, the Municipal Engineer shall serve on
the owner, agent or person in control of the crane, a written notice that
describes the condition being unsafe and specifies the required repairs
or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition. Such notice
shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the
Municipal Engineer exceptions or rejection of the terms of the order.
§ 11-8.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 11-8.8
1:254
§ 11-8.9. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 30-2016]
Chapter 12
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 12-1. DEFINITIONS.16 [Ord. 5/5/80 § 1]
As used in this chapter:
HOUSING SPACE — Shall mean any building, housing complex, garden
apartment structure or trailer, permanent or temporary, or any part thereof,
and all other real or personal property related thereto, which is rented or
offered for rent as a residence, home sleeping place, or lodging place, and
d. Such order shall be deemed properly served if a copy is delivered to the
owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail addressed to
the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested.
If a certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter has
not been delivered, a copy shall be posed in a conspicuous place in or on
the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the
foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the crane shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
e. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the Municipal Engineer may
be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or
additions are made during restoration of such equipment, such repairs,
alterations or additions shall comply with all applicable codes.
f. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
an order to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment in accordance with this section.
a. Any person who operates a crane without meeting the requirements of
this section or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 and no more than $10,000 for
each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
b. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than
$20,000 for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
16.Editor's Note: For the purposes of Section 12-1, Definitions, it is hereby clarified and
confirmed that from the inception of this chapter, the term "landlord resides in one of the
units" requires residence by a substantial beneficial owner thereof in order to exempt the
premises from rent control and to make the chapter inapplicable, under the section. The
term "Landlord" as defined in Section 12-1 refers to persons leasing or in control of
premises, once the Rent Control Ordinance becomes applicable. This clarification was
adopted by Ord. 7/20/81.
§ 11-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1
1:255
includes all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, and all health and
recreational facilities, garage, connected with the use or occupancy of that
property. It does not include, and this chapter does not apply to:
LANDLORD — Shall mean an owner, lessor, sublessor, assignee, or other
person receiving or entitled to receive rent or any agent of a person
receiving or entitled to receive rent for use, rental or occupancy of housing
space, whether by written or oral lease, letting, or otherwise.
MAXIMUM RENT — Shall mean the maximum lawful consideration
allowable for the occupation, rental or use of housing space, which may
be expressed in terms of monthly rent and other charges or privileges,
however called or agreed to, including garage rent; fee for use of health or
recreational facilities, all of which are controlled hereunder.
PRICE INDEX — Shall mean the Consumer Price Index (all items) for
the region of the United States of which New Jersey is a part, published
periodically by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of
Labor.
RENT —
A hospital, nursing home, retirement home, asylum, or public
institution, college or school dormitory, or any charitable, educational,
or non-profit institution.
a.
A hotel or motel characterized by the customary hotel or motel services
such as, but not limited to, laundry and maid service, telephone,
switchboard, and front lobby desk, and use by transient lodgers. Steady
or prolonged use (three months or more) is subject to this chapter, even
though rent or cost is paid weekly, etc.
b.
c. Public housing, or that related to any governmental entity.
One-family detached houses, condominiums and cooperative housing
developments (after initial sale); provided, however, that any tenant
who resides in a condominium or cooperative unit, either prior to
the recording of the master deed or the lawful establishment of the
cooperative development, shall be entitled to the protection of this
chapter.
d.
Premises (in addition to d above) wherein there are five units or less
and the landlord resides in one of the units. Housing accommodations,
newly constructed and rented for the first time, are exempted. The
initial rent may be determined by negotiations between landlord and
tenant. All subsequent rentals will be subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
e.
Caretaker or superintendent, wherein substantially all rent is paid for
by services, maintenance, security or upkeep, with or without some
salary or other arrangement.
f.
BASE RENT — Shall mean the maximum rent price, cost or rental for
housing space established (a) on January 1, 1980, or (b) on bona fide
a.
§ 12-1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 12-1
1:256
TENANT — Shall mean a lessee or other person who pays rent (in whatever
form) for use, rental, or occupation of housing space, and related garage,
services and facilities.
TOTAL RENTAL AND HOUSING ARRANGEMENT — Shall mean all the
rental, terms, obligations, conditions, rights and privileges of the landlord
and tenant regarding rental and use of housing space, including but not
limited to:
rental for the first time after that date, (c) or as established pursuant to
this chapter or otherwise by law hereafter. After each rent increase of
"base rent", the increased rent becomes the new "base rent".
It shall include as part of "base rent" regular or periodic increases
hereafter based upon the cost of living; or based upon capital
improvements (if so ordered by the Rent Control Board) or based upon
serious economic hardship (if so ordered by the Rental Board).
It shall not include fluctuating influences such as any tax surcharge;
fuel surcharge or other temporary or special relief.
TOTAL RENT — Shall mean base rent, plus any additional rent
allowable under this chapter or other law, such as tax surcharge, when
allowable; heating oil surcharge, when allowable; or other rent or rent
increase allowable hereunder.
Cost of living increases shall be calculated only on base rent, not on
total rent, unless otherwise ordered by the Rent Control Board or other
competent authority.
b.
RENTAL STATEMENT — Shall mean a full statement of base rent; other
rent; and total rent; and all other costs and charges; and a statement
of the housing space, services and privileges, involving the total rental
and housing arrangement between landlord and tenant, that shall be
promptly given and signed (a) on demand of either party, (b) on demand
of the Rent Control Board or its agents, (c) on taking effect of any rent
increase or decrease.
c.
a. Exact space rented and used or occupied.
Money or thing of value, paid or delivered as rent or other cost or
charges; and in what form, and for what period; shown as base rent and
all other rent.
b.
Additional health, recreational or other facilities, costs or charges,
rights, services or privileges enjoyed, such as basement storage space,
clothesline, garage, elevator, parking; yard or garden, washing or
drying machines or facilities, heat, hot water, security, painting and
decorating and similar terms and conditions.
c.
If a written lease is in existence, it shall serve as the initial rental
statement and proof of the total rental and housing arrangement,
unless contrary to this chapter or applicable law.
d.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1
1:257
§ 12-2. RENT CONTROL REGULATIONS. [Ord. 5/5/80 § 2; Ord. No.
13-2018]
Other terms shall be defined in the following sections concerned.
a. Established. Based upon the shortage of adequate housing at
reasonable rents, and need for housing space and reasonable controls
relating thereto, in the exercise of the Police power and to protect
public health, safety and welfare, rent control is hereby established in
Guttenberg for all housing space and all housing space rentals covered
by this chapter, as of January 1, 1980. All rentals and related services
and privileges in the total rental and housing arrangement shall be
maintained at the same base rent.
b. Base Rent. Such rentals as were established by bona fide renting
arrangements, in whatever form, of housing space in Guttenberg,
covered under this chapter, are hereby controlled, as of January 1,
1980, and no additional rent, cost or charges may be lawfully collected
hereafter without authority under this chapter. The lawful rental
actually paid rather than a stated lease rent which is partially waived or
conceded, shall be the lawful controlled base and maximum rent
hereunder.
c. Basic Policy. It is the intent and policy of this chapter that normally the
base rent shall command and pay for the normal total rental and
housing arrangement covering the particular housing space in
Guttenberg.
d. Special Rental Action.
1. In addition to normal cost of living rental increases, hereafter
provided for; and any other Town wide across-the-board rent
increases that may be authorized hereunder for tax surcharge, fuel
surcharge or the like, application for "special rental action" may be
made at any time by landlord or tenant under Section 12-3 hereof
to increase or decrease rent or applicable obligations, terms,
facilities, privileges or services.
2. Such special rental action shall require prior order of the Rent
Control Board which shall act only for good cause shown, after
notice and opportunity to be heard and furnish proofs (oral hearing
only on leave granted) in the following situations:
(a) Landlord has materially reduced services, facilities, privileges,
maintenance of the premises, or other attributes of the total
rental and housing arrangement, beyond reasonable ordinary
wear and tear.
(b) Tenant or its subtenants (children, etc.) have abused the
premises or have failed to clean the rental portion of the
premises, or defaced same or the property, or have conducted
§ 12-1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 12-2
1:258
themselves in such loud or disorderly or unpleasant manner as
to disturb other tenants or otherwise have disturbed the quiet
enjoyment of the premises or the neighborhood.
(c) Such unforeseen economic factors as constitute a serious
hardship on the landlord, unless some reasonable rent increase
is granted.
(d) Such other special unforeseen circumstances as would require
adjustment of the rent upward or downward to prevent great
hardship or injustice.
(e) Major necessary capital improvements to the premises made
subsequent to this chapter.
(f) All such applications shall be made in writing stating the total
rental and housing arrangement, a clear detailing of the
special circumstances with supporting proofs; the amount of
increase or decrease requested with all reasons therefor; and a
request for hearing if testimony is required, and shall be filed
30 days before the requested effective date of increase or
decrease.
e. Existing Leases and Options to Renew. The terms and provisions,
insofar as concerns base rent payments in existing leases and options to
renew such leases agreed to prior to January 1, 1980, shall continue in
full force and effect until the termination of the lease or option period.
All new leases or renewals offered or executed or to commence
thereafter, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The base
rent level in leased rented housing space shall be the rent in effect at
the expiration after January 1, 1980 of such lease term or renewal after
which date the tenant may remain under lease or as a monthly tenant,
and the premises shall thenceforth remain subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
f. Application to Certain Lease Clauses. All tax adjustment, fuel or other
rent escalation and rent adjustment clauses in existing leases shall be
subject to the provisions of this ordinance in their prospective
application, as to future renewals after January 1, 1980.
g. Permitted Rent Increase. Increases in annual rent are permitted as
follows:
1. 3% annual increase is permitted where the landlord provides NO
utilities to Tenant (i.e. heat, electric).
2. 3.5% annual increase is permitted where the Landlord provides
utilities to Tenant.
3. If the Tenant is a Qualified Senior or Disabled person the Landlord
may increase the annual rent by 2.5% or Consumer Price Index
("CPI"), whichever is less. In determining whether a person
§ 12-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:259
qualifies as a senior citizen or disabled person under this section,
such person shall be required to satisfy the criteria as set forth in
the Senior Citizens and Disabled Persons Protective Tenancy Act,
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq. Qualification for eligibility for senior
citizens and disabled person status:
(1) In determining whether a person qualifies as a senior citizen or
disabled person under this section, such person shall be
required to satisfy the criteria as set forth in the Senior
Citizens and Disabled Persons Protective Tenancy Act, N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.22, et seq.
(2) All persons seeking to qualify as senior citizens or disabled
persons shall complete application forms provided by the Rent
Control Board.
(3) The determination as to eligibility shall be made by the Rent
Control Board within 60 days after the receipt of a complete
application.
(4) Hearings by the Rent Control Board on applications for
eligibility shall be held in closed session with only the affected
landlord and tenant and their agents in attendance. All data
utilized at such hearing shall be held in strict confidence at the
request of the tenant.
(5) Once a tenant obtains initial eligibility, said tenant must certify
at the expiration of every two years thereafter as to his/her
continued eligibility. Such certification forms shall be provided
by the Rent Control Board.
(6) Said certification must be completed by an eligible tenant not
less than three months prior to lease-renew or annual rent
increase.
(7) For good cause shown, a landlord may apply to the Rent
Control Board for a hearing on the question of a tenant's
eligibility at the anniversary date of such tenant's eligibility
after the initial two-year period of eligibility.
h. Frequency and Maximum Percentage of Increase. Such increase shall
be deemed a basic economic cost of living increase, and shall be limited
to one such increase if otherwise justified, in anyone twelve-month
period after July 1, 1980 and without prejudice to any other rent
increase provided hereunder, but all increases together, for any reason
whatsoever, cannot exceed 9.5% in any one year after July 1, 1980,
subject to special cases under Section 12-3 hereof.
All subsequent rent increases; and calculations regarding increases in
the Consumer Price Index; fuel oil costs, and the like, will commence
or be calculated or compared from the date of the last rent increase
§ 12-2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 12-2
1:260
received hereunder, as near as may be. Tax increases will be calculated
on an annual basis.
i. Tax Surcharges. A landlord may seek 90% surcharge from a tenant
because of an increase in municipal property taxes if such taxes are
$100 in excess of those assessed for the 1980 tax year. The landlord
shall divide the increase in the current property tax over the property
tax for the 1980 tax year by:
1. Determining the total number of rentable square feet in the
dwelling (excluding halls, stairs, basement or the like) to obtain the
tax increase per square foot of rentable space. The tenant shall not
be liable for a tax surcharge exceeding 90% of the tax increase per
square foot of rentable space multiplied by the number of square
feet occupied by the tenant, or
2. Determining the total number of rooms in the dwelling available for
rent to obtain the tax increase per room. The tenant shall not be
liable for a tax surcharge exceeding the tax increase per room,
multiplied by the number of rooms occupied by the tenant.
3. Tenant shall pay the lower of the two tax surcharge rent increase
calculations.
4. Any landlord seeking a tax surcharge shall notify the tenant and the
board in writing of the calculations involved in computing the tax
surcharge, including the present amount of municipal property tax
for the dwelling, the amount of municipal property tax for the
dwelling for the year 1980, and
(a) The total number of rentable square feet in the dwelling, the
tax increase per square foot of rentable space, the number of
square feet occupied by the tenant and the maximum allowable
tax surcharge, or
(b) The total number of rooms in the dwelling available for rent,
the tax increase per room, the number of rooms occupied by
the tenant, and the maximum allowable tax surcharge.
5. Tax Surcharge Payments; Installments; Time Payable. The Tax
surcharge for which each tenant may be liable, shall be paid in 12
equal monthly installments, each being 1/12 of the total annual
surcharge, such payments commencing July 1 of each year. The tax
surcharge shall not be considered part of base rent for the purpose
of computing cost of living increases, but shall be paid separate in
addition to the base rent, whenever authorized.
6. Reduction in Municipal Property Taxes. In cases in which the
tenant has paid the tax surcharge, the tenant shall be entitled to a
tax rebate in the event of a reduction in municipal property taxes.
The landlord shall compute the rebate to which the tenant may be
entitled by use of the same formula as set forth above in computing
§ 12-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:261
§ 12-3. SPECIAL RENTAL ACTION APPLICATIONS FOR RENT
INCREASE OR DECREASE. [Ord. 5/5/80 § 3]
a tax surcharge. Payment thereof shall be made in the form of a
credit against the monthly rent or of a check made payable to the
tenant.
7. Tax Appeal by Landlord. In the event a tax appeal is taken by the
landlord and the landlord is successful in such appeal and the taxes
are reduced, the tenant shall receive 60% of the reduction as
applied to his portion of rentable space footage or the number of
rooms occupied by the tenant calculated as above set forth.
j. Fuel Oil Surcharge. Similar fuel oil surcharge shall be allowable to the
extent of 90% of the increase in future years over 1980 of annual fuel oil
costs, provided such increase is more than $100. In such case, fuel oil
surcharge shall be allowable, but shall not constitute part of base rent.
a. Hardship Increases. In the event of hardship or inability to make a fair
return on the landlord's actual investment, or if a landlord cannot meet
his mortgage and interest payments and maintenance requirements, he
may apply to the Rent Control Board for additional increased rental.
The Board may grant the landlord a hardship rent increase to meet
these payments. Prior to any such application to the Board, a landlord
shall serve upon each tenant a true copy of each application, setting
forth the basis in detail for such application, and a true copy thereof
shall be served at least one month prior to any hearing thereon.
b. Major Capital Improvements or Services. A landlord may seek
additional rent for major capital improvements or services. The
landlord shall compute the average cost of the improvement or service
per year of useful life by dividing the cost of the completed capital
improvement or service by the number of years of useful life of the
improvement, as claimed by the landlord for income tax depreciation
purposes, or other proper method. The landlord shall apportion the
average cost of the completed improvement service per year of useful
life among the tenants in the dwelling, in accordance with the formula
set forth in Section 12-2i hereof for computing a tax surcharge. The
latter method shall be used when the Board determines that the benefit
of the improvement or service is essentially equally shared by all
tenants regardless of the amount of space occupied. If such increase is
granted, it shall not be considered base rent or calculated in the cost of
living increase.
c. Maximum Yearly Percentage Allowable. Increases in rent due to
hardship applications and/or major capital improvements or service
applications, singly or combined, shall be limited to a maximum of 9.5%
of the existing base rent in any one twelve-month period, at all events.
d. Rehabilitated Dwellings Substantially Rebuilt. Rehabilitated dwellings
offered for rent in newly rehabilitated condition, after the effective date
§ 12-2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 12-3
1:262
§ 12-4. RENT CONTROL BOARD.
§ 12-4.1. Establishment of a Rent Control Board. [Ord. 5/5/80 § 4;
Ord. 6/2/86 § 1; Ord. #001/06]
There is hereby created a Rent Control Board in the Town of Guttenberg.
Such board will consist of seven members, who shall be appointed by the
Board of Council by resolution, adopted by a majority vote, and their terms
of office shall be for a period of one year each, with each member serving
without compensation.
of this ordinance, shall be exempt from rent controls set forth herein
until a bona fide base rent has been established, provided the costs
of rehabilitation exceed 1/2 of either the undepreciated cost or the
fair market value of the dwelling prior to rehabilitation, and the
rehabilitation was necessary and substantial.
e. Rent Reduction Appeal; Decline in Care and Services. Whenever
services, care or maintenance materially decline in any dwelling, any
tenant may apply to the Rent Control Board for a decrease or reduction
in rent. True copy of such notice shall be served upon the landlord and
all other tenants in such building simultaneously setting forth in detail
the reasons for such application. At least one month shall elapse prior
to the date fixed for hearing thereon.
f. Tenant may appeal rental or increase on the grounds that landlord
receives excessive return on actual investment.
g. Procedure for Hearings and Determinations. The Rent Control Board,
upon any application, or on its own motion, may set an oral hearing
date, consider proof, and grant, deny, modify and otherwise adjust any
and all rentals, rent increases, rent decreases or reductions, rent status
or adjustments, as well as make such determinations concerning any
and all conditions, services, equipment, terms and related matters
pertaining to rentals and controlled premises. All persons shall have
notice and an opportunity to be heard, before decision, but oral hearing
shall be held only on request, and granted by Rent Control Board, if
facts exist, or may be on the written record, if only documents and
argument are involved.
h. Order of Board Required for Rent Increase. No landlord may request,
demand, receive or obtain any rent increase nor shall any tenant be
obligated to pay any rent increase, unless and until the landlord and the
tenant are in receipt of an order to that effect by the Rent Control
Board, setting forth in detail the amount of the existing base rental, the
percentage or amount of rent increase allowed, any conditions; the new
rental amount including the increase; and the effective date of such
increase; all of which shall be in the discretion of the Rent Control
Board.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.2
1:263
§ 12-4.2. Powers of the Rent Control Board. [Ord. 5/5/80 § 4; Ord.
#001/97]
The Rent Control Board is hereby granted, and shall have and exercise
all the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the
purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to the following:
§ 12-5. COMPLIANCE. [Ord. 5/5/80 § 6; Ord. #014/04]
a. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the use of subpoenas. Such rules and regulations shall have
the force of law, until revised, repealed or amended, by the Board of
Council in the exercise of its discretion, provided that such rules and
regulations are first filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
b. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to aid
and assist them in complying with the provisions of this chapter.
c. To consider and decide all applications and proceedings under this
chapter.
d. To investigate and secure compliance; and to have all access to all
books, records, and materials necessary to function under this
ordinance.
e. To exercise such other powers as necessary to administer and enforce
this chapter and all orders and decisions relating thereto.
f. A quorum for a hearing shall consist of at least three members, and a
majority of the quorum shall be authorized to issue orders relating to
the powers and functions of the Board. The Board shall give both
landlords and tenants reasonable opportunity, with or without counsel,
to be heard before making any determination and may grant oral
hearings on applications if the cause requires same.
a. Landlord to Maintain All Reasonable Standards of Service,
Maintenance, etc. During the time this chapter is in force and effect,
the landlord shall maintain all reasonable standards of service,
maintenance, furniture, furnishings, use and equipment in the housing
space and dwelling as he provided or was required to maintain by law
or lease at the date the lease or tenancy was entered into or
commenced, or on January 1, 1980.
b. Compliance Required in Rental Increases. No landlord shall receive or
charge any rents in excess of that which he was receiving or charging
on January 1, 1980, except for rental increases as authorized by this
chapter, or as otherwise provided herein.
c. All rent increases shall be rounded upward or downward to the nearest
half-dollar.
§ 12-4.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 12-5
1:264
§ 12-6. DECONTROL. [Ord. 5/5/80 § 7]
d. Liberal Construction of Chapter. This chapter being deemed necessary
and essential for the health, safety and welfare of the Town and its
inhabitants, shall be generally construed to effectuate the purposes
thereof. If any provision is invalidated or limited, all other provisions
shall be deemed severable and in full effect.
e. Compliance with State Law. No rent increase shall be granted until all
requirements of law are fulfilled by the landlord.
f. Denial for Nonpayment of Taxes, Liens. In any application for any
increase of rent filed by a landlord who has failed to make payment of
any municipal real estate taxes, assessments or municipal liens on such
premises that may be due and owing to the Town, the Board shall hold
such application in abeyance until there has been compliance herewith
and current tax payment.
g. All dwellings which are subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
file by October 1, 2004 and each year thereafter on October 1 of that
year, a registration statement and a filing fee of $25 with the Rent
Leveling Board. This registration statement shall include the following
information to be provided on a form supplied by the Rent Leveling
Board; the name of each tenant and the apartment number; the number
of rooms for each apartment; the current rent for each apartment; the
amount of the last increase for each apartment unit; the date of the last
increase for each apartment unit; the address of the owner of the
building and his or her telephone number; and the superintendent's
name, address and phone number, if applicable. This annual
registration statement must be filed by October 1, 2004 and each
anniversary date thereafter. Failure to register or reregister or false
registrations shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. A copy of
the annual registration statement shall be presented to any tenant upon
demand.
h. For the purpose of disclosure, the registration statement shall be
considered a public document which shall be made available for
inspection pursuant to reasonable regulations established by the Rent
Leveling Board.
a. Any dwelling unit needed as a bona fide dwelling by a landlord or his
immediate family (child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, stepchild,
brother or sister) shall become exempt from rent control, provided the
family member actually resides or wishes to reside therein (without
limitation as to number of units needed). If the family member vacates
within one year, the old tenant forced to vacate, shall receive the
difference between new rent and old rent for balance of one year that
premises were not occupied by family member.
b. Landlord or buyer shall give 45 days' notice of need of apartment or
housing space, with full particulars including names, present
§ 12-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:265
§ 12-7. PENALTIES. [Ord. 5/5/80 § 8]
Besides being limited as to rentals and other provisions, each violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the
filing with the Rent Control Board or the Board of Council of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. A violation affecting more than one household or tenancy shall
be considered a separate violation as to each leasehold or tenancy, and each
month shall constitute a new separate violation.
§ 12-8. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE. [Ord. #1994-05 §§ I-IV; Ord.
#005/02; Ord. No. 05-2018]
addresses, relationship and all circumstances, and requesting
possession and advising that after a particular date, the premises will
no longer be under rent control.
c. Such provision shall not exempt owner from serving other appropriate
notice to quit and demand for possession under State laws or
proceeding under State law for possession.
d. In the case of bona fide notice and need for the premises, the premises
shall thereafter be decontrolled, and any reasonable rent may be
charged thereafter, upon further subsequent notice of rent increase,
pursuant to State law.
a. A tenant who received a notice of eviction from an owner-landlord
because of zoning or code enforcement by the Town for an illegal
occupancy, deemed a "displaced person" by N.J.S.A. 20:4-1, et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g, shall be entitled to relocation assistance in an
amount equal to six times the displaced person's monthly rent from the
owner-landlord. The owner-landlord shall pay the relocation assistance
directly to the displaced person.
b. An additional fine for zoning or housing code violations for an illegal
occupancy may be assessed by the Town against the owner-landlord in
an amount up to six times the displaced person's monthly rent.
c. Upon a second or subsequent violation for an illegal occupancy, after
the opportunity for a hearing, an owner-landlord may be fined in an
amount equal to the annual tuition cost of any resident of the illegally
occupied unit attending a public school. This fine is in addition to the
fine set forth in paragraph b and shall be recovered in a civil action by
summary proceeding in the name of the Town of Guttenberg pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10, et seq. The Municipal Court and the Superior
Court shall have jurisdiction of the proceedings for the enforcement of
this penalty. The tuition cost shall be determined in the manner
prescribed for nonresident pupils, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:28-19 and
the payment of the fine shall be remitted to the Town's school district.
§ 12-6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 12-8
1:266
Chapter 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 13-1. INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
d. For purposes of this section, the owner-landlord of a structure shall not
include mortgagees in possession of a structure through foreclosure.
e. For purposes of this section, a "second or subsequent violation for an
illegal occupancy," as set forth in paragraph c., shall be limited to those
violations that are new and a result of distinct and separate zoning or
code enforcement activities and shall not include any continuing
violations for which citations are issued by a zoning or Code
enforcement agency during the time period required for summary
dispossession proceedings to conclude if the owner has initiated
eviction proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction.
f. The Town of Guttenberg shall not be responsible for the payment of
relocation assistance to any tenant who is deemed a displaced person
as a result of this section.
g. The Construction Code Official shall be responsible for all inspections,
regulations and enforcement.
h. The Town may provide by resolution that where a resident is displaced
from his/her dwelling by fire or other emergency, and the damage
resulting from the fire or other emergency in the judgment of the
housing inspector or other official charged with equivalent
responsibility, is such as to render the dwelling uninhabitable, the
resident shall be deemed a displaced person under the "Relocation
Assistance Act" and shall be eligible for relocation assistance as
afforded persons displaced as a result of code enforcement activities.
State appropriations of relocation assistance shall not be used for this
purpose unless specifically permitted by language in the annual
appropriations act.
i. Repayment to Town by Owner-Landlord. All relocation assistance costs
incurred by the Town pursuant to this section shall be repaid by the
owner-landlord of the structure to the Town in the same manner as
relocation costs are billed and collected under Section 1 of P.L. 1983, c.
536 (N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1) and Section 1 of P.L. 1984, c. 30 (N.J.S.A.
20:4-4.2). These repayments shall be deposited into the municipality's
revolving relocation assistance fund.
j. Creation of Revolving Relocation Assistance Fund. The Town shall
create a revolving relocation assistance fund to be funded in such
amount as may be determined by the Town.
§ 12-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.1
1:267
§ 13-1.1. Adoption of Existing Structure Code.17 [Ord. #2/7/90 § 1;
#028/00; Ord. #010/06]
The International Property Maintenance Code shall be and is hereby
adopted as the Existing Structures Code of the Town for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part thereof.
§ 13-1.2. (Reserved)18
§ 13-2. HOUSEHOLD WASTE.
§ 13-2.1. Discarding Along Street Prohibited. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street, on
or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste, rubbish,
refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances, furniture or
private property, except by written consent of the owner of the property, in
any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage
or disposal.
§ 13-2.2. Storage Prohibited; Exception. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 4]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential except in a fully
enclosed structure or during days designated for the collection of bulky
items.
§ 13-2.3. Disposal of Mattress or Box Springs. [Ord. No. 17-2017]
a. Mattresses and box springs that are placed curbside for bulk collection
shall be completely wrapped in plastic or placed in disposable plastic
bags. Plastic wrapping or plastic bags must be sufficient to cover all
exposed areas of the mattress and box spring. The plastic wrapping
and/or disposable plastic bags are required to avoid, to the greatest
extent possible, Town employees from coming into contact with
bedbugs or bedbug-infested materials.
b. Furniture, mattresses or box springs or other items placed curbside for
bulk collection that are not wrapped or infested with bedbugs, may be
refused pickup for bulk collection in the absolute discretion of the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his designee.
17.Editor's Note: A copy of the International Property Maintenance Code is on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.
18.Editor's Note: Former subsection 13-1.2, Additions, Insertions and Charges, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ord. 2/7/90 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 010/06.
§ 13-1.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 13-3
1:268
§ 13-3. VEHICLES.
§ 13-3.1. Parking on Lawns Prohibited. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 6]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to park or permit the
parking of any vehicle on his or her residential lawn.
§ 13-3.2. Inoperable Vehicles. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on streets,
vacant lots and residential lawns except in a fully enclosed structure, any
motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, which is (a) missing tires, wheels,
engine or other parts essential to its operation or (b) which displays
extensive body damage or deterioration; or (c) which does not display
a current, valid State license; or (d) which is wrecked, disassembled or
partially disassembled.
§ 13-4. TIRES.
§ 13-4.1. Storage Prohibited; Exception. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 5]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed
structure or on days designated for the collection of tires.
§ 13-5. CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.
§ 13-5.1. Accumulation Prohibited. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 9]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after the completion of any construction or demolition project.
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate all debris
or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain and
empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as to
prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 13-6. WASTE DISPOSAL BINS.
§ 13-6.1. Overflow Prohibited. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 10]
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 13-6.2. Portable On-Demand Storage Container. [Ord. #002/06]
An application shall be filled out for a placement of a portable on demand
storage container if requested by a resident of the Town of Guttenberg.
Said container shall mean to include all on-site storage containers utilized
in the relocation of household furniture or other items. Said container must
§ 13-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-6.2
1:269
be placed in an approved designated legal parking spot in front of the
applicant's residence. Said container may not obstruct the roadway nor
the sidewalk. All applications shall be approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee. A $75 fee will be charged for each container and the
permit shall be for three days.
§ 13-6.3. Storage of Refuse Receptacles. [Ord. #02-14]
Refuse receptacles shall be stored only in areas designated for storage
between garbage collections. They shall be placed adjacent to the curb in
front of the premises, or other area designated for collection no earlier than
6:00 p.m. on the day before collection and shall be promptly returned to
the storage area upon collection. Refuse receptacles shall not be stored on
sidewalks or areas in front of any buildings or houses between collection
days.
§ 13-7. PENALTY. [Ord. No. 13-2015; Ord. No. 09-2016]
Each person violating Sections 13-1 through 13-6 of the provisions of this
chapter, shall, upon first conviction, be liable to a penalty of $100. Any
second or subsequent conviction shall be liable to the penalty as stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 13-8. REGISTRATION OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGE PROPERTY.19
§ 13-8.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 23-2017]
It is the purpose and intent of the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Guttenberg to establish a process to address the deterioration, crime and
decline in value of Town neighborhoods caused by properties with defaulted
mortgages located within the Town of Guttenberg, and to identify, regulate,
limit and reduce the number of these properties located within the Town.
It is the Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg's further intent
to establish a registration requirement as a mechanism to protect
neighborhoods from the negative impact and conditions that occur as a
result of vacancy, lack of adequate maintenance and security and will
provide a method to expeditiously identify a contact person for each
property responsible for this protection.
It is not the intent of this section to determine the rights and liabilities of
persons under agreements to which the Town is not a party. This section
shall not be construed to alter the terms of any lease or other agreement
between a landlord and a tenant or others relating to property that is
the subject of this section; provided that no provision of any lease or
other agreement shall be construed to excuse compliance with this section.
Additionally, a violation of this section shall not in and of itself create a
negligence per se standard or otherwise expand existing liability in tort for
either a landlord or a tenant.
19.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 2014-15.
§ 13-6.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 13-8.2
1:270
§ 13-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 23-2017]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — Shall mean a property that is
accessible through a comprised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a
structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow
access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — Shall mean to include, but not be limited to, the
Town's Zoning Ordinance, the Town's Property Maintenance Ordinance,
Solid Waste Ordinance, Residential and Commercial Recycling Ordinance,
and the State and Town Building and Fire Codes.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — Shall mean:
DEFAULT — Shall mean that the mortgagor has not complied with the terms
of the mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence
of the debt, referred to in the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean any Law Enforcement Officer,
Building Official, Zoning Official, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector,
Building Inspector, or other person authorized by the Town to enforce the
applicable code(s).
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Shall mean any condition that on its own, or
combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person
to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but
are not limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility
notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris;
abandoned vehicles auto parts or materials; the absence of furnishings and/
or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of
an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers and/or mail, or statements by neighbors, passers-by,
delivery agents or government agents; or the presence of boards over doors,
windows or other openings in violation of applicable code.
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
a.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in
value of the neighboring properties; or
b.
c. Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Town Codes; or
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as
required by the applicable codes.
d.
§ 13-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-8.2
1:271
FORECLOSURE — Shall mean the legal process by which a mortgagee,
or other lien holder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of
redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged
as security for a debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition
shall include, but is not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu
of foreclosure, sale to the mortgagee or lien holder, certificate of title and
all other processes, activities and actions, by whatever name, associated
with the described process. The process is not concluded until the property
obtained by the mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of
title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an
arm's length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
MORTGAGEE — Shall mean the creditor, including but not limited to,
trustees; mortgage servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement;
any agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest;
or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the
mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity
who, individually or jointly or severally with others, holds the legal or
beneficial title to any building, facilities, equipment or premises subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall mean any improved residential or commercial
land, buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land,
or portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located in the Town limits. Developed lots are considered improved land.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY — Shall mean:
SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION — Shall mean six months from the date
of the first action that requires registration, as determined by the Town,
or its designee, and every subsequent six months. The date of the initial
registration may be different than the date of the first action that required
registration.
VACANT — Shall mean any parcel of land in the Town that contains any
building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human
Any real property located in the Town, whether vacant or occupied,
that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing
foreclosure action by the Mortgagee or Trustee, has been the subject
of a foreclosure action by a Mortgagee or Trustee and a Judgment
has been entered, or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where
the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in
the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale.
a.
The designation of a "default/foreclosure" property as "registrable"
shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a
non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the
foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage
has been cured.
b.
§ 13-8.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 13-8.2
1:272
beings as evidenced by the conditions set forth in the definition of "Evidence
of Vacancy" above which is without lawful tenant, or lawful occupant or
without a certificate of occupancy. Vacant property does not mean property
that is temporarily unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation,
personal matters or business, or is not intended by the owner to be left
vacant, so long as the period does not exceed 30 days.
§ 13-8.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 23-2017]
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to the Town above and beyond any other State or Town
provisions for same.
§ 13-8.4. Establishment of a Registry. [Ord. No. 23-2017]
Pursuant to the provisions of subsection 13-8.5, the Town or its designee,
shall establish a registry cataloging each Registrable Property within the
Town, containing the information required by this section.
§ 13-8.5. Registration of Defaulted Mortgage Real Property. [Ord.
No. 23-2017]
a. Any Mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the Town shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The Mortgagee
shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the
Code Enforcement Department, or its designee, on forms or other
manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or
occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether
it is found to be vacant or occupied.
b. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail
address for the Mortgagee/Trustee, and the Mortgage Servicer, and the
name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property who has the authority to make decisions concerning the
abatement of nuisance conditions at the property, as well as any
expenditure in connection therewith.
c. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this ordinance (Ordinance No. 23-2017, adopted October 23,
2017) have 30 calendar days from the effective date to register the
property with the Code Enforcement Department, or its designee, on
forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is
vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each
property, whether it is vacant or occupied.
d. If the mortgage on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the new
Mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this section. Any previous
§ 13-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-8.5
1:273
unpaid registration fees are the responsibility of the new Mortgagee or
Trustee and are due and payable with their initial registration. Except
if it is determined that the transferee is exempt from paying fees then
the previous mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility
of paying all previous unpaid fees and fines, regardless of who the
mortgagee was at the time when registration was required, including
but not limited to unregistered periods during the foreclosure process.
The provisions of this section are cumulative with and in addition to
other available remedies. Moreover, the Code Enforcement Department
is authorized and empowered to refer the previous mortgagee's nonpayment
of previous fees and fines to a court of competent jurisdiction
for disposition.
e. If the servicing rights for a mortgage on a registrable property are sold
or transferred, the registration must be updated to include all the new
Servicer information within 10 days of the servicing transfer.
f. If the Mortgagee owner of a foreclosed real property sells or transfers
the property to a non-arm's length related person or entity, the
transferee is subject to all the terms of this section and within five days
of the transfer register the property. Any previous unpaid registration
fees are the responsibility of the new Registrable property owner and
are due and payable with their initial registration. Except if it is
determined that the transferee is exempt from paying fees then the
previous mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility of
paying all previous unpaid fees and fines, regardless of who the
mortgagee was at the time when registration was required, including
but not limited to unregistered periods during the foreclosure process.
The provisions of this section are cumulative with and in addition to
other available remedies. Moreover, the Code Enforcement Department
is authorized and empowered to refer the previous mortgagee's nonpayment
of previous fees and fines to a court of competent jurisdiction
for disposition.
g. As long as the property is Registrable it shall be inspected by the
Mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change in
the property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of
that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property
registration.
h. A non-refundable registration fee of $500 shall accompany each
registration pursuant to this section.
i. If a lis pendens, deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, or other public notice of
foreclosure is filed on a property and the property was not registered
and the registration fee paid at least 30 days prior to the filing date, a
late fee of $100 shall be charged per property and shall be due and
payable with the registration. This section shall apply to the initial
registration and registration renewals. Registrations delinquent
greater than 30 days are subject to additional fines as described herein.
§ 13-8.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 13-8.5
1:274
§ 13-8.6. Penalty. [Ord. No. 23-2017]
j. All registration fees must be paid directly from the Mortgagee, Trustee,
Servicer, or Owner. Third Party Registration fees are not allowed
without the consent of the Town and/or its authorized designee.
k. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the semi-annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they are registrable.
l. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied, or
legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure, the filing
of a dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of final judgment and/or
certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any
Mortgagee holding the defaulted mortgage, from all the requirements
of this section as long as the borrower is in default.
m. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
n. Failure of the Mortgagee to properly register or to modify the
registration information from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this section is a violation of the section
and shall be subject to enforcement and any resulting monetary
penalties and/or property liens.
o. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this section, the Town may take the
necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
p. Properties subject to this section shall be in accordance with the
applicable code(s) of the Town.
a. Registration Violation. The penalty to a Mortgagee and/or Owner who is
out-of-state and has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose a Guttenberg residential property, but not appointed an instate
representative or agent pursuant to this section, shall be subject
to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation.
b. Code Violation. A Mortgagee and/or Owner subject to this section shall
be fined $1,500 for each day commencing on the 31st day after
receiving notice of a violation of the requirement to care, maintain, and
or provide proper security upkeep, issued by the Construction Code
Official or other authorized agent for the Town pursuant to this section.
§ 13-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-9
1:275
§ 13-9. MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS. [Ord. No. 13-2015; Ord.
No. 09-2016]
All sidewalks, steps, driveways, and similar paved areas for public use shall
be kept in good repair, and deteriorated, uprooted, cracked or dilapidated
sidewalks shall be repaired by the property owner. In the case where
the owner or his contractor replaces a portion of the sidewalk staying
in conformance with the International Property Maintenance Code or a
driveway apron, then such construction shall conform to the specifications
prepared by Guttenberg Building Department.
§ 13-10. MAINTENANCE OF TREES ON SIDEWALKS. [Ord. No.
13-2015; Ord. No. 09-2016]
§ 13-11. PENALTY. [Ord. 8/17/88 § 13; Ord. No. 29-11; Ord. No.
13-2015; Ord. No. 09-2016]
Any person found guilty of a violation of Section 13-9 and/or 13-10 of this
chapter shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 14
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 14-1. STATE UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
a. No person shall do any of the following acts upon any sidewalk or street
within the Town of Guttenberg without the written approval of the
Guttenberg Building Department:
1. Cut, trim, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots of, spray with
any chemical, remove or otherwise injure any living tree or shrub
or injure, misuse or remove any structure or device placed to
support or protect such tree or shrub.
2. Plant any tree or shrub.
3. Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign or other device to a
tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub.
4. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree
or shrub to permit the access of air, water fertilizer to the roots of
such tree or shrub.
5. Place any building material within six feet of a tree or shrub.
b. The Guttenberg Building Department shall give written approval to an
owner of a Guttenberg property to trim or remove any tree or shrub on
his or her property when that owner can prove to the Guttenberg
Construction Official that said tree or shrub is dead or no longer viable
and/or causing damage to the property of the Guttenberg owner.
§ 13-9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 14-1.1
1:276
§ 14-1.1. Local Enforcement. [Ord. 2/21/90 § 1]
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c 383), the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 14-1.2. Enforcement Agency. [Ord. 2/21/90 § 2; Ord. 4/3/91 § 1;
Ord. #016/99]
The local enforcement agency within the Town shall be the Fire Prevention
Bureau which is hereby created within the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 14-1.3. Duties of Enforcement Agency. [Ord. 2/21/90 § 3]
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Town other than owner
occupied one and two family dwellings and shall faithfully comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 14-1.4. Inspection of Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. 2/21/90 § 4]
The local enforcement agency established by subsection 14-1.2 of this
section shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required
by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community
Affairs.
§ 14-1.5. Organization. [Ord. 2/21/90 § 5; Ord. 4/3/91 § 2; Ord. #016/
99]
The local enforcement agency established by subsection 14-1.2 of this
section shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official
who will supervise all activities of the agency and who shall be responsible
for filing such reports of activities as may be required by law or regulation.
For administrative purposes, the Fire Official shall report to the
Councilperson in charge of the Fire Prevention Office.
§ 14-1.6. Appointment of Fire Official(s). [Ord. 2/21/90 § 6]
Fire Official(s) and or Fire Inspector(s), in numbers sufficient to effectively
carry out the duties of the local enforcement agency shall be appointed by
the Mayor and Board of Council for terms not to exceed one year.
§ 14-1.7. Appeals. [Ord. 2/21/90 § 7]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 27D-208) any person or persons aggrieved by any order
of the local enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Hudson.
§ 14-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.8
1:277
§ 14-1.8. Inspection and Fees. [Ord. 2/21/90 §§ 8, 10; Ord. 4/3/91
§ 3; Ord. #016/99; Ord. #012/00; Ord. #020/02; Ord. #012/04; Ord.
#25-11; Ord. #19-12; Ord. No. 05-2017]
a. In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Uniform
Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the Department of Community
Affairs, the following additional inspections and fees are hereby
established with inspection to take place once a year and with the
further requirement that these non-life hazard uses shall register with
the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Town of Guttenberg.
Annual Fee
Business Use Group
B-1 Under 2,500 square feet $50
B-2 2,500 to 4,900 square feet $100
B-3 5,000 to 9,999 square feet $125
B-4 10,000 and over square feet $180
Factory Use Group
F-1 Under 5,000 square feet $180
F-2 5,000 and over square feet $250
Mercantile Use Group
M-1 Under 6,000 square feet $100
M-2 6,000 to 11,999 square feet $250
Storage Use Group
S-1 Under 2,500 square feet $100
S-2 2,500 square feet and over $180
Residential Use Group
R-A non-owner occupied 1 and 2 units $25
R-B 3 to 6 units $75
R-C 7 to 12 units $125
R-D 13 to 20 units $250
R-E Over 20 units $600
Utilities Use Group
U-1 Under 2,500 square feet $100
U-2 2,500 and over square feet $150
Smoke Detector Inspections
1-, 2- family, condos and co-ops and townhouses
1. If inspected more than 10 business days
prior to change of occupancy
$35
§ 14-1.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 14-1.8
1:278
§ 14-1.9. Permit Fees. [Ord. 2/21/90 § 9; Ord. 4/3/91 § 4; Ord. No.
05-2017]
The following permit fees are hereby established:
Type 1 $75
Type 2 $166
Type 3 $331
Type 4 $497
Type 5 $1,200
§ 14-2. PORTABLE COOKING APPLIANCES IN OR NEAR
BUILDINGS.
§ 14-2.1. Use Prohibited in any Building. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 1]
The use or possession of portable gas and kerosene stoves, propane
barbecue stoves, and other similar fuel burning appliances using highly
flammable liquids or gases is prohibited in or on any building within the
Town. As used herein, the term building shall mean and include any balcony,
roof, deck, or extension of the building.
Annual Fee
2. If inspected 4 to 10 business days prior to
change of occupancy
$70
3. If inspected less than 4 business days prior
to change of occupancy
$125
b. R-A Uses shall only be inspected upon sale or change of tenant.
c. Uses not classified above will be classified as business uses.
d. Uses required to register with the State as life hazard uses shall not be
required to register under this section.
e. In the discretion of the Fire Official, vacant buildings will be charged
and inspected according to the previous use of the building.
f. All residential uses except R-A uses shall be inspected in the common
areas only.
g. Smoke Detector Inspections. There shall be an additional fee of $40 per
occasion for a reinspection of smoke detectors.
h. Late Fees. Any fees due and owing under this subsection that have not
been paid within 14 days of its due date shall be subject to a late fee
penalty equal to the amount of the original fee.
§ 14-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2.2
1:279
§ 14-2.2. Distance Requirements. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 2; Ord. #016/99]
The use or possession of portable gas and kerosene stoves, propane
barbecue stoves, and other similar fuel burning appliances using highly
flammable liquids or gases is prohibited within five feet of any building.
§ 14-2.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 8/21/91 § 3]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be liable to a
fine in an amount not to exceed $100. Each and every day a violation of this
section shall occur shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
Chapter 17
SEWER AND WATER
§ 14-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 14-2.3
1:280
ARTICLE I
Sewers
§ 17-1. CONNECTION FEE ENFORCEMENT.
§ 17-1.1. Statement of Policy. [Ord. 2/7/90; Preamble]
The North Bergen Municipal Utilities Authority (MUA) by resolution of
August 10, 1989, after hearing duly held in accordance with statutory
requirements adopted a Sewer Connection Fee Resolution, which requires
that all those persons who are constructing, building and/or developing any
property in the Township of North Bergen, and Town of Guttenberg as the
terms are defined under the Municipal Land Use Act and/or ordinances of
the Township of North Bergen, and Town of Guttenberg to pay to the MUA
a connection fee prior to the issuance of any Certificates of Occupancy, and
prior to the issuance of a permit to build in accordance with terms of the
Connection Fee Resolution incorporated herein by reference.
By Resolution adopted on December 14, 1989, by the MUA pursuant to
hearing held thereon, the terms of the August 10, 1989, Sewer Connection
Fee Resolution were affirmed and confirmed.
It is the desire of the Mayor and Board of Council of the Town of Guttenberg
to coordinate with the North Bergen MUA and to help enforce the terms and
conditions of the aforementioned MUA Resolutions, and to further provide
direction to the Building Department and Construction Code Official of the
Town of Guttenberg in accordance therewith.
§ 17-1.2. Application Required. [Ord. 2/7/90 § 1]
Prior to the issuance of any permit for construction, the Building
Department and Construction Code Official thereunder, shall direct the
person submitting such application for such permit, to the office of the
North Bergen MUA for purposes of having the person submit a CP-1
application, and to otherwise comply with the Sewer Connection Fee
Resolution as set forth hereinabove.
§ 17-1.3. Compliance Required. [Ord. 2/7/90 §§ 2 - 3]
a. The Building Department and Construction Code Officials shall not
issue or authorize the issuance of any permit for construction until the
applicant has complied with all requirements of the MUA and the Sewer
Connection Fee Resolution, and the applicant evidences receipt from
the MUA of payment of the connection fee.
b. The Building Department and Construction Code Official thereunder
shall not issue any Certificates of Occupancy upon any application
unless the applicant has complied with all requirements of the MUA
Sewer Connection Fee Resolution, and evidences receipt from the MUA
of having satisfied and paid the sewer connection fee.
§ 17-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.4
1:281
§ 17-1.4. Terms and Conditions. [Ord. 2/7/90 § 4]
All terms and conditions of the Sewer Connection Fee Resolution as adopted
on August 10, 1989, and as confirmed and affirmed on December 14, 1989,
shall be incorporated by reference herein.
§ 17-1.5. List of Applicants. [Ord. 2/7/90 § 5]
The Building Department and Construction Code Official thereunder shall
submit on a weekly basis to the Executive Director of the North Bergen
MUA a list of all those applicants who have submitted any applications for
construction permits.
§ 17-1.6. Stop Work Notice. [Ord. 2/7/90 § 6]
The Building Department, and Construction Code Official thereunder, shall
issue a stop work notice to any person who has undertaken any building,
construction or development projects without having first paid to the MUA
the connection fee as required by the MUA in accordance with the Sewer
Connection Fee Resolution.
§ 17-2. through § 17-10. (RESERVED)
§ 17-1.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 17-2
1:282
ARTICLE II
Water
§ 17-11. WATER EMERGENCY.
§ 17-11.1. Declaration of Water Emergency. [Ord. 9/20/89A § 1]
Whenever the Mayor and Board of Council find that a water emergency
exists in the Town, it may adopt a resolution declaring that such a water
emergency exists in the Town. Such a resolution may be adopted by the
governing body at any regular, special, adjourned or emergency public
meeting of the governing body. Such a resolution shall identify that portion
of the municipality affected by the water emergency, which may include
the entire municipality, and shall specify which of the water use regulations
contained in subsection 17-1.2 of this section is being imposed as well as
any exemptions as may be authorized. Such resolution shall be effective
immediately and shall continue in effect for 90 days, unless extended or
replaced as set forth in subsection 17-1.3 of this section. For the purpose of
this subsection, a water emergency shall exist if:
§ 17-11.2. Water Use Restrictions. [Ord. 9/20/89A § 2]
Upon adoption by the Mayor and Board of Council of a resolution declaring
that a water emergency exists in the Town of Guttenberg in accordance
with subsection 17-11.1 of this section, all citizens shall be urged to observe
voluntary indoor conservation measures and any or all of the following
water use restrictions may be imposed and, if imposed, shall be applicable
to all residents and tenants, except where a bona fide health emergency
exists:
a. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the
municipality has adopted water use restrictions, has notified the
municipality, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other
State, County or local agency entitled to notice of such restrictions and
such restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any State,
County or local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so; or
b. The Mayor and Board of Council are otherwise satisfied that a water
emergency exists in the municipality.
a. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including, but
not limited to, the watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and
the washing of cars; or
b. The limiting of outside water usage by allowing outside water usage by
persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days
and those having odd house or box numbers on odd days with outside
water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of
any month during the water emergency; or
§ 17-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-11.2
1:283
§ 17-11.3. Duration of Water Restrictions. [Ord. 9/20/89A § 3]
The resolution of the governing body authorized by subsection 17-11.1 of
this section shall, in addition to complying with subsection 17-11.1, provide
a period of time during which the water use restrictions imposed shall be
applicable and which shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate
the water emergency under the circumstances, considering the nature
and extent of the water emergency. At the expiration of the time period
specified, in the resolution, the water use restriction shall lapse and be
inapplicable and unenforceable. If the Mayor and Board of Council shall be
satisfied that the water emergency has been abated prior to the expiration
of the time period specified in the resolution, it may adopt a resolution
declaring the water emergency ended and the water use restrictions
inapplicable. If, at the expiration of the time period specified in the
resolution, the Mayor and Board of Council shall be satisfied that the
water emergency continues to exist, it may adopt a resolution under the
authorization of this section continuing the water use restrictions.
§ 17-11.4. Enforcement of Water Use Restrictions. [Ord. 9/20/89A
§ 4]
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall be
enforced during a water emergency by the Police Department. Whenever
a violation of the water use restrictions shall be found, the violator shall
be given a written warning and advised of the penalties for a second and
third offense as provided by subsection 17-11.5 of this section. The Police
Department shall keep such records as may be reasonable and necessary
for the purpose of determining the persons and businesses who have been
warned upon a first offense. The Police Department is hereby empowered
to write summonses for the violation of the water use restrictions imposed
pursuant to this section.
§ 17-11.5. Penalties. [Ord. 9/20/89A § 5]
After a first offense in accordance with subsection 17-11.1 of this section,
any person or business who thereafter violates the water use restrictions
imposed pursuant to this section shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance
with this subsection. For a second offense, the fine imposed shall be $500 or
imprisonment for 10 days or both. For a third and subsequent offense, the
fine imposed shall be $1,000 or imprisonment for 30 days or both.
c. Any other water use restriction specified by the Mayor and Board of
Council in the resolution authorized by subsection 17-11.1 of this
section which is reasonable under the circumstances considering the
nature and extent of the water emergency. Any water restrictions
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be limited in application to
that portion of the municipality, which may include the entire
municipality, identified as being affected by the water emergency in the
resolution of the governing body adopted in accordance with subsection
17-11.1 of this section.
§ 17-11.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 17-11.5
1:284
Chapter 18
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
[Editor's Note: For regulations concerning permits for use of
construction debris containers, and fees for permits, see Chapter 11,
Building and Housing, Section 11-1.
§ 18-1. MANDATORY RECYCLING.
§ 18-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. 7/21/89 § 1]
As used in this section.
ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CANS — Shall mean and include only those
containers made entirely of aluminum and used solely for the packaging of
beverages.
BLUE GRADE PAPER — Shall mean and include white office paper, white
copy paper, white computer printout paper, white bond paper and white
typing paper.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean and
include all public or private establishments including, but not limited to,
those manufacturing, retailing and/or service establishments; food
establishments in business for the purposes of consumption, on or off
premises, as well as food distribution and/or processing; and professional
and/or nonprofit or for profit corporate entities.
COMPOSTING — Shall mean a process by which organic materials are
turned into humus (similar to topsoil).
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shall mean and include cardboard
containers used primarily for the packaging, boxing and/or transporting of
products of any type.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean and include any one-family, two-family,
or multi-family home; apartments and high rises; condominiums and/or
cooperatives.
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Shall mean and include
all bottles and jars made entirely of glass, devoid of metal caps and rings,
and used in the storage of food and beverages. Specifically excluded are
blue glass and flat glass commonly known as window glass, light bulbs and
fixtures.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Shall mean and include all waste as defined in
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-38, N.J.S.A. 1E-51, and N.J.S.A. 7:26-8.1 et seq.
LEAVES — Shall mean, specifically, foliage from plants and trees only.
NEWSPAPERS — Shall mean and include paper of any type commonly
referred to as newsprint and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily
or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions and containing
advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded,
§ 17-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1.1
1:285
however, are all magazines or other periodicals, as well as all other paper
products of any nature whatsoever.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS — Shall mean and include all
municipal and State government facilities; all religious, educational and
health care facilities; and all public and/or private civic organizations and
all nonprofit or for profit organizations.
RECYCLING — Shall mean the process by which designated materials
which would otherwise become solid waste, are separated, collected,
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean and include all garbage and rubbish that is
collected for disposal.
§ 18-1.2. Program Established. [Ord. 7/21/89 § II]
There is hereby established a mandatory program for the source separation
of leaves, for the purpose of composting; newspapers, corrugated
cardboard; glass food and beverage containers and aluminum beverage
cans from the solid waste generated within the Town for the purpose of
recycling.
§ 18-1.3. Separation and Preparation of Recyclable Materials. [Ord.
7/21/89 § 2; Ord. 11/01/89C § 1]
All owners, lessees or occupants of dwelling units, except those physically
disabled; and all owners, lessees and occupants, except those physically
disabled, of business, commercial and/or industrial establishments; and all
owners, lessees and occupants, except those physically disabled, of private,
public and governmental institutions and facilities, shall separate leaves
for the purpose of composting; newspapers; corrugated cardboard; glass
food and beverage containers and aluminum beverage cans from other solid
waste and shall recycle these materials in the following manner:
a. Leaves.
1. By composting on the property of the owner, lessee or occupant;
and/or
2. By placing leaves, on the day/days to be established, at the
designated collection or pickup site(s) to be determined by the
Recycling Coordinator, or his authorized agent for composting, in
accordance with all applicable regulations.
3. Leaves shall be placed in such containers as authorized by the
Recycling Coordinator or his authorized agent for composting.
b. Newspapers.
1. Newspapers shall be tied securely in bundles with twine, rope, cord
or string to facilitate handling and insure that they will not be wind
§ 18-1.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 18-1.3
1:286
blown or otherwise distributed onto the public streets. The bundle
shall not exceed a weight of 30 pounds each or a height of more
than 12 inches each.
2. Specifically, in no event, shall newspaper bundles be placed in bags
of any type.
3. Bundles shall be placed for collection on the day/days to be
established, at the designated collection or pickup site(s) to be
determined by the Recycling Coordinator, or his authorized agent,
for collection in accordance with all applicable regulations.
4. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any owner, lessee
or occupant of a dwelling unit, as herein defined, may wrap solid
waste in newspaper and discard same with regular solid waste.
c. Glass Food and Beverage Containers.
1. Glass food and beverage containers used for storage of food and/or
beverages shall be rinsed clean of all residue and shall have all
caps and/or rings removed.
2. Glass food and beverage containers shall be placed in a container
or receptacle having a capacity not to exceed 34 gallons and not to
weigh more than 40 pounds when filled. No glass shall be
deliberately broken for the purpose of filling any container or
receptacle; however, accidentally broken glass will be accepted.
3. Containers or receptacles shall be placed for collection on the day/
days to be established, at the designated collection or pickup site(s)
to be determined by the Recycling Coordinator, or his authorized
agent for collection, in accordance with all applicable regulations.
4. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any owner, lessee
or occupant of a dwelling unit, as herein defined may utilize glass
food and beverage containers for the disposal of nonhazardous
liquid wastes with other regular solid waste.
d. Aluminum Beverage Cans.
1. After being rinsed clean of all residue, aluminum beverage cans
will be placed in containers or receptacles having a capacity not to
exceed five gallons.
2. Containers or receptacles shall be placed for collection on the day/
days to be established, at the designated collection or pickup site(s)
determined by the Recycling Coordinator, or his authorized agent,
for collection in accordance with all applicable regulations.
3. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any owner, lessee
or occupant of a dwelling unit, as herein defined may utilize
aluminum beverage cans for the disposal of nonhazardous liquid
waste with other regular solid waste.
§ 18-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1.3
1:287
§ 18-1.4. Collection. [Ord. 7/21/89 § VI; Ord. #01-14]
e. Corrugated Cardboard.
1. Corrugated cardboard shall be tied securely in bundles with twine,
rope, cord or string to facilitate handling and insure that it will not
be wind blown or otherwise distributed onto the public streets. The
bundles shall not exceed a weight of 30 pounds or a height of more
than 12 inches each.
2. Specifically, in no event, shall corrugated cardboard bundles be
placed in bags of any type.
3. Bundles shall be placed for collection on the day/days to be
established, at the designated collection or pickup site(s) to be
determined by the Recycling Coordinator, or his authorized agent,
for collection in accordance with all applicable regulations.
4. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any owner, lessee
or occupant of a dwelling unit, as herein defined, may wrap solid
waste in corrugated cardboard and discard same with the regular
solid waste.
f. High Grade Paper.
1. High grade paper shall be tied securely in bundles with twine, rope,
cord or string to facilitate handling and insure that it will not be
wind blown or otherwise distributed onto the public streets. The
bundles shall not exceed a weight of 30 pounds each or a height of
more than 12 inches each.
2. Specifically, in no event, shall high grade paper bundles be placed
in bags of any type.
3. Bundles shall be placed for collection on the day/days to be
established, at the designated collection or pickup site(s) to be
determined by the Recycling Coordinator, or his authorized agent,
for collection in accordance with all applicable regulations.
4. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding any owner, lessee
or occupant of a dwelling unit, as herein defined, may wrap solid
waste in high grade paper and discard same with the regular solid
waste.
a. The Recycling Coordinator shall establish the day/days of collection and
the collection or pickup site(s) designated for the collection of leaves for
the purpose of composting; newspaper; corrugated cardboard, glass
food and beverage containers and aluminum beverage cans; or any
other designated recyclable materials, for the purpose of recycling and/
or composting.
b. Notification of the designated collection or pickup day/days and the
designated collection or pickup site(s) for leaves for the purpose of
§ 18-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 18-1.4
1:288
§ 18-1.5. Collection By Authorized Persons. [Ord. 7/21/89 § III]
composting; newspaper; corrugated cardboard, glass food and
beverage containers and aluminum beverage cans; or any other
designated recyclable materials, shall be published in the official Town
newspaper for a continuous period of not less than six days, the last
publication date being at least 15 days prior to the first scheduled
collection/pickup date. Notification may also be made by the mailing of
a "flyer" or "newsletter" indicating the designated dates and collection
or pickup site(s), to each dwelling unit, public or private institution and
commercial and industrial establishment within the Town.
c. Recycling receptacles shall be stored only in areas designated for
storage between recycling collections. They shall be placed adjacent to
the curb in front of the premises, or other area designated for collection
no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day before collection and shall be
promptly returned to the storage area upon collection. Recycling
receptacles shall not be stored on sidewalks or areas in front of any
buildings or houses between collection days.
a. The Recycling Coordinator may use municipal personnel to collect the
recyclable materials set forth herein, at curbside and/or collection or
pickup site(s) to be determined; and shall sell the recyclable materials,
if a market exists therefore, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
b. The Mayor and Board of Council may elect to enter into agreements
with qualified persons, partnerships or corporations for the purpose of
authorizing them to collect all recyclable materials, or any portion
thereof, at curbside or collection or pickup site(s).
c. The Mayor and Board of Council may, upon receipt of a completed and
approved application issue permits to any person, civic, fraternal,
nonprofit or for profit organization, authorizing a drop-off collection
point(s) for the aggregation of certain specific recyclable materials.
Issuance of a permit shall not, however, authorize the person, civic,
fraternal, nonprofit or for profit organization to pick up or collect
specific recyclable materials from any curbside, or from any designated
municipal collection or pickup site(s) in the Town.
d. The Mayor and Board of Council may negotiate and enter into contracts
for the collection, composting and/or marketing of leaves, newspaper,
corrugated cardboard, glass food and beverage containers and/or
aluminum beverage cans, or such other designated recyclable materials
as may be determined; or to place same out to bid, if required, by the
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
e. The Mayor and Board of Council may utilize Town personnel to collect
leaves, newspaper, corrugated cardboard, glass food and beverage
containers and/or aluminum beverage cans, or such other designated
recyclable materials, or contract out the cost of the collection as may be
determined to be in the best interests of the municipality.
§ 18-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1.6
1:289
§ 18-1.6. Collection By Unauthorized Persons Prohibited. [Ord. 7/
21/89 § IV]
§ 18-1.7. Direct Disposal of Recyclable Materials by Owners. [Ord.
7/21/89 § V]
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any owner, lessee or
occupant of a dwelling unit, public or private institution, or commercial or
industrial establishment, may donate or sell recyclable materials as defined
herein, to any person, partnership or corporation, whether or not operating
for profit. However, the person, partnership or corporation shall not pick up
recyclable materials at curbside or at any designated collection or pickup
site(s) authorized by the municipality or its designated agent.
§ 18-1.8. Verification of Private Recycling Tonnage. [Ord. 7/21/89
§ VIII]
§ 18-1.9. Enforcement. [Ord. 7/21/89 § VIII]
§ 18-1.10. Penalty. [Ord. 7/21/89 § IX]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this section
or any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. The maximum fine for failure
to comply with subsection 18-1.3 hereof, and regulations issued pursuant
a. Recyclable material as defined herein shall be the property of the Town
once placed at the designated collection or pickup site(s) authorized by
the municipality or its designated agent.
b. It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the
municipality or its designated agent, to pick up or cause to be picked
up, said recyclable materials as defined herein. Each such collection
will be illegal and in violation hereof and shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense, punishable as hereinafter provided.
a. Any owner, lessee or occupant of any dwelling unit, public or private
institution, commercial or industrial establishment, actively
participating in a recycling program by the Town or its authorized
agent, shall submit monthly verification of the tonnage of materials
recycled.
b. The monthly verification shall be submitted to the Recycling
Coordinator no later than 20 days following the end of each month after
inception of this program. Failure to do so may cause the program to be
terminated by order of the Town Recycling Coordinator.
a. The Police Department, the Department of Code Enforcement, the
Recycling Coordinator, Mayor, Board of Council and/or the Directors of
the Department of Public Works/Sanitation are hereby authorized and
directed to enforce this section and amendments thereto.
§ 18-1.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 18-1.10
1:290
thereto, shall not exceed $100 for the first three violations; any violations
thereafter shall result in termination of regular garbage collection until the
time of compliance.
Chapter 19
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 19-1. STREET OPENINGS.20
§ 19-1.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #18-10]
No person, company, firm or corporation shall remove, dig into, disturb,
excavate, take up or cause or procure to be removed, disturbed, excavated
or dug up the surface of any public place or any pavement or concrete
therein, except upon written permission of the Construction Official whose
duty it shall be to grant such permission when all of the requirements of
the section for granting same have been complied with by the applicant. A
separate permit will be required for each project except for street openings
pertaining to the installation of light poles.
§ 19-1.1A. No Permit Allowed for Newly Constructed Streets. [Ord.
No. 20-12; Ord. No. 10-2016]
No permit shall be issued for a newly constructed street, which street shall
have been constructed after the passage of this chapter for a period of five
years from the date of acceptance of such construction, except in cases of
emergency as described in Section 19-1.11, or otherwise authorized by the
Mayor and Council. If a permit is allowed and issued, then all roads must
have the pavement surface restored using infrared techniques or equal.
Ninety days prior to the start of construction of permanent pavement on
any street, the Construction Official shall notify, in writing, all property
owners of record on such street, all utility companies serving such street,
and the Town Administrator of such construction and of the provisions of
this section. Sidewalks shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
§ 19-1.2. Application Form. [Ord. #18-10]
Application for permission to make an opening as above shall be made in
writing and signed by the properly authorized person on a blank form to be
furnished by the Construction Official upon payment of a fee of $150. Each
application shall state the location and approximate size of the opening to
be made. No permit shall be deemed to authorize anything not stated in the
application, and the applicant shall confine his work within such limits in
order that the work of repaving shall be as small as possible.
20.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: 5/26/58, 11/21/66, 1995-02, 002/00, 036/00, 019/02,
005/04, 008/04, 005-07.
§ 18-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.3
1:291
§ 19-1.3. Commencement of Work - Time. [Ord. #18-10]
The work on any opening to be made under the permit provided for in this
section shall be commenced within 30 days from the date of said permit
and the work prosecuted with diligence to its completion. If, for any reason,
work is not commenced within said period of 30 days, the permit shall
become void unless within such a period of 30 days, the applicant shall
present the permit to the Construction Official who shall thereupon either
return the deposit or extend the time from the beginning of said work for
another period of 30 days by endorsement on the permit.
§ 19-1.4. Deposit Held. [Ord. #18-10; Ord. No. 06-2018]
The applicant shall deposit with the Construction Official before any permit
is granted the sum of $1,500 for each and every proposed opening not more
than 20 feet in length in paved or unpaved streets or public places, and
when the proposed opening shall exceed 20 feet of length, the applicant
shall pay the sum of $200 for each additional 20 feet of length or fraction
thereof. This amount shall be retained by the Town for a period of 12
months from the date of completion to guarantee the proper performance
of the work done by the applicant and the maintenance thereof in good
condition by the applicant. If, during such period of 12 months, the opening
shall settle or any street surface over such opening shall require repairs,
except where pavement has been resurfaced or repaired by the Town, as
hereinafter provided, and the applicant shall fail to make such repairs as
required within seven calendar days after the service or mailing of a "Notice
to Repair Street Opening" from the Construction Official to do so, then the
Construction Official may cause such repairs to be made and pay the cost
thereof from said deposit.
Any reimbursement/payment of any road opening permit in relation to this
section shall be paid directly from the escrow account.
§ 19-1.5. Notice to Construction Official of Work. [Ord. #18-10]
All openings in pavement or public places shall be made and all excavations
and backfilling shall be done by the applicant to whom the permit is issued
as hereinbefore provided. Said applicant shall give 48 hours' notice prior to
the commencement of a pavement opening, as well as 48 hours' notice prior
to the commencement of the backfilling thereof to the Construction Official,
the Operations Manager of the Department of Public Works, and the Town
Engineer, which notice may be given at the time of the application for a
permit therefor.
§ 19-1.6. Method of Excavating. [Ord. #18-10]
All excavations shall be made in open trenches except where otherwise
permitted by the Construction Official and/or the Town Engineer. The sides
of the excavation shall, when necessary, be suitably supported in
compliance with all applicable local, State and Federal regulations
including OSHA. Supports shall be installed as the work progresses unless
§ 19-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 19-1.6
1:292
the Construction Official or Town Engineer shall order otherwise. All
trenches shall be backfilled in accordance with subsection 19-1.6A.
Where excavation is made in a tunnel beneath a concrete pavement or
beneath a pavement having a concrete base, the tunnel shall be backfilled
with an appropriate soil/cement mixture or other approved material which
must be compacted in place so that the cavity is completely filled and there
is no settlement.
§ 19-1.6A. Fill Material. [Ord. #18-10]
Material used to backfill street or sidewalk openings shall be appropriate
for the particular location in accordance with the diagram issued with the
permit.21 All sidewalks are to be poured on four inches of clean 3/4 inch
gravel. All sidewalks are to be a minimum four inches thick.
§ 19-1.7. Paving. [Ord. #18-10]
All openings in sidewalks and paved roadways shall be temporarily covered
with a minimum two-inch thick layer of bituminous paving material and
maintained until the installation of the permanent surface. The top of the
trench shall not be higher than one inch above the adjacent paving. When
practical, the permanent base shall be installed to support the temporary
surface paving material.
Any opening made in a paved street or sidewalk area is to be temporarily
paved the same day it is backfilled. Where this is not practical, barricades
and suitable lighting shall be placed around the area and the area shall
be protected with a suitable cover to withstand any auto, truck or similar
vehicle from entering the excavation until such time as the opening is
temporarily or permanently paved.
Permanent pavement shall be installed after the backfill has had sufficient
time to settle and field conditions are favorable for same. All permanent
pavement shall, however, be installed within a maximum of three months.
Every effort shall be made to install permanent paving and complete same
prior to the commencement of the winter season.
All road openings within the County right-of-way must be restored in
accordance with the Hudson County Road Opening Standards.
a. All openings must be inspected prior to backfilling.
b. The holder of the permit must notify the Construction Official when the
necessary inspections are to be made.
21.Editor's Note: The diagram referred to herein is included in the attachment at the end of
this chapter.
§ 19-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.8
1:293
§ 19-1.8. Security of Site. [Ord. #18-10]
The excavation and all piles of excavated materials or any materials used
in the work for which a permit is issued shall be guarded and lighted by
the applicant who shall be liable for all damages caused by his negligence
in the prosecution of the work or his negligent failure to properly guard or
maintain same.
§ 19-1.9. Government Excluded. [Ord. #18-10]
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work undertaken by County
or State agencies or the Town.
§ 19-1.10. Public Utility - Bond. [Ord. #18-10]
Any public utility subject to regulation by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners of the State of New Jersey, which desires to obtain permits
under the provisions of this section may in lieu of the provisions hereof
requiring deposits under subsection 19-1.4 provide a bond which may be
the bond of such public utility solely, in the penal sum of $10,000 running
in favor of the Town, and file same with the Town Clerk. Such bond shall be
conditioned upon compliance with the applicable provisions of this section
in respect of each street opening which shall hereafter be made by such
public utility in the Town and the obligations of such bond shall be a
continuing obligation in the full amount thereof in respect to each street
opening.
§ 19-1.11. Procedure in an Emergency. [Ord. #18-10]
Street openings may be made without the necessity of a written application
as provided for subsection 19-1.1 in emergencies, such as broken or frozen
water mains or other circumstances, which would endanger public welfare,
health and safety, provided that notice thereof shall be given, as soon
as practical, verbally to the Director of Public Safety. Written application
for a permit shall nevertheless be made to the Town as soon as may
be convenient, but in any event within 48 hours, all in accordance with
subsection 19-1.1.
§ 19-2. SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
§ 19-2.1. Removal Required. [Ord. 11/21/66 § 1; Ord. #002/00; Ord.
#008/04]
The owner of premises abutting or bordering upon any street shall jointly
and severally be responsible for removing snow and ice from abutting
sidewalks for a distance of four feet from the property line of the abutting
premises within 24 hours after the snow has fallen or the ice has formed.
§ 19-2.2. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 11/21/66 §§ 2 - 4]
§ 19-1.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 19-2.2
1:294
§ 19-2.3. Penalty. [Ord. 11/21/66 § 5; Ord. #005/04; Ord. #03-11]
Each person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall, upon first
conviction be liable to a penalty of $50 to $500. Any second or subsequent
conviction shall be liable to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Each offense shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day in
which the offense exists.
§ 19-3. USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS IS PROHIBITED FROM
AUTOMOBILE REPAIRS EXCEPT FOR EMERGENCIES.
§ 19-3.1. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. #36-11]
All persons or entities are prohibited from dismantling, repairing or
servicing motor vehicles on the Guttenberg public streets whether for
commercial or private purposes, except for emergency repairs or minor
adjustments, and in such cases, any dirt, litter, grease, oil, gasoline or
other matter will be thoroughly cleaned promptly from said public street or
sidewalk.
Chapter 20
ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 20-1. AIR POLLUTION CONTROL CODE.
§ 20-1.1. Title. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 1:1]
This section shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Air Pollution Control
Code of the Town of Guttenberg."
§ 20-1.2. Findings and Declaration of Policy. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 1:2]
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders,
soot, fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants is a
menace to the health, welfare, and comfort of the residents of Guttenberg,
and a cause of substantial damage to property. For the purpose of
a. In order to keep the streets and thoroughfares of the Town open to
traffic after a snow storm, it shall be unlawful for any person, personally
or by agent, to throw or otherwise convey snow or ice off his premises
or off the sidewalk or areaway in front thereof, upon the street after the
Town has caused such street to be opened up for traffic by plowing.
b. No snow or ice shall be thrown in the area of a fire hydrant so as to
interfere with the use of the fire hydrant.
c. No snow or ice shall be thrown from the premises, areaway, or
sidewalks upon any crosswalk at intersections of the streets so as to
interfere with and impede the use thereof by pedestrians.
§ 19-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.2
1:295
controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to
be the policy of the Town to minimize air pollution as herein defined and
prohibit excessive emission of the same, to establish standards governing
the installation, maintenance, and operation of equipment and
appurtenances relating to combustion which are a source or potential
source of air pollution, and in furtherance of this purpose to cooperate
and coordinate these efforts with the State Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy, Air Pollution Control Program.
§ 20-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. 10/19/80 § 2:1]
As used in this section:
AIR POLLUTION — Shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of
one or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are, or
tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life, or
to property, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or
property throughout the Town as shall be affected thereby, and excludes all
aspects of employer-employee relationship as to health and safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Shall mean those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides, or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Shall mean any furnace, boiler, water
heater, device, mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still, or
other apparatus, or a group or collection of such units in the process of
fuel burning for the generation of heat or power. Refuse burning equipment
shall be considered incinerators as herein defined and not as fuel burning
equipment under this definition. Ovens, stoves, or ranges used exclusively
for domestic cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Shall mean any device, apparatus, equipment or
structure used for destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or
substance, including, but not limited to, refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or
scrap, or facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — Shall mean a property of a substance which affects the sense of
smell.
OPEN BURNING — Shall mean any fire wherein the products of combustion
are emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack
or chimney.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has care, custody, or control
of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without
knowledge of the owner thereof.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care,
or control of any premises or part thereof including, but not limited to,
a dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a
fiduciary, including, but not limited to, executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver, guardian, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such
§ 20-1.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-1.3
1:296
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all or
any part of any premises, including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling
unit, shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased
or subleased.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putresciible and nonputrescible wastes (except
body wastes), and shall include, but not be limited to, garbage, rubbish,
yard trimmings, leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Shall mean Ringelmann's Scale for
Grading the Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of
Mines, or any chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of
smoke density which is approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy of the State of New Jersey, as the equivalent of said
Ringelmann's Scale.
RUBBISH — Shall mean solids not considered to be highly flammable
or explosive, and shall include, but not be limited to, rags, old clothes,
leather, rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard
trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar
materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Shall mean any business, trade or industry
engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or
material, including but not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping
containers or drums.
SMOKE — Shall mean small gas borne and airborne particles arising from
a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — Shall mean all solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business,
trade, or industry, and shall include, but not be limited to, plastic products,
carton, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders,
and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 20-1.4. Prohibition of Open Air Burning. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 3]
§ 20-1.5. Smoke Emissions From Fuel Burning Equipment. [Ord. 10/
19/70 § 4]
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning, except as
provided in paragraph b.
b. The open burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other
known method of disposal can be used without hazard to health or
property and the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by
the Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy in accordance with Chapter 2,
Section 1.4 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
§ 20-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.5
1:297
§ 20-1.6. Incinerator Regulation. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 5]
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit smoke from any fuel
burning equipment, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air.
b. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
1. Smoke emitted during the cleaning of a fire box or the building of a
new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than No. 2
of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period or periods
aggregating no more than three minutes in any 15 consecutive
minutes.
a. Smoke Emissions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke
from any incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air;
or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
b. New Fires. The provisions of paragraph a shall not apply to smoke
emitted during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of
which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a
period of no longer than three consecutive minutes; or to emissions of
such opacity within a stack or chimney or exclusive of water vapor, of
such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree which is not greater
than the emissions designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart,
for a period no longer than three consecutive minutes.
c. Visible Particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
emission of particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator
which are individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
d. Odors. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
e. Limitation on Time of Operation. No person shall operate, and no owner
or operator of any building in the Town shall permit the operation of an
incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any day and all
operation shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m., including
complete extinction of the fire and removal of material in a safe manner
from the firebox to a non-combustible container; provided, however,
that by special permit, the Town may, because of exceptional
circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as it shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare
of the public or of persons in the vicinity.
§ 20-1.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-1.7
1:298
§ 20-1.7. Prohibition of Air Pollution. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 6]
No person or owner of property, and no person having possession or control
of property, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 20-1.8. Inspections and Right of Entry. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 7]
a. All buildings and premises subject to this Code are subject to inspection
by the Enforcement Officer or his duly authorized representatives. All
rooms and areas in the building shall be available and accessible for
such inspection which shall be made during usual business hours if the
premises are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that
inspections may be made at other times if:
1. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection; or
2. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection
during other than the prescribed hours; or
3. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
b. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which
poses an immediate threat to life, health, or safety. Such procedure
shall take place only where the time required to apply for and secure
the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action
necessary to abate the condition. Emergency inspections may also be
authorized by the Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32. Where the Enforcement Officer or
his duly authorized representative is refused entry or access or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant, or operator
from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation of this Code and subject to the penalties hereunder.
c. Search Warrant or Access Warrant. The Enforcement Officer may, upon
affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court for a search warrant
setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of
the Code may exist on the premises, including one or more of the
following:
1. That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the Enforcement Officer for periodic inspections or
premises of the type involved;
§ 20-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.8
1:299
§ 20-1.9. Enforcement. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 9]
2. That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash,
soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that violations of this Code exist;
3. Circumstances such as age and design of fuel burning equipment
and/or system, types of incinerator, particular use of premises or
other factor which renders systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
If the Judge of the Municipal Court is satisfied as to the matters
set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
a. Enforcement Officer. Primary responsibility for the enforcement of this
Code shall rest with an Enforcement Officer, designated as such by
resolution of the Mayor and Board of Council.
b. Enforcement Assistants, Agents or Representatives. When duly
authorized by the Enforcement Officer or the Mayor and Board of
Council, suitable assistants, agents and representatives may also act as
Enforcement Officer of the said Code, apply for such warrants,
investigate, detect and process or prosecute violations, including, to the
extent authorized by law, investigations and proceedings in
surrounding areas which may affect or contribute to air pollution in
Guttenberg.
c. Additional Powers and Standards. It is recognized and determined that
air pollution cannot be abated, prevented or corrected overnight and
that numerous special circumstances and factors may exist, rendering a
literal interpretation or enforcement of this Code unjust, illegal,
unconstitutional, impractical or a hardship without the use of exercise
of sound discretion in enforcement procedures.
In all such cases, the following additional powers and procedures are
authorized:
1. Informal Procedures. The Enforcement Officer may carry on
informal conference procedures so as to encourage informal
correction procedures and voluntary abatement or other
compliance with the Code.
2. Special Petitions for Relief. In all cases where an order or violation
proceedings issue or commence, affected parties may petition the
Mayor and Board of Council for clarification, modification,
reconsideration, time to comply or other relief, and the Mayor and
Board of Council may act in the premises, based on Standards
contained herein.
§ 20-1.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-1.9
1:300
§ 20-1.10. Construction. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 10]
This Code is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
§ 20-1.11. Penalties. [Ord. 10/19/70 § 8]
§ 20-2. SALE AND USE OF PLASTIC COVERINGS OR BAGS.
§ 20-2.1. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. 12/21/59 §§ 1, 2]
3. Standards for Special Relief. In all cases where age or nature of
equipment; custom in the trade or area; size, location, nature,
configuration or other aspect or attribute of the property or parties
or business; conditions in neighboring communities; availability of
specialized equipment; serious economic hardship; illness;
progress being made; impracticalities due to weather, traffic or
other specialized conditions; or other additional similar or different
cause or condition, would render strict or literal enforcement
unjust, illegal, unconstitutional, impractical or excessively harsh
and severe to the point of inequity or to the point of excessive
personal, economic or other hardship, then the Enforcement
Officer, and/or the Mayor and Board of Council (directly or on
appeal from a decision of the Enforcement Officer) may grant such
appropriate time, or such appropriate other relief or order as shall
prevent such result, in the exercise of sound legal discretion, which
shall be lawful unless an actual palpable abuse of discretion
appears.
a. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code, or who
shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
b. The violation of any section or subsection of this Code shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this Code.
Each day of violation shall constitute an additional, separate and
distinct offense.
a. The Board of Council hereby finds, determines and declares:
1. That a serious public emergency exists by reason of the
uncontrolled use by certain businesses of thin plastic coverings or
bags in the Town.
2. That the absence of proper supervision, regulations and controls of
the aforesaid plastic coverings or bags would result in serious
danger to the health, safety, life and welfare of the children of the
Town.
§ 20-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.1
1:301
§ 20-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. 12/21/59 § 3]
As used in this section:
PLASTIC COVERINGS OR BAGS — Shall mean any sheet, receptacle or bag
produced or manufactured from material commonly known as "plastic" or
"polyethylene."
REGULATION OR REGULATIONS — Shall mean the rules and regulations
of the Board of Health and any amendments, modifications or repealers
thereof.
§ 20-2.3. Powers and Duties of Board of Health. [Ord. 12/21/59 § 4]
The powers and duties of the Board of Health shall be as follows:
3. That to prevent such dangers to health, safety, life and welfare,
preventive action by the Board of Council is imperative.
4. That such supervision, regulations and controls are urgently
needed in order to prevent danger to the health, safety, life and
welfare of the children of the Town.
b. That the adoption of this section is both urgent and necessary for the
purpose of preventing the consequences hereinabove described and to
make effective the policy of the Board of Council.
a. To make, promulgate, adopt, amend, modify, repeal and enforce such
reasonable general and uniform rules and regulations as they may
deem necessary.
1. To adequately effectuate the terms and provisions of this section.
2. For the exercise by them of the function, powers and duties
conferred upon them hereunder.
3. To supervise, control and regulate the use of plastic coverings or
bags in the Town, consistent with the purpose of this section, as
stated in subsection 20-2.1 hereof.
b. No regulation of the Board of Health or any amendment, modification
or repealer thereof shall take effect until five days after it has been filed
with the Town Clerk.
c. Any regulation or order issued in accordance with the provisions of this
section by the Board of Health may be in such form and may contain
such classification and differentiations as may provide for such
adjustment or reasonable exception, as in their judgment are necessary
or proper in order to effectuate the purpose of this section.
d. The Board of Health, guided by consideration of safety of children, shall
make such other rules and regulations which may be required to
facilitate the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
section with respect to the providing of safeguards to be approved by
§ 20-2.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-2.3
1:302
§ 20-2.4. Approval Required. [Ord. 12/21/59 § 5]
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or operates a place of business
in the Town of Guttenberg, wherein plastic coverings or bags are sold or
are furnished to customers of the business in connection with the sale of
any commodity whatsoever, or with the rendering of any service whatsoever
to customers, to so sell or furnish same, unless such person shall have
first submitted to the Board of Health a sample or samples of the plastic
coverings or bags, and shall have received from the Board of Health written
approval for the use of same as aforesaid.
§ 20-2.5. Penalty. [Ord. 12/21/59 § 6]
Any person who violates any provision of this section, or of any regulations,
order or requirement hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 20-3. VIBRATION RESTRICTIONS; NONRESIDENTIAL SOURCES.
§ 20-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. #020-1995, Preamble]
Excessive vibration is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare
and quality of life; and a substantial body of science and technology exists
by which excessive vibration may be substantially abated. The people have
a right to and should be ensured a residential environment free from
excessive vibration. It is the policy of the Town of Guttenberg to prevent
excessive vibration which may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of its
citizens.
§ 20-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. #020-1995, § 1]
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
AMPLITUDE — Shall mean the maximum displacement of the earth from
the normal rest position. Amplitude is usually reported as inches or mils.
ANSI S3.29-1983 — Shall mean the American National Standard Institute
guide to the evaluation of human exposure to vibration in buildings.
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL SOURCES — Shall mean all uses of property
other than residential use.
DISCRETE IMPULSES — Shall mean a ground transmitted vibration
stemming from a source where specific pulses do not exceed 60 per minute
(or one per sound).
FREQUENCY — Shall mean the number of times that a displacement
completely repeats itself in one second of time. Frequency may be
designated in cycles per second (cps) or hertz (hz).
them, as a condition of granting approval of the use of the plastic
coverings or bags as referred to in this section.
§ 20-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.2
1:303
GROSS VIBRATION — Shall mean vibration of a duration or intensity such
that it causes secondary or sympathetic vibrations on an adjoining property.
Evidence of such gross vibration shall include, but not be limited to, the
audible or visible result of objects in motion such as travel of objects,
movement of wall hangings, waves in standing water, and/or clanging of
dishes, glasses, bottles, or utensils, or windows vibrating in their frames.
IMPACT — Shall mean an earthborn vibration generally produced by two or
more objects striking each other so as to cause separate and distinct pulses.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Shall mean any distinct parcel of land used for
nonresidential use on one part and residential use on another.
PARTICLE VELOCITY — Shall mean a characteristic of vibration that
depends on both displacement and frequency. If not directly measured, it
can be computed by multiplying the frequency by the amplitude times the
factor 6.28. The particle velocity will be in inches per sound, when the
frequency is expressed in cycles per second and the amplitude in inches.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Shall mean property lawfully used for human
habitation. Residential property shall not include properties where the
only human habitation is comprised of supervisors, janitors, maintenance
personnel, grounds-keeper or guards who are residing on the premises for
the convenience of the property owner or as a condition of employment.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY LINE ON MIXED USE PROPERTY — Shall mean
the residential building exterior either at the ground or any residential
floor, or, if so designed, the exterior line of any balcony or terrace. For
intra-building use, it shall be the interior of the room affected by the
nonresidential activity. Rooms shall not include halls or closets.
SECONDARY OR SYMPATHETIC VIBRATIONS — Shall mean the setting
in motion of common objects on the receptor property by the original
source vibration. Such items include, but are not limited to, dishes, glasses,
utensils, window frames, wall hangings, TV antennas, and standing water.
SENSORY LEVEL OF PERCEPTION — Shall mean the level that
differentiates the presence of the vibration phenomenon from the
background level. The background level is assumed to be no vibration
unless a 360° inspection of the receptor premises and the source premises
indicates otherwise.
STEADY STATE VIBRATION — Shall mean a vibration which is continuous
including, but not limited to, vibration from a fan, compressor, or motor.
VIBRATION — Shall mean a reciprocating movement transmitted through
the earth, both in horizontal and vertical planes.
VIBRATION PERCEPTION THRESHOLD — Shall mean the minimum
ground or structure borne vibration motion necessary to cause a person
to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to,
sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
§ 20-3.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-3.3
1:304
§ 20-3.3. Excessive Vibration Prohibited. [Ord. #020-1995, § 2]
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any source
or sources of vibration on nonresidential property in such a manner as
to create a vibration level that exceeds the particular vibration level
restrictions as set forth in Table I, or any standard established by Section
s, parts c, d, e, f, or g, when measured at or within the residential real
property line or receiving residential property line on multi-use property.
§ 20-3.4. Performance Standards; Vibration. [Ord. #020-1995, § 3]
a. Ground-transmitted vibration shall be measured with a seismograph,
instrument, or complement of instruments capable of recording
vibration displacement and frequency, particle velocity, or acceleration
simultaneously in three mutually perpendicular directions for all
Performance Standard Category 3 investigations.
b. Table I designates the maximum permitted vibration levels. Where
more than one set of Vibration Performance Standard Categories apply,
the most restrictive shall govern.
Measurements may be made at points of maximum restrictive category,
upon written notification to the operator, the treatment of violation of
the lesser violation will govern the operation of the facility.
c. For any residential receptor, the vibration emanating from any
nonresidential source shall not exceed the category levels established
for the time of day as indicated in Table I - Vibration Level Restrictions.
Equipment shall be removed from service and returned to service
according to the "Treatment of Violation" section of Table I.
Table I.
Vibration Level Restrictions
Nonresidential source to residential receptor when measured at or
within an adjacent residential property line, or receiving residential
property line on multi-use property including within the receptor
building. Measurements may be made at points of Maximum Vibration
Intensity.
§ 20-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.4
1:305
Performance Standard
Category Applicable Hours
Treatment of
Violations
1 Gross vibration level 24 hours Cease use within 24
hours of written
notification. Return
to service after
equipment is below
sensory level of
perception.
2 Sensory level of
perception
11:00 p.m. to 7:30
a.m. workdays and
24 hours weekends
and legal holidays
Cease use 30 days
after written
notification or
written extension to
comply. Return to
service when it is
determined that
equipment is below
sensory level or
perception.
3 ANSI S3.29-1983
weighted according
to Section 2(f)
7:30 a.m. to 11:00
p.m. weighted 2.25
11:00 p.m. to 7:30
a.m. weighted 1.0
Same as Category 2.
d. In the case of "Gross Vibration," it shall be necessary to establish the
presence of secondary or sympathetic vibration on the receptor
property to cite a violation. After the establishment of a violation of the
"Gross Vibration Level," the operator of the source may be required to
produce test results demonstrating compliance with ANSI S3.29-1983
with the weighting levels specified in Section 2(f).
e. In the case of "Sensory Level of Perception" exceedance, it shall be
necessary to establish that vibrations exist on the receptor property in
excess of the background vibration level of the neighborhood, or of the
receptor property with the source off. After the establishment of a
violation of the "Sensory Level of Perception" standard, the operator
may be required to produce test results demonstrating compliance with
ANSI-S3.29-1983 with the weighting levels specified in Section 2(f).
f. In the case of "ANSI S3.29-1983 Level" (American National Standard
Guide to the Evaluation of Human Exposure to Vibration in Buildings),
it shall suffice to show that ANSI S3.29-1983 Figure 4 (Combined-
Response Base Curve for Undefined Axis of Human Vibration) with the
weighting factors in Table A1 of 1.0 applied to the hours of 11:00 p.m. to
7:30 a.m. and the weighting factor of 2.25 applied to 7:30 a.m. to 11:00
p.m. has been exceeded.
g. Saturdays/Sundays and legal holidays shall conform with Performance
Standard Category 2 for 24 hours.
§ 20-3.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-3.4
1:306
§ 20-3.5. Penalties. [Ord. #020-1995, § 4]
Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalty set forth in the
violations and penalties section of the general provisions of the Code of the
Town of Guttenberg. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered in
separate violation for the purpose of the penalty section.
§ 20-4. HEALTH AND SANITARY REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 20-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
As used in this section:
ADULTERATION OR ADULTERATED — When used in connection with
foods, drugs, cosmetics, or devices, these terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 24:5-8 to 24:5-11.1.
APPROVED — Shall mean food or drink, a source of food or drink, a method,
a device or a piece of equipment meeting requirements of the Board of
Health and the State Department of Health or as per law.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Shall mean a licensed Sanitary First Grade
Inspector or public health investigator.
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean the Guttenberg Board of Health.
CLEANERS — Shall mean any place, premises, building, part of building,
cellar or basement or room or establishment used therein for the purpose
of washing, dry cleaning or drying of clothing, linens or any other type of
wash both on or off the premises.
COSMETIC — Shall have the meaning ascribed to it by N.J.S.A. 24:1-1.
COSMETIC PLANT OR ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any place,
premises, building, cellar or basement, apartment or room occupied or used
therein for the having, holding, collection, handling, production, processing,
mixing, compounding, manufacture, packing, storage, distribution or sale
of: (1) articles used (for or as cosmetics) for or intended to be rubbed,
poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, introduced into, or otherwise applied to
the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting
attractiveness or altering the appearance and, (2) articles intended for use
as a component of any such article, except that such term shall not include
soap.
DESIGNEE — Shall mean any person so deemed by the Health Officer.
DEVICE — Shall have the meaning ascribed to it by N.J.S.A. 24:1-1.
h. Testing by the facility operator shall be conducted in the presence of
the local enforcement official. The equipment being tested must be
operated in any modes, speed, materials, and operating conditions
determined by the local enforcement official to be sufficient to
approximate vibration conditions which the facility is likely to produce.
§ 20-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4.1
1:307
DRUG — Shall have the meaning ascribed to it by N.J.S.A. 24:1-1.
DRUG PLANT OR ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any place, premises,
building, part of building, cellar or basement, apartment or room occupied
or used therein for having, holding, collection, handling, production,
processing, mixing, compounding, manufacture, packing, storage,
distribution or sale of:
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any person who handles any food, drug or
cosmetics, or device or article used for food, drugs, cosmetics, or device
used in the having, holding, collection, handling, production, preparation,
processing, manufacture, packing, storage, distribution of food, drugs or
cosmetics.
EQUIPMENT — Shall mean any mechanical apparatus or contrivance or
parts thereof used in the production, processing, preparation,
compounding, mixing, bottling, manufacture, packing, storage or
distribution of food, drugs, devices or cosmetics.
FOOD — Shall mean any raw, cooked or processed edible substances, water,
ice, beverages or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or
in part for human consumption.
HEALTH CLUB/SPA — Shall mean any place, premises, building, part of
building, cellar or basement or room or establishment that is designated
therein for indoor sports, exercise or physical education.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the legally designated Health Officer of
the Town of Guttenberg.
LAUNDRY — Shall mean any place, building, part of building, cellar or
basement or room, or establishment used therein for the purpose of
washing, cleaning and/or drying articles of clothing, linens or any other type
of wash.
MISBRANDED — When used in connection with food, drugs, cosmetics or
devices, shall have the meaning ascribed to it by N.J.S.A. 24:5-16 et seq.
NUISANCE — Shall mean any condition, or cause which may produce noise,
offensive odor or any condition which may be an annoyance, a hazard, or a
detriment to human health.
ORDER OR RULE — Shall mean any directive of the Health Officer.
PERSON — Shall mean and include an individual, firm, corporation,
association, society, partnership and their agents or employees.
Articles used (for or as drugs) for or intended for use in the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or other
animal, or
a.
Articles (other than food) used or intended to affect the structure or any
function of the body of man or other animal, or
b.
Articles intended for use as a component of any article specified in
paragraphs a or b.
c.
§ 20-4.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-4.1
1:308
RECREATIONAL BATHING PLACE — See the definition in N.J.A.C. 8:26 et
seq.
RETAIL COSMETIC ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any place, premises,
building, part of building, cellar or basement, apartment or room occupied
or used therein for providing services to the public for cleansing,
beautifying, promoting attractiveness or altering appearance, and
promoting comfort. These shall include, but shall not be limited to: barber
shops, hair salons, nail salons, beauty parlors, beauty salons, and tanning
salons.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — See the definitions in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.3,
"Definitions."
TOWN — Shall mean the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 20-4.2. Inspections. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
The Health Officer or his authorized agent hereby has the authority to
conduct inspections of all establishments delineated in Guttenberg Revised
General Ordinances Section 4-50, all drug and cosmetic establishments as
well as all taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, dance clubs and any retail food
establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.3 and any similar establishment
where food is prepared for retail sale or service on the premises or
elsewhere, in any other retail eating or drinking establishment or operation
where food or drink is served, handled or provided for the public with or
without charge to ensure that the following requirements are met. Such is
not an exclusive list and the Health Officer or his authorized agent may
inspect all the above establishments or facilities for other defects he might
reasonably believe might impact on public health. The Health Officer or his
authorized agent may inspect for compliance with the following:
a. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be weathertight,
watertight, safe, clean, sanitary and in good repair.
b. Every window, door and basement shall be weathertight, watertight
and kept in a clean sanitary way and in good repair.
c. All parts of the establishment shall be kept in a rodentproof and
insectproof condition. Effective control measures shall be utilized to
minimize and eliminate the presence of insects, rodents and other
vermin.
d. All toilet facilities, showers and baths shall be kept in a clean, sanitary
way and in good working condition. The above facilities shall be kept
odor- and nuisance-free.
e. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free of
defects, leaks and obstructions.
f. Hand-washing facilities shall have an adequate supply of hand-washing
soap and sanitary towels or approved hand-drying device. Use of
§ 20-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4.2
1:309
§ 20-4.3. Examination of Adultered, Unwholesome Articles. [Ord.
No. 15-2016]
common towels is prohibited. Where disposable towels are used, waste
receptacles shall be located conveniently near hand-washing facilities.
g. All showers and baths shall have hot and cold running water. Hot water
shall be at a temperature of 120° F.
h. All equipment used within establishments shall be maintained in good
repair and kept in a safe, clean and sanitary way.
i. All chemicals shall be clearly marked and stored in areas designated by
the Health Officer or his authorized agent.
j. All parts of the establishment, equipment and its premises shall be kept
neat, clean, free of odors and nuisances and in good working condition.
k. All equipment shall be stored in a clean, safe and nuisance-free manner.
l. All parts of the establishment shall be properly ventilated according to
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
m. Establishments shall have health and safety notices, which the Health
Officer deems necessary, to be conspicuously posted in areas
designated by the Health Officer or his authorized agent.
n. Any other requirement deemed necessary by the Health Officer in view
of the operation of the establishment shall be met.
o. Employees shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and
shall conform to good hygienic practices during all working periods.
p. All garbage and rubbish and refuse shall be kept in leak proof,
nonabsorbent containers constructed of durable metal, or other
approved types of materials which do not leak and which do not absorb
liquids.
q. Adequate lockers within dressing rooms or other suitable facilities shall
be provided and used for the storage of employees' coats, clothing and
personal belongings.
r. Laundered cloths and napkins shall be stored in clean, neat and
protected place until used.
s. All storage places used for the storage of utensils or equipment shall be
kept neat, clean, and in good repair and in a sanitary way.
t. All outside areas of establishments and facilities delineated in this
section of this chapter shall be kept clean, in good repair and nuisance
free.
u. All used or soiled linens, cloths, and towels shall be stored in a leak
proof container with a securely fastened lid.
§ 20-4.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-4.3
1:310
§ 20-4.4. Food Handler's Certification. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
a. The Health Officer shall have the following powers in regard to the
examination of food, drink, drugs, cosmetics and other substances as
may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness, adulteration,
contamination or misbranding.
b. The Health Officer or his authorized agent may prohibit the sale or use
of any food, drink, device, drug or cosmetic which is or is suspected of
being unwholesome, adulterated, contaminated or misbranded.
c. The Health Officer or his authorized agent shall condemn any food,
drink, drug, cosmetic or device and cause it to be destroyed or disposed
of in such a manner as to make it impossible to thereafter be used for
human consumption or use, whenever suspected of being
unwholesome, adulterated, contaminated or misbranded.
d. The person operating a food, drug, device or cosmetic plant or
establishment shall permit access to all parts of the establishment and
shall make available all records concerning the operation of said plant
or establishment to the Health Officer or his authorized agent.
a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FOOD — Shall mean and include any substance used or intended to be
used as food or drink for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATION — Shall mean a certificate issued
by the Board of Health of Guttenberg or any other agency recognized
by the Board of Health of Guttenberg.
PERSON IN CHARGE — Shall mean any person charged with the
responsibility of overseeing the operations, including the supervision
of employees engaged in the preparing, processing and sale of food
or drink intended for human consumption, be it for on- or off-premises
consumption.
b. Certificate Required.
1. No establishment shall be open for business in the preparing,
processing and sale of food or drink intended for human
consumption without having a person in charge on the premises
who has a current food handler's certificate.
2. At least one person on each shift shall have a current food handler's
certificate.
3. The food handler's certificate shall not be issued or granted to any
person unless the person seeking such food handler's certificate
shall have first completed an approved course of general
instruction in health education, sanitation, personal hygiene, food
§ 20-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4.4
1:311
§ 20-4.5. Frequency and Areas of Inspections. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
The Health Officer or his authorized agent shall inspect any licensee,
business, establishment, or facility as often as he deems necessary.
§ 20-4.6. Access by Health Officer. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
The person operating any licensed, establishment, business or facility shall
permit access to all parts of the licensed, establishment, business or facility.
No person shall unlawfully hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, or prevent the
Health Officer or his authorized agent regarding inspections related to this
section.
§ 20-4.7. Public Posting of Inspection Reports. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
§ 20-4.8. Evaluation of Reports. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
protection, dishwashing procedures and other related health
matters.
c. Application for certificate; course.
1. No establishment shall operate for more than 30 days without the
person in charge employed in that establishment applying for a
food handler's certificate.
2. No establishment shall operate for more than three months without
the person in charge employed in that establishment completing an
approved course of instruction in food-handling techniques.
d. No person to whom a food handler's certificate is issued or granted
shall give, loan, transfer or permit the same to be used by any other
person, for any purpose whatsoever.
a. An inspection report shall be presented to the owner or person in
charge or in their absence, any employee of the establishment, licensee,
business or facility at the completion of each inspection.
b. The most recent report shall be maintained by the operator of each
establishment, licensee, business or facility on the premises for review
by the public, upon request. Inspection reports and other applicable
records shall be maintained on the premises for review for a minimum
of two years.
c. Every licensee delineated in subsection 20-4.2 shall display such license
in a conspicuous place near the public entrance of the establishment in
such a manner that the public may view said license.
d. The current inspection report for each inspected business
establishment shall be posted on the official Town Web Site.
§ 20-4.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-4.8
1:312
§ 20-4.9. Submission of Plans and Preoperational Inspections. [Ord.
No. 15-2016]
Whenever an establishment, business, or licensed facility is constructed
or renovated, and whenever a structure is converted for use pursuant to
any licensed facility, business or establishment delineated by subsection
20-4.2 hereof, or alterations are made that will significantly change the
nature of the operation, plans and specifications pertaining to the sanitary
nature of the establishment such as proposed equipment layout, equipment
design and installation shall be submitted to the Health Officer or his
authorized agent for review and approval before construction, renovations
or conversion is begun. The Health Officer shall review these plans and
respond accordingly within 30 days within the date of submission. No
establishment, business, or licensed facility shall be constructed, renovated,
a. Immediately upon conclusion of the inspection the Health Officer or
licensed sanitary inspector shall issue the evaluation of the
establishment and leave the original copy with the person in charge.
b. Evaluations shall be as follows:
1. Satisfactory. The establishment is found to be operating in
substantial compliance with this section and personnel have
demonstrated that they are aware of and are practicing proper
sanitation and safety principles as outlined in this section.
2. Conditionally Satisfactory. At the time of the inspection the
establishment was found not to be operating in substantial
compliance with this section and was in violation of one or more of
the provisions of this section. Due to the nature of these violations a
reinspection is scheduled. The reinspection shall be conducted at
an unannounced time and a full inspection must be conducted.
Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable
time and determined by the nature of the violation.
3. Unsatisfactory. Whenever an establishment, business, licensee or
facility is operating in violation of this section, with one or more
violations that constitute gross unsanitary or unsafe conditions
which pose an imminent health hazard, the Health Officer or his
authorized agent shall issue an unsatisfactory evaluation. The
Health Officer or his authorized agent shall immediately request
the person in charge to voluntarily cease operation until it is shown
on reinspection that conditions which warrant an unsatisfactory
evaluation no longer exists. If any person neglects or refuses to
comply with a request to voluntarily cease operation of any
establishment, facility or licensee delineated in subsection 20-4.2
of this section, the Health Officer shall institute an action pursuant
to subsection 20-4.12 of this section. The Health Officer may, in
appropriate situations, seek injunctive relief, at his or her
discretion. Such action shall be effective immediately.
§ 20-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4.9
1:313
or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications previously
submitted to and approved by the Health Officer.
§ 20-4.10. Preoperational Inspections. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
Whenever plans or specifications are required to be submitted to the Health
Officer by subsection 20-4.9 hereof, the Health Officer or his authorized
agent shall inspect the licensee, business, facility or establishment prior to
the start of operations to determine compliance with the requirements of
this section and any other law which governs said licensee, business, facility
or establishment.
§ 20-4.11. Orders; Health Officer's Power to Promulgate. [Ord. No.
15-2016]
The Health Officer is hereby empowered to promulgate orders at his
discretion, to ensure that all provisions of this section and all sections of
the New Jersey State Sanitary Code which apply to said licensee are met.
Such orders shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order
is directed shall comply therewith immediately.
§ 20-4.12. Suspension of License. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
§ 20-4.13. Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
When an establishment, business or licensee has had more than two
unsatisfactory ratings or two license suspensions within a two-year period
a. The Health Officer is hereby empowered to suspend the license of any
establishment, business or licensee that has been issued a license by
the Town of Guttenberg if any provision of this section or any provision
or regulation of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code that regulates said
establishment, business or licensee is not met.
b. Immediately, upon notification of Health Officer or his authorized agent,
the operator of said establishment, business, licensee or facility shall
cease operation and shall not resume operation until approval is given
by the Health Officer or his authorized agent. When a license is
suspended pursuant to this section or an order to cease operation is
issued by the Health Officer or his authorized agent, the operator shall
immediately post on the front entrance of the establishment or facility
an evaluation placard which shall state the following: "The license of
this establishment has been suspended by order of the Health Officer of
the Town of Guttenberg."
c. Any establishment or facility not licensed by the Town of Guttenberg,
but delineated in subsection 20-4.2 shall be subject to an order to cease
operations. Such facility or establishment shall immediately post on the
front entrance of the establishment an evaluation placard which states
the following: "This establishment or facility is hereby ordered to cease
operations by order of the Health Officer of the Town of Guttenberg."
§ 20-4.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 20-4.13
1:314
of time, issued by the Town of Guttenberg, the Health Officer may revoke
and terminate such license. Any person aggrieved by such action may
petition a court of competent jurisdiction for relief of such action.
§ 20-4.14. Hearings. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
§ 20-4.15. Legal Authority. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
All licensed, establishments, businesses and facilities shall be operated in
compliance with all provisions of this section and any other regulation as
per law.
§ 20-4.16. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or any provision
of any rule, or regulation or order promulgated by the Health Officer
pursuant to the authority granted by this section shall, upon conviction, in
the Municipal Court of Guttenberg or other Court of competent jurisdiction
be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $2,000 or
community service for a period of not more than 90 days or imprisonment
a. The Health Officer is hereby empowered to order a hearing for the
purposes of ensuring that all provisions of this section and all provisions
of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code which apply to said business,
establishment or licensee are met. The Health Officer shall notify, in
writing, said licensee stating the time, location and a brief reason for
the hearing. Once notified, the licensee shall comply with all aspects of
said order.
b. Any person affected by any rule or order which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this section, or of
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Health Officer, provided
that such person shall file in the office of the Health Officer a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of
the grounds therefor within 10 days after the day that notice was
served. Upon receipt of such petition, the Health Officer is hereby
empowered to order a hearing and set a time and place for such hearing
and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why
such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition
was filed, provided that, upon application of the petitioner, the Health
Officer may postpone the date of hearing for a reasonable time beyond
such ten-day period, if in his judgement the petitioner has submitted a
good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
c. After such hearing, the Health Officer shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the order or rule, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this section and of the rules, orders and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with.
§ 20-4.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4.16
1:315
for a term not exceeding 90 days, and each day's failure to comply with any
provision, rule or order shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.22
§ 20-4.17. Reinspection Fees. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
§ 20-4.18. Repealer. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
All ordinances, codes or parts of the same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 20-4.19. Severability. [Ord. No. 15-2016]
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this section or Code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
Chapter 21
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 21-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 21-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 1.1; Ord. 5/21/84
§ 1.1; Ord. #008/06 § 21-1.1]
The legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of Guttenberg, New Jersey
does ordain as follows.
a. Whenever, upon inspection, any licensee, facility or entity licensed
under subsection 4-20.2 of the Code of the Town of Guttenberg or any
licensee, facility or establishment defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 (Retail Food
Establishments) is issued an unsatisfactory or a conditional satisfactory
rating by the local health authority which requires a reinspection, a
reinspection fee of $150 shall be paid directly to the local health
authority.
b. Said fee shall be paid by the owner, owners, managers, management
agency or operator of any aforementioned licensed facility or entity
listed above directly to the local health authority within seven business
days of notice of an unsatisfactory or conditional satisfactory rating.
22.Editor's Note: Violation of the State Sanitary Code shall be as provided in N.J.S.A.
26:1A-10.
§ 20-4.16 GUTTENBERG CODE § 21-1.2
1:316
§ 21-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 1.2; Ord. 5/21/84 § 1.2;
Ord. #008/06 § 21-1.2]
§ 21-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 1.3; Ord. 5/21/84
§ 1.3; Ord. #008/06 § 21-1.3]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 21-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 1.4; Ord.
5/21/84 § 1.4; Ord. #008/06 § 21-1.4]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
a. The flood hazard areas of Guttenberg are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 21-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1.4
1:317
§ 21-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 2.0; Ord. 5/21/84 § 2.0; Ord.
#008/06 § 21-2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Code
Official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO or AH zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map with a 1% or greater chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the flood
plain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 21-1.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 21-2
1:318
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within an area of
special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an
Area of Special Flood Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report provided
in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation or normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such state of local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the higher natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
b.
§ 21-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2
1:319
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a buildings lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreation
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes subsequent improvements
to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348)
— Shall include substantial improvements and shall mean the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 21-2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 21-2
1:320
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 21-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 21-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 3.1;
Ord. 5/21/84 § 3.1; Ord. #008/06 § 21-3.1]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Guttenberg, Hudson County, New Jersey.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
b.
§ 21-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3.2
1:321
§ 21-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. 8/2/82 § 3.2; Ord. 5/21/84 § 3.2; Ord. 008/06 § 21-3.2]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Guttenberg, Community
No. 340220, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 21-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 3.3; Ord. 5/21/
84 § 3.3; Ord. #008/06 § 21-3.3]
Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations conditions) shall constitute an offense
justifiable in the Municipal Court. Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Town from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violations.
§ 21-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 3.4;
Ord. 5/21/84 § 3.4; Ord. #008/06 § 21-3.4]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 21-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 3.5; Ord. 5/21/84 § 3.5; Ord.
#008/06 § 21-3.5]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Hudson
County, New Jersey (all jurisdictions)" dated August 16, 2006.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Hudson County, New Jersey (all
jurisdictions) as shown on Index No. 34017CINDOA, and on panels
34017C0042D and 34017C0061D, whose effective date is August 16,
2006.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the office of the
Town Clerk at 6808 Park Avenue, Guttenberg, New Jersey, 07093.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 21-3.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 21-3.6
1:322
§ 21-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 3.6;
Ord. 5/21/84 § 3.6; Ord. #008/06 § 21-3.6]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Guttenberg, any officer
or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration; for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 21-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 21-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 4.2;
Ord. 5/21/84 § 4.2; Ord. #008-06 § 21-4.1]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
21-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Code Official or Secretary to the Zoning and
Planning Board and may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 21-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 4.3;
Ord. 5/21/84 § 4.3; Ord. #008-06 § 21-4.2]
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 21-5.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 21-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4.3
1:323
§ 21-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord. 8/
2/82 § 4.3; Ord. 5/21/84 § 4.3; Ord. #008/06 § 21-4.4.3]
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
21-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer subsection 21-5.2a,
Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and subsection 21-5.2b,
Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures;
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section
21-4.1c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
§ 21-4.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 21-4.3
1:324
§ 21-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. 5/21/84 § 4.4; Ord. #008-06
§ 21-4.4]
e. Interpretation of Firm Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual filed conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection 21-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Guttenberg Zoning and Planning Board as established by
Guttenberg shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Guttenberg Zoning and Planning Board shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirements,
decision, or determination made by the Construction Code Official
in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Guttenberg Zoning and
Planning Board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court of New Jersey.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Guttenberg Zoning and
Planning Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program of that area;
§ 21-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4.4
1:325
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 21-4.4a,4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Guttenberg Zoning and Planning
Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Condition for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (k) in subsection 21-4.4a,4 have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variance may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variance shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
§ 21-4.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 21-4.4
1:326
§ 21-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 21-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 5.1; Ord. 5/21/84 § 5.1;
Ord. #008/06 § 21-5.1]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
21-4.4a,4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed materials and utility equipment resisting to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the system into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
§ 21-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-5.1
1:327
§ 21-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. 8/2/82 § 5.2; Ord. 5/21/84 § 5.2;
Ord. #008/06 § 21-5.2]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation date have
been provided as set forth in subsection 21-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 21-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
2. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
§ 21-5.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 21-5.2
1:328
Chapter 22
WATERFRONT REGULATIONS
§ 22-1. WATERFRONT CLEANUP.23
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction.
1. New Construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation or together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, shall:
2. Be required within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
3. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
4. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
5. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods or construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in subsection 21-4.3c,2.
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 21-5.1a,2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
§ 21-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1.1
1:329
§ 22-1.1. Short Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Waterfront Cleanup Regulations."
§ 22-1.2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
DEBRIS — Shall mean any loose material not attached to the land or to any
structure and which is capable of becoming drift, and any watercraft, not
under safe control.
DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Works
as appointed by the Mayor, and who may appoint, with the approval of the
Mayor, an authorized agent to act in his behalf.
DRIFT — Shall mean any floatable material which may cause damage to
vessels or craft.
FINAL ORDER — Shall mean either the order of the Mayor, after the time
to request a review thereof has lapsed, or the order of the Mayor issued as
a result of the review requested in subsection 22-1.7.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Shall mean the waterways which are capable
of carrying interstate commerce, and the tributaries thereto, within the
geographical limits of the Town.
PREMISES — Shall mean the land, building, wharf, pier, dolphin, boom,
weir, breakdown, bulkhead, jetty, or other structure and shall include all or
any as may be necessary.
WATERFRONT, SHORE OR BANK — Shall mean that portion of the land
which borders navigable waters and which lies shoreward of the established
harbor lines or low water mark within the corporate limits of the Town.
§ 22-1.3. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is the elimination of sources of drift and
debris which constitute possible obstacles or hazards to existing navigation
on the navigable waters of this Town by the removal and disposal of debris
and deteriorated structures on the shores of such waters, and liable to be
washed into such waters.
§ 22-1.4. Sources of Drift; Prevention.
Whenever the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that:
a. Debris placed or deposited on the banks of any navigable water is liable
to be washed into such navigable water by any cause whatsoever and
thereby be or become a source of drift likely to hinder, impede or
otherwise obstruct navigation; or any watercraft not under safe control;
or
23.Editor's Note: The original ordinance establishing the Waterfront Cleanup Regulations is
on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 22-1.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 22-1.4
1:330
§ 22-1.5. Order of Mayor.
The order of the Mayor issued pursuant to Section 22-1.4 of this chapter
shall be in writing, directed to the occupant, and last known owner of
record, if not such occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the
complaint, and shall specify whether the condition complained of shall be
removed, abated, altered or repaired.
§ 22-1.6. Service of Order.
The order of the Mayor issued pursuant to subsection 22-1.5 shall be
served upon the occupant, and the last known owner of record, if not such
occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the complaint either by
personally delivering a copy of such Order to such occupant and last known
owner of record or by registered mail addressed to such persons at their
last known address.
§ 22-1.7. Review of Order.
Within 15 days after service of the order of the Mayor issued pursuant
to subsection 22-1.5 or, under emergency, within such shorter time as the
Mayor may prescribe, the person to whom such order is directed, or any
person aggrieved thereby, may appeal to the Mayor to review the same. The
Mayor, or his agent after such review, at which all interested parties shall
be afforded the opportunity to be heard, may affirm, modify or reverse the
order of the Mayor as the facts may warrant. Unless the same is declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be arbitrary, capricious or not supported
by substantial evidence, the order of the Mayor, after review thereof, shall
be final and conclusive.
§ 22-1.8. Compliance with Order.
In the event that the persons to whom the order of the Mayor is directed
fail or refuse to comply with the terms of such order within 30 days after
such order has become final, the Director shall without further notice to
any person, take or cause to be taken the necessary action to remove,
abate, alter, or repair the nuisance as specified in the order. The costs and
expenses incident thereto shall be a personal charge against the occupant,
and last owner of record, if not such occupant, of the premises affected and
all appurtenances thereto.
b. The condition of any wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir, breakdown,
bulkhead, jetty, or other structure on or bordering on the shores of any
navigable water is so dilapidated and deteriorated as to be or become a
source of drift or debris liable to be washed into such navigable waters
by any cause whatsoever and thereby likely to hinder, impede, or
otherwise obstruct navigation, the Director may find the same to be a
public nuisance and thereupon order that the same be removed,
abated, altered or repaired as such Order may specify; may be issued by
the Mayor on the Director's Report.
§ 22-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1.9
1:331
§ 22-1.9. Abandonment Prohibited; Drift or Debris Prohibited.
No person shall abandon any flat bottomed boat, barge, scow, raft or vessel
upon any public land or waterway to or upon any private property within the
Town without the prior written permission of the Director of Public Works,
who is hereby designated by the Board of Council to perform this function,
subject to review and final decision by the Mayor. No drift or debris shall be
caused or continued by any person.
§ 22-1.10. Bond Required for Anchorage Over 10 Days.
The owner of any occupied or unoccupied barge, which is to be docked in or
on the banks of any river or navigable waterway within the Town for more
than 10 consecutive days, shall post a surety bond in the amount of $25,000
with the Town Clerk and in favor of the Town, the bond being issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ 22-1.11. Forfeiture of Bond; Reimbursement.
In the event that a barge bonded in accordance with the preceding
subsection sinks or otherwise becomes unable to navigate under its own
power, the bond so posted shall be forfeited to the Town, to aid in the
removal of such barge from any river, riverbank or navigable waterway
within the Town.
§ 22-1.12. Bond Cancellation Upon Removal of Vessel.
The surety on a bond issued pursuant to the above shall have the right to
immediately cancel such bond upon the removal of the barge from the rivers
and riverbanks of the Town.
§ 22-1.13. Vessels Not Affected.
This chapter shall not apply to barges, ships or boats owned or operated
by common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, nor shall it
apply to pleasure craft used on a seasonal basis.
§ 22-1.14. Violations; Penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter by abandoning any flat bottomed boat,
barge, scow, or raft without permission shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed by N.J.S.A. 12:7C-1 et seq. as amended and supplemented. All
other violations shall be punishable by the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. Each day shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 22-2. SMOKING OR MATCH LIGHTING ON THE WATERFRONT.
§ 22-2.1. Prohibition. [Ord. 7/2/51 § 1]
No person shall smoke, handle or use tobacco in any form lighted by fire, or
ignite matches, or carry matches of any kind on any pier, bulkhead, wharve,
§ 22-1.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 22-2.1
1:332
dock, shed, warehouse, office or approach to the properties located on the
waterfront in the Town or on any craft or vessel berthed or moored thereto,
or on any dray or vehicle of any description passing on, through or over or
using the properties.
§ 22-2.2. Penalty. [Ord. 7/2/51 § 2]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 23
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 23-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 1]
The Town of Guttenberg hereby grants to Vision Cable Television Company,
which name is designated on the amended application and filed with the
Public Utility Commission of the State of New Jersey, its consent to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the Town, poles, wire, cables,
underground conduits, manhole and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the Town of a cable
television system and cable communications system.
§ 23-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. 76.5) and the Cable Television Act
(N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.) and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter
or conflict with the Federal or State definitions;
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean Chapter 186 of the General
Laws of New Jersey, 1972, Section 48:5A-1 et seq.
COMPANY — Shall mean the grantee of rights under this chapter and is
known as Vision Cable Television company, which name is designated on the
amended application filed with the Public Utility Commission of the State of
New Jersey.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Town of Guttenberg, County of Hudson,
in the State of New Jersey.
§ 23-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 3]
Public hearings concerning the franchise herein granted to the Company
were held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act and pursuant to communications with the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners and on dates meeting the approval of representatives of all
applicants. The hearings have been held as above stated and have been fully
§ 22-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:333
open to the public; and the Municipality having received at these hearings
all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this
franchise, the Municipality hereby finds that the Company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications, and
that the Company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate
and feasible.
§ 23-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 4]
The consent herein granted shall expire 15 years from the date of the
expiration of the original Certificate of Approval as issued by the Board of
Public Utilities. This term shall be automatically renewed for a period of 10
years unless either the Municipality or the Company shall, not later than 60
days before the expiration of the initial term, serve upon the party notice
of its intention not to accept such automatic renewal as set forth in N.J.S.A.
48:5A-25.
§ 23-5. FRANCHISE EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL. [Ord. 5/19/93B
§ 5]
If the Company seeks a successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and Certificate of Approval
in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and 16 and
applicable State and Federal rules and regulations. The Company shall
also petition the Board for a Certificate of Approval authorizing continued
operation during the period following expiration of the consent granted
herein, and until such a time that a decision is made by the Mayor and
Board of Council relative to the renewal of the consent.
§ 23-6. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 6]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid from subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the Municipality, or any amount permitted by the New
Jersey Cable Television Act or otherwise allowed by law.
§ 23-7. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 7]
The consent granted herein to the Company shall apply to the entirety of
the Municipality of the Town of Guttenberg, and any property hereafter
annexed by the Municipality by law.
§ 23-8. CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE. [Ord. 5/19/93B §§ 8]
The Company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application. The timetable as
presented in the application incorporated herein has been determined to be
reasonable by the Town of Guttenberg.
§ 23-3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 23-9
1:334
§ 23-9. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. 5-19-93B § 9]
The Company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
franchise territory described herein, in accordance with the proposal for
the provision of services as described in the application. Any additional
extension of the system will be made in accordance with the proposal in the
application.
§ 23-10. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 10]
§ 23-11. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. 5/19/903 B § 11]
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment, malfunctions and similar matters. The present address of the
Company for such purpose is 200 Roosevelt Avenue, Palisades Park, New
Jersey. Such local business office shall be open during normal business
hours, but in no event less than 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
§ 23-12. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 12]
The Cable Television Advisory Committee formed by the Mayor and Board
of Council, or any designated persons or entity which may be appointed
a. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of the work.
b. Relocation. If any time during the period of this consent the Town shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality, shall remove, relay
and relocate its equipment at the expense of the Company.
c. Temporary Removal of Cables. The Company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts to is facilities to allow moving of buildings,
machinery or in other similar circumstances. The expense shall be
borne by the party requesting such action except when requested by
the Municipality, in which case the Company shall bear the cost.
d. Removal or Trimming Trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the Company's facilities.
§ 23-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-12
1:335
from time to time by the Mayor and Board of Council, shall be empowered
to receive any complaints and to process these complaints to the Office of
Cable Television, which is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer for
the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall be
received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-7.1.
§ 23-13. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 13]
During the life of the franchise, the Company shall give a performance
bond to the Town of Guttenberg in the sum of $25,000. Such bond shall be
to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of the Company as
represented in its application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ 23-14. RATES FOR CATV RECEPTION SERVICE. [Ord. 5/19/93B
§ 14]
The Town, having determined the rates proposed in the application for
cable television receipt service are reasonable, approves them as presented,
subject to review and regulation by the Board, if permitted by law.
§ 23-15. BASIC SERVICE. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 15]
The Basic Service includes those channels which the Company is required
to carry by Federal Communications Commission rules and any channel
which the Company carries without a separate or additional charge.
§ 23-16. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 16]
The Company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect, at its
sole expense, at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Town of Guttenberg as an insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the
minimum amounts of
§ 23-17. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 17]
The Company shall hold the Town of Guttenberg harmless for any liability
arising out of the Company's operation and construction of its CATV system.
§ 23-18. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. 5/19/93B § 18]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
a. $150,000 for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit,
however, of $500,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one
accident;
b. $100,000 for property damages resulting from any one accident, and
c. $50,000 for all other types of liability; or for any other amounts
statutorily mandated.
§ 23-12 GUTTENBERG CODE § 23-18
1:336
Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 23-19. CONSISTENCY WITH FUTURE FEDERAL AND STATE
RULES, REGULATIONS AND ORDERS. [Ord. 5/19/93 § 19]
It is understood that should any State or Federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent consistent with the application dates specified in the
change.
§ 23-20. EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE ORDINANCE. [Ord. 5/19/93B
§ 20]
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which the
Town of Guttenberg received written notification that the Company accepts
the terms and conditions herein.
Chapter 24
FILMING
§ 24-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #011/06]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — Shall mean the taking of still or motion pictures, either on film
videotape or similar recording equipment, for commercial or educational
purposes, intended for viewing on television or in theaters or for
institutional use or for advertising purposes.
PUBLIC LANDS — Shall mean any and every public street, highway,
sidewalk or square, public park or playground or other public place within
the Town which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Town.
§ 24-2. PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION. [Ord. #011/06]
a. No person, firm or corporation shall film or permit filming with the
Town of Guttenberg without first obtaining a permit therefor, which
permit shall set forth the location of such filming and the date or dates
when filming shall take place.
b. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Town Clerk during normal
business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Town Clerk and shall be accompanied by a permit fee
as set forth in Section 24-14. Incidental use of a public sidewalk or
street which does not result in the closing of the street or sidewalk to
public use shall not be considered filming on public land.
§ 23-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:337
§ 24-3. FREQUENCY RESTRICTED. [Ord. #011/06]
No permit shall be issued for filming at a particular location in a residential
zone within the Town of Guttenberg to permit filming at said location on
more than four days during any one calendar year.
§ 24-4. INSURANCE; INDEMNIFICATION. [Ord. #011/06]
No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the Town of
Guttenberg unless the applicant for such permit:
§ 24-5. INTERFERENCE WITH PEDESTRIANS AND TRAFFIC. [Ord.
#011/06]
The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Guttenberg
Police Department with respect thereto.
§ 24-6. INCONVENIENCE TO PROPERTY OWNERS; NOISE;
PARKING. [Ord. #011/06]
The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to minimize
the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners attributable
to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate noise and park
vehicles associated with such filming off the public streets.
§ 24-7. INTERFERENCE WITH OTHER ACTIVITIES. [Ord. #011/06]
The holder shall avoid any interference with previously scheduled activities
upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible, any interference with
normal public activity on such public lands.
§ 24-8. MINIMIZATION AND REMOVAL OF DEBRIS, TEMPORARY
STRUCTURE OR TEMPORARY SETS. [Ord. #011/06]
The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris, rubbish, temporary sets and/or temporary
structure during filming and shall be responsible for removing all
c. Where filming takes place on private property, permission of the owner
must be obtained in writing.
d. One permit shall be required for each location.
a. Provides proof of insurance coverage as follows: for bodily injury for
any one person, in the amount of $500,000; and for any aggregate
occurrence, in the amount of $1,000,000.
b. Agrees, in writing, to indemnify and save harmless the Town of
Guttenberg from any and all liability or damages from the use of such
public lands.
§ 24-2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 24-8
1:338
equipment, debris, temporary sets, temporary structure and/or other
rubbish from the filming location upon the completion of filming or the
expiration of the filming location upon the completion of filming or the
expiration of the permit, whichever comes first.
§ 24-9. PERMITTED DAYS AND HOURS. [Ord. #011/06]
Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown, whichever is earlier, in residential
zones.
§ 24-10. DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEALS. [Ord. #011/06]
§ 24-11. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #011/06]
The Town Clerk may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements or
limitations of this chapter and may authorize filming other than during the
hours herein described or may permit filming at a particular location in a
residential zone on more than four days during any one calendar year or
may waive any other limitation or requirement of this chapter whenever
it determines that strict compliance with such limitations will pose an
a. The Town Clerk may refuse to issue a permit whenever he/she
determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by other
Town agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming at
the location and/or the time set forth in the application would violate
any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the public's
use of public lands, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment
or adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety
or welfare.
b. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Town Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief may appeal to the
Mayor and Council. A written notice of appeal setting forth the reasons
for the appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk. An appeal from the
decision of the Town Clerk shall be filed within 10 days of the Town
Clerk's decision. The Mayor and Council shall set the matter down for a
hearing within 30 days of the day on which the notice of appeal was
filed. The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be in the form of a
resolution. A resolution supporting the decision of the Town Clerk or
granting relief shall be approved by the Mayor and Council at the first
regularly scheduled public meeting of the Mayor and Council after the
hearing on the appeal, unless the appellant agrees, in writing, to a later
date for the decision. If such a resolution is not adopted in the time
required, the decision of the Town Clerk shall be deemed to be reversed
and a permit shall be issued in conformity with the application or the
relief shall be deemed denied.
§ 24-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-11
1:339
unreasonable burden upon the applicant and that such a permit may be
issued without endangering the public's health, safety or welfare.
§ 24-12. NOTIFICATION TO FIRE INSPECTIONS BUREAU. [Ord.
#011/06]
The applicant shall notify the Fire Inspections Bureau 24 hours before
filming takes place and permit the Fire Inspectors to inspect the site and
the equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all fire safety
instructions issued by the Fire Inspector.
§ 24-13. PROVISION OF OFF-DUTY POLICE OFFICERS. [Ord. #011/
06]
The applicant will be required to hire one or more off-duty police officers
when deemed necessary by the Police Chief.
§ 24-14. PERMIT FEES. [Ord. #011/06; Ord. #26-11]
Permit fees shall be as follows:
§ 24-15. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #011/06; Ord.
#27-11]
Any person violating this chapter or rules and regulations contained herein
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $750 or imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 24-16. EXCEPTIONS. [Ord. #011/06]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of new stories
within the Town of Guttenberg.
Chapter 25
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 25-1. DEVELOPER'S FEES.
§ 25-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
a. Filming permit: $500.
b. Daily filming fee: $500.
a. In Holmdel Builder's Association vs. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to the
Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
§ 24-11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 25-1.1
1:340
§ 25-1.2. Basic Requirements. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
§ 25-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a development
included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but
is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
COUNCIL ON AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Shall mean the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing established under the Fair Share Housing
Act, which has primary jurisdiction for the administration of housing
obligations in accordance with sound regional planning consideration in the
State.
DEMOLISHED — Shall mean any act or process that renders more than
50% of a structure or building unsafe for human occupancy or use shall be
considered demolished for the purposes of this section.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable propriety interest in such land.
b. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 Section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
c. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low and moderate income housing. This section shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
a. This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
b. The Town of Guttenberg shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
§ 25-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1.3
1:341
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Shall mean funds paid by any person for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the assessed value of a
property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value
for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5 and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (C. 54:1-35a through
C. 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Shall mean those strategies that
minimize the impact of development on the environment, and enhance
the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
LIVING SPACE — Shall mean all internal areas of a dwelling with a floor to
ceiling height of greater than six feet, exclusive of garages which are not to
be considered as living space.
NATURAL DISASTER — Shall mean a catastrophic event, such as a
hurricane, flood, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, blizzard, or other
natural phenomena that causes extensive human casualties, property
damage or both.
§ 25-1.4. Residential Development Fees. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
a. Imposed Fees.
1. For all residential developments, residential developers shall pay a
fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development, provided no increased density is permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2% of the
equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified
higher percentage of 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Residential
Development.
§ 25-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 25-1.4
1:342
§ 25-1.5. Nonresidential Development Fees. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
1. Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of any municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, except that expansion of an existing
residential structure which increases the living space by less than
20% and/or the volume of the existing structure by less than 20%
shall be exempt from paying a development fee. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
4. A dwelling that is constructed as a replacement for a dwelling that
was demolished as a result of a natural disaster shall be exempt
from paying a development fee. The dwelling that is constructed as
a replacement dwelling must be constructed on the same site as the
dwelling that was demolished as a result of a natural disaster.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
§ 25-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1.5
1:343
§ 25-1.6. Collection Procedures. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
1. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
2. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
3. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption: Form." Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis of the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Town of Guttenberg as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
b. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
§ 25-1.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 25-1.6
1:344
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
Certificate of Occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should the Town of Guttenberg fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due
and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set
forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (C. 40:55D-8.6).
h. 50% of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
building permit and that determined at issuance of Certificate of
Occupancy.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Town of
Guttenberg. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be
made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State
Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq. within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
§ 25-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1.6
1:345
§ 25-1.7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
§ 25-1.8. Use of Funds. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the Town of Guttenberg. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with the Town of
Guttenberg's affordable housing program.
c. Within seven days from the opening of the Trust Fund account, the
Town of Guttenberg shall provide COAH with written authorization, in
the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality,
the bank, and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the
Funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
d. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Town of Guttenberg's fair
share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
§ 25-1.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 25-1.8
1:346
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to: preservation
or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or State standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending
plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Town of Guttenberg for
past housing activities.
c. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low and moderate income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner may entitle the
Town of Guttenberg to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
d. The Town of Guttenberg may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
e. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
§ 25-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1.8
1:347
§ 25-1.9. Monitoring. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
The Town of Guttenberg shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring
forms included in the annual monitoring report related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the Town of Guttenberg's housing program,
as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms
designed by COAH.
§ 25-1.10. Ongoing Collection of Fees. [Ord. #017-08 § 1]
The ability for the Town of Guttenberg to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the
Town of Guttenberg has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has
received COAH's approval of its Development Fee Ordinance. If the Town
of Guttenberg fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development
fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to
forfeiture of any and all funds remaining within its Municipal Trust Fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.
222 (C. 52:27D-320). The Town of Guttenberg shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final site
plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification, nor shall
the Town of Guttenberg retroactively impose a development fee on such
a development. The Town of Guttenberg shall not expend development
fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of
compliance.
Chapter 26
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 26-1. PLANNING BOARD.
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20%
of the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
§ 25-1.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 26-1.1
1:348
§ 26-1.1. Created. [Ord. 12/5/60 § 1; Ord. 12/20/82 § 1; Ord. #08-14]
Pursuant to the statutes in such case made and provided, known as the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), there is hereby created
the Planning Board of the Town of Guttenberg consisting of nine members.
§ 26-1.2. Appointment. [Ord. 12/5/60 § 2; Ord. 12/20/82 § 2]
The members of the Planning Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and
hold their respective offices in accordance with the terms and provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 26-1.3. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 12/5/60 § 3; Ord. 12/20/82 § 3]
The Planning Board shall, subject to the terms of the Municipal Land Use
Law as amended or supplemented and pursuant to appropriate ordinances
enacted by the Town, pursue the purposes and objects of studying, guiding
and planning the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the
Town, to promote, in accordance with the present and future needs of the
community and in accordance with its resources, the efficient planning and
use of the land and resources of the Town, to prevent the incidence of
slums and blight in the community, to foster the efficient development of
the community and to promote the economic welfare and living standards
and health of the people and the prosperity, safety, order, conveniences,
education, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town, both in the
present and for the future, as provided by law.
§ 26-1.4. Alternate Members. [Ord. 4/18/90; Ord. #007/02]
There shall be four alternate members of the Planning Board. The alternate
members of the Planning Board shall be appointed and shall serve in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.
§ 26-2. DUTIES OF THE PLANNING BOARD PURSUANT TO N.J.S.A.
40:55D-25c.24
§ 26-2.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 017-1995, Preamble]
The Town of Guttenberg has created a Planning Board in accordance with
the statutory dictates of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq. and created a Board
of Adjustment pursuant to the dictates of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.; and
the New Jersey Legislative Branch has amended the Municipal Land Use
Law, known as N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., so as to allow municipalities with
populations less than 10,000 residents, the option of creating a Planning
Board and vesting the same powers of the Board of Adjustment in the
Planning Board.
24.Editor's Note: Former § 26-2 previously codified herein and containing sections of Ord. #3/
87 was replaced by Ord. No. 017-1995 which combined the duties of the Planning Board
and the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 26-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-2.1
1:349
The amendment is delineated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c, which states in part
that a municipality having a population of 10,000 or less, may create a
nine member Planning Board with two alternates, which shall exercise to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions, all of the powers
of a Board of Adjustment; but the Class I and III members (Mayor and
Council person) shall not participate in the consideration of applications
for development which involve relief pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.
The intent and purpose of the amendment is to allow for the selection
of members to a Board willing to comply with the requirements imposed
upon Board members in complying with the ethics disclosure statement
and requiring compliance with all of the dictates of the Statutes anent the
position of municipal Board member.
The legislative branch of the State took into consideration the difficulties
of filling all of regular and alternate positions on the voluntary Zoning and
Planning Boards and the potential negative effect this hardship had on the
municipalities and applicants who sought relief from the appropriate board.
The further intent of the legislative branch of the State was to lessen
the costs of operating two separate and diverse Boards and such financial
outlay was considered severe and a hardship on local municipalities and
their respective governing bodies.
The Planning and Zoning Boards of the Town of Guttenberg have had a
limited number of applications filed and heard in the last year, and further,
the financial expenditures for each respective Board were still tendered for
that period of time pursuant to the various expenses of the Boards and the
financial savings attendant to the adoption and creation of a single Board is
self evident and beneficial to Guttenberg, this financial consideration being
a major factor and determinative of the intent of the legislative branch.
§ 26-2.2. Duties Delineated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c. [Ord. No.
017-1995 § 1]
Effective upon adoption of this section, the Planning Board shall be
empowered with all of the powers and responsibilities as delineated in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c and the Planning Board shall be the sole Board for the
hearing of all development applications filed pursuant to the dictates of the
Municipal Land Use Law, also known as N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 26-3. DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION FEES.
§ 26-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. #008-10, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment of a fee
schedule for the payment of fees with respect to all applications submitted
to the Town of Guttenberg pursuant to the Town's zoning and land use
regulations.
§ 26-2.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 26-3.2
1:350
§ 26-3.2. Procedures. [Ord. #008-10, § I]
a. Administration of Fees and Escrow Deposits.
1. Application fees covering administration and overhead shall be
charged to the applicant and shall be submitted at the time of an
application for a review or hearing by the Joint Planning/Zoning
Board.
2. In addition to the fees to be paid herein, the applicant shall submit
escrow deposits at the time of submission of an application for a
review or hearing by the Joint Planning/Zoning Board.
3. All application fees and escrow funds shall be paid in cash, certified
check, attorney's check, or money order made payable to the Town
of Guttenberg. Application fees and escrow funds shall be paid to
the Town with separate certified checks or money orders. Along
with the application fees and escrow funds, the applicant shall
submit a letter breaking out the totals into its component parts,
pursuant to Subsections 4 and 5 below.
4. Where an application involves more than one of the categories
itemized below, the fees and/or escrow deposit applicable to each
category shall be required.
5. The escrow funds shall be deposited into a separate trust account
by the Town, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, and if the deposit
amount required is greater than $5,000, interest will accrue to the
applicant. Disbursements may be made from the escrow fund only
after approval by the Town of Guttenberg's Chief Financial Officer.
6. Escrow funds shall be placed in an escrow account by the Chief
Financial Officer. Such funds shall be used to pay the Board's
Attorney, Professional Engineer, Professional Planner, Traffic
Engineer, and other experts deemed necessary to review and
comment on the application. Said experts shall submit vouchers to
the Town for all reasonable and necessary fees for review of the
application, which fees shall be paid from the escrow account in a
manner prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.e and N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16
through 40A:5-18.
7. Where the review costs exceed the escrow deposit fee, the
applicant shall pay the additional amount within 15 days of the
request. Failure to remit the additional required deposit within the
requested timeline shall render the application incomplete, and no
further action or proceedings shall be taken by the Joint Planning/
Zoning Board until after compliance. Where the review costs are
less than the amount of the escrow deposit, the difference shall be
returned to the applicant within 120 days of final disposition of the
application.
§ 26-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3.2
1:351
§ 26-3.3. Schedule of Fees and Escrow Deposits. [Ord. #008-10, § 1]
8. In the event that an application is withdrawn, application fees are
nonrefundable, but any escrow funds remaining at the time of
withdrawal shall be returned to the applicant. If the same
application is resubmitted at a later time, the applicant shall be
required to repay all application fees and establish a new escrow
account.
9. An application is deemed incomplete until all application fees and
escrow deposits are submitted.
10. No construction shall commence, nor shall a certificate of
occupancy be issued, until the inspection fees required by
Subsection 26-3.3d of this section have been submitted.
a. Site Plan or Subdivision.
1. Application Fees.
(a) Minor site plan: $500.
(b) Preliminary residential site plan: $500, plus $50 per dwelling
unit.
(c) Preliminary site plan under 5,000 square feet: $500.
(d) Preliminary site plan between 5,000 and 9,999 feet: $1,000,
plus $50 for every 1,000 square feet.
(e) Preliminary site plan between 10,000 and 25,000 square feet:
$1,500, plus $50 for every 1,000 square feet.
(f) Preliminary site plan over 25,000 square feet: $2,000, plus $50
for every 1,000 square feet.
(g) Final site plan: 50% of preliminary site plan fee.
(h) Amendment or extension of preliminary or final site plan: $500.
(i) Minor subdivision: $500, plus $100 per lot.
(j) Preliminary major subdivision: $500, plus $100 per lot.
(k) Final major subdivision: $500, plus $50 per lot.
(l) Amendment or extension of preliminary or final subdivision:
$500.
2. Escrow Deposits.
(a) Minor site plan: $1,000.
(b) Preliminary residential site plan: $1,000, plus $100 per
dwelling unit.
§ 26-3.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 26-3.3
1:352
(c) Preliminary site plan under 5,000 square feet: $1,000.
(d) Preliminary site plan between 5,000 and 9,999 square feet:
$4,000.
(e) Preliminary site plan between 10,000 and 25,000 square feet:
$4,000.
(f) Preliminary site plan over 25,000 square feet: $5,000.
(g) Final site plan: 50% of preliminary site plan fee.
(h) Amendment or extension of preliminary or final site plan:
$1,000.
(i) Minor subdivision: $1,000.
(j) Preliminary major subdivision: $2,500.
(k) Final major subdivision: $1,000.
(l) Amendment or extension of preliminary or final subdivision:
$1,000.
b. Appeals, Interpretations and Variances.
1. Application Fees.
(a) Hear and decide appeals, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a:
$300.
(b) Hear and decide interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $300.
(c) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c: $300 for the first
variance, $150 for each additional variance.
(d) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $500 for the first
variance, $250 for each additional variance.
2. Escrow Deposits.
(a) Hear and decide appeals, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a:
$500.
(b) Hear and decide interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $500.
(c) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c: $1,000 if not part of
site plan or subdivision.
(d) Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $1,000 if not part of
site plan or subdivision.
c. Other Fees.
§ 26-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3.3
1:353
§ 26-4. PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES.
[Added 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 05-19]
§ 26-4.1. Developer's Agreement.
With respect to all applications for subdivision and site plan approval, the
Town of Guttenberg Joint Zoning and Planning Board shall condition any
such approval upon the execution of a developer's agreement between the
Town of Guttenberg Joint Zoning and Planning Board (the "Board") and
the applicant specifying, in part, off-site, on-tract or off-tract improvements,
public improvements, bonding requirements, escrow requirements, other
conditions imposed by the Town and such other terms and conditions as
the Town deems appropriate. The Board may waive the requirement of
a developer's agreement in appropriate circumstances. Unless so waived,
no certificate of occupancy or building permit shall be issued respecting
any application for development requiring subdivision or site plan approval
unless the applicant has entered into a developer's agreement of a form
specified herein.
§ 26-4.2. Furnishing of Performance Guarantees; Improvements.
1. Application Fees.
(a) Special meeting: $1,000.
(b) Informal or concept reviews: $250.
2. Escrow Deposits.
(a) Special meeting: $1,000.
(b) Informal or concept reviews: $500.
d. Inspection Fees. Inspection fees for drainage, paving, landscaping,
curbing and other improvements which relate to matters involving
public facilities: The greater of $100 or 10% of the cost of the
improvements.
a. Before filing of final subdivision plats or recording of minor subdivision
deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to
the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to Subsection d of Section 52
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65), or as a condition of approval of
a permit update under the State Uniform Construction Code for the
purpose of updating the name and address of the owner of property on
a construction permit, the Town shall require and shall accept in
accordance with the standards set forth hereinbelow and regulations
adopted pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a)
for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain
on-tract improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee as set forth in this section.
§ 26-3.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 26-4.2
1:354
§ 26-4.3. Safety and Stabilization.
1. The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor of the
Town in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation of
only those improvements required by an approval or developer's
agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be dedicated to a public
entity, and that have not yet been installed, which cost shall be
determined by the Town Engineer, according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4), for the following improvements as shown on the
approved plans or plat:
(a) Streets.
(b) Pavement.
(c) Gutters.
(d) Curbs.
(e) Sidewalks.
(f) Street lighting.
(g) Street trees.
(h) Surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by "the map filing law," P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.; repealed by Section 2 of P.L. 2011, C. 217) or
N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 through N.J.S.A. 46:26B-8.
(i) Water mains.
(j) Sanitary sewers.
(k) Community septic systems.
(l) Drainage structures.
(m) Public improvements of open space.
(n) Any grading necessitated by the preceding improvements.
2. The developer shall also furnish a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development,
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as required by the
Town Code or imposed as a condition of approval. At a developer's
option, a separate performance guarantee may be posted for the
privately held perimeter buffer landscaping.
3. The Town Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the
improvements covered by the performance guarantee, which
itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each performance
guarantee posted by the obligor.
§ 26-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4.3
1:355
a. The developer shall also furnish to the Town a safety and stabilization
guarantee in favor of the Town. At the developer's option, a safety and
stabilization guarantee may be furnished either as a separate
guarantee or as a line item of the performance guarantee. A safety and
stabilization guarantee shall be available to the Town solely for the
purpose of returning property that has been disturbed to a safe and
stable condition or otherwise implementing measures to protect the
public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition, only in the
circumstance that:
1. Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on the
development has ceased for a period of at least 60 consecutive days
following such commencement for reasons other than force
majeure.
2. Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the provision
of written notice by the Town to the developer of the Town's intent
to claim payment under the guarantee.
3. The Town shall not provide notice of its intent to claim payment
under a safety and stabilization guarantee until a period of at least
60 days has elapsed during which all work on the development has
ceased for reasons other than force majeure. The Town shall
provide written notice to the developer by certified mail or other
form of delivery providing evidence of receipt.
4. The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000.
5. The amount of a safety and stabilization bond guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements exceeding $100,000 shall
be calculated as a percentage of the bonded improvement costs of
the development or phase of development as follows:
(a) Five thousand dollars for the first $100,000 of bonded
improvement costs, plus 2.5% of bonded improvement costs in
excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000; plus
(b) One percent of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
6. The Town shall release a separate safety and stabilization
guarantee to a developer upon the developer's furnishing of a
performance guarantee which includes a line item for safety and
stabilization in the amount required under this subsection.
7. The Town shall release a safety and stabilization guarantee upon
the Town Engineer's or other municipal official's (designated by
ordinance) determination that the development of the project site
has reached a point that the improvements installed are adequate
to avoid any potential threat to public safety.
§ 26-4.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 26-4.4
1:356
§ 26-4.4. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy; Guarantee.
In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development,
as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer shall furnish a separate
guarantee, referred to herein as a "temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee," in favor of the Town in an amount equal to 120% of the cost
of installation of only those improvements or items which remain to be
completed or installed under the terms of the temporary certificate of
occupancy and which are required to be installed or completed as a
condition precedent to the issuance of the permanent certificate of
occupancy for the development, unit, lot, building or phase of development
and which are not covered by an existing performance guarantee. Upon
posting of a temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee, all sums
remaining under a performance guarantee previously furnished by the
developer which relate to the development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is sought
shall be released. The scope and amount of the temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee shall be determined by the Town Engineer or such
other municipal official designated by ordinance. The temporary certificate
of occupancy guarantee shall be released by the Town Engineer or other
municipal official designated by ordinance upon the issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy with regard to the development, unit,
lot, building, or phase as to which the temporary certificate of occupancy
relates.
§ 26-4.5. Acceptance of Performance Guarantee from Successor
Developer.
a. The Town may accept a performance guarantee in favor of the
municipality from a successor developer as a replacement for a
performance guarantee that was previously furnished, pursuant to
Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53), for the purpose of
assuring the installation of improvements. The Town shall not accept a
replacement performance guarantee without securing:
1. Written confirmation from the new obligor that the intent of the
new obligor is to furnish a replacement performance guarantee,
relieving the predecessor obligor and surety, if any, of any
obligation to install improvements; and
2. Written verification from the Town Engineer that the replacement
performance guarantee is of an amount sufficient to cover the cost
of the installation of improvements, but not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which verification shall be determined
consistent with Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53).
b. An approving authority shall notify the governing body whenever it
accepts a replacement performance guarantee. Notice shall contain a
copy of the written confirmation of the new obligor's intent to furnish a
replacement performance guarantee and the municipal engineer's
§ 26-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4.5
1:357
§ 26-4.6. Maintenance Guarantee.
§ 26-4.7. Other Agencies; Utilities.
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the
case may be, shall be required by the Town for such utilities or
improvements.
§ 26-4.8. Regulations Concerning Performance Guarantees.
written verification of the sufficiency of the amount of that replacement
performance guarantee.
c. Within 30 days after receiving notice from the approving authority of its
acceptance of a replacement performance guarantee, the governing
body, by resolution, shall release the predecessor obligor from liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee.
a. Prior to the release of a performance guarantee required pursuant to
this section, the developer shall post with the Town a maintenance
guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation
of the improvements which are being released.
1. The developer shall post with the Borough, upon the inspection and
issuance of final approval of the following private site
improvements by the Town Engineer, a maintenance guarantee in
an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the
following private site improvements, which cost shall be
determined according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4):
(a) Stormwater management basins;
(b) In-flow and water quality structures within the basins; and
(c) The out-flow pipes and structures of the stormwater
management system, if any.
2. The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period not to
exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the end of the
established term.
a. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Town
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 15
§ 26-4.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 26-4.8
1:358
of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the passage
of the resolution.
b. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Town for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Town may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be
subject to the public bidding requirements of the "Local Public
Contracts Law," P.L. 1971, c. 198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
c. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the governing body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the
Town Clerk, that the Town Engineer prepare, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Town Engineer and appended to
the performance guarantee pursuant to this section, a list of all
uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed bonded improvements. If
such a request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to
the Town Engineer. The request shall indicate which bonded
improvements have been completed and which bonded improvements
remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the
Town Engineer shall inspect all bonded improvements covered by
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with
the governing body, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the
obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
1. The list prepared by the Town Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each bonded improvement determined to be incomplete
or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of
each incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and
remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed bonded
improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared
by the Town Engineer shall identify each bonded improvement
determined to be complete and satisfactory together with a
recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory
bonded improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Town Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection a of this section.
2. The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Town Engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded improvements
upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and
shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in
the performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted,
in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Town Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
§ 26-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4.8
1:359
pursuant to this section. This resolution shall be adopted not later
than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Town Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the governing
body, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee with respect to those approved bonded
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet
approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the total
performance guarantee and safety and stabilization guarantee
posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of
all improvements. The safety and stabilization guarantee shall be
reduced by the same percentage as the performance guarantee
is being reduced at the time of each performance guarantee
reduction.
3. For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to each approved bond improvement shall
be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Town
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to
Subsection a of this section, including any contingency factor
applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of the approved
bonded improvements would exceed 70% of the total amount of the
performance guarantee, then the Town may retain 30% of the
amount of the total performance guarantee and safety and
stabilization guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of
all bonded improvements, as provided above, except that any
amount of the performance guarantee attributable to bonded
improvements for which a temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee has been posted shall be released from the performance
guarantee even if such release would reduce the amount held by
the Town below 30%.
4. If the Town Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as
requested by the obligor pursuant to this section within 45 days
from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in a
summary manner for an order compelling the Town Engineer to
provide the list and report within a stated time and the cost of
applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
5. If the governing body fails to approve or reject the bonded
improvements determined by the Town Engineer to be complete
and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the
complete and satisfactory improvements within 45 days from the
receipt of the Town Engineer's list and report, the obligor may
apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling,
within a stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory
improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance
§ 26-4.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 26-4.8
1:360
§ 26-4.9. Regulations Concerning Inspection Fees.
guarantee for the approvable complete and satisfactory
improvements in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Town Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to this section; and the cost of applying to the
court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the
prevailing party.
6. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the Town
or approving authority as part of the performance guarantee, then
any partial reduction granted in the performance guarantee
pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in
the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full
amount of the performance guarantee, provided that if the
developer has furnished a safety and stabilization guarantee, the
Town may retain cash equal to the amount of the remaining safety
and stabilization guarantee.
d. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete or correct
such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same
procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
e. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the obligor to
contest by legal proceedings any determination of the governing body
or the Town Engineer.
a. The obligor shall reimburse the Town for reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Town Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; which fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts set
forth hereinbelow. The Town shall require the developer to post the
inspection fees in escrow in an amount:
1. Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater
$500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that are subject to
a performance guarantee under this section; and
2. Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that are
not subject to a performance guarantee under this section, which
cost shall be determined pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
b. For those developments for which the inspection fees total less than
$10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Town Engineer
for inspections, the developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the
inspection fees.
§ 26-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4.9
1:361
§ 26-4.10. Approved by Stages or Sections.
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to Subsection a of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
§ 26-4.11. Dedication of Improvements to Town.
To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Town on the subdivision plat or site plan, the governing body shall be
deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required pursuant
to Subsection a of this section, to accept dedication for public use of streets
or roads and any other improvements made thereon according to site plans
and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority, provided that
such improvements have been inspected and have received final approval
by the Town Engineer.
Chapter 27
LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 27-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. 10/18/89, § 1]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision and site plan development in the Town
in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare of the municipality. It shall be administered to:
c. For those developments for which the inspection fees are total $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Town Engineer
for inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of
the inspection fees.
d. If the Town determines that the amount in escrow for the payment of
inspection fees, as calculated hereinabove, is insufficient to cover the
cost of additional required inspections, the developer shall deposit
additional funds in escrow. In such instance, the Town shall deliver to
the developer a written inspection escrow deposit request, signed by
the Town Engineer, which informs the developer of the need for
additional inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
§ 26-4.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-1
1:362
§ 27-2. ADMINISTRATION. [Ord. 10-18-89, § 2]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Planning Board
unless the application for site plan or subdivision involves a request for a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-70(d). If the application for site plan
or subdivision involves a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-70, then the
application shall proceed before the Board of Adjustment, and in such
instance, any reference in this chapter to the Planning Board shall refer to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 27-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 3]
Except as provided herein, all words in this chapter requiring a specific
interpretation shall be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3, 40:55D-4,
40:55D-6 and 40:55D-7.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of
a subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
BOARD — Shall mean the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
BUILDING — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a
roof.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Shall mean a subdivision or site plan
application shall be complete for purposes of commencing the applicable
time period for action by the Planning Board when so certified by the
Planning Board or its designee. In the event that the Board or its designee
does not certify the application to be complete within 45 days from the
date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the
a. Protect the character and to maintain the stability of all areas within
the community and to promote the orderly and beneficial development
of such areas.
b. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man made
disasters.
c. Encourage the location and design of streets and road ways which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the locations of such
facilities and routes which will result in congestion.
d. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic designs and arrangements.
e. Encourage coordination of various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view towards lessening the
costs of such development and the more efficient use of land.
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:363
expiration of the forty-five-day period for the purposes of commencing the
applicable time period unless:
DAYS — Shall mean the number of calendar days for the purposes of this
chapter.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Board of Council.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision not classified as a
minor subdivision under this chapter.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of not more than
two lots which: (1) does not involve planned development, any new street
or extension of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:50D-42, as same may be amended or supplemented, (2) does
not involve any variance from the Zoning Ordinance; and (3) contains the
information required in order to make an informed determination as to
whether the requirements set forth in Section 27-11 of this chapter for
approval of a minor site plan have been met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision containing not more
than two lots, each fronting on a street fully improved in accordance with
the standards specified in this chapter; and which (1) does not involve any
new street or the extension of municipal facilities and (2) does not adversely
affect the development of the lot to be divided, the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property and (3) does not conflict with any provision or portion
of the Master Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance, or this chapter.
NOTICE OF HEARING — Shall mean when applicant is required by law or
the provisions of this chapter to give notice of the hearing of his application
The application lacks information indicated on the check list of items
to be submitted specified in the proceeding paragraph and providing in
writing to the applicant and;
a.
The Planning Board or designee has notified the applicant, in writing,
of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of the submission
of the application. The applicant may request that one or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the Board or its
authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days
from the date of its submission.
Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that the applicant is
entitled to approval of his application. The Planning Board may
subsequently require correction of any information found to be in error
and submission of additional information not specified in this chapter
or any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for
development have been met. The application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any revisions
in the accompanying documents so required by the Planning Board.
b.
§ 27-3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-3
1:364
by the Board, the applicant, at least 10 days prior to the hearing, shall: (a)
give notice of the hearing by publication in the official newspaper of the
Town of Guttenberg and (b) give written notice of the hearing to all owners
of real property as shown on the current tax map located within this State
and within 200 feet in all directions of the subject property in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12(b).
PERFECTED APPLICATION — Shall mean one that is submitted in a proper
and complete form, including all required application forms and maps, all
required fees are submitted and filed within the appropriate time schedules
and proof is included that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property for which approval is sought.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale
or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions, if no
new streets are created: (1) divisions of land found by the Planning Board
to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size, (2) divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions, (3) divisions of property upon court order including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure, (4) consolidation of existing lots by
deed or other recorded instrument and (5) the conveyance of one or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the Town Construction
Official to conform to the requirements of this chapter and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map of the Town.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision".
§ 27-4. EXEMPTION FROM SITE PLAN REVIEW. [Ord. 10/18/89, § 4]
a. The Planning Board may grant an exemption from the requirements of
site plan approval if the application is for a site plan development
involving:
1. Minor subdivisions or individual lot applications for detached one
or two dwelling unit buildings, not involving a conditional use
permit or a use variance.
2. Any nonresidential use or activity involving:
(a) Repairs to the interior or exterior of a building not involving an
enlargement of the building; and
(b) Renovations or alterations to the exterior or interior of a
building or structure not involving any significant increase in
usable space or existing use of the building or structure and
not involving any change or permitted use. Any proposed
change of a site plan or deviation from the site plan during
construction shall require approval by the Planning Board.
b. The exemption may be granted only upon a resolution by the Planning
Board finding that:
§ 27-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-4
1:365
§ 27-5. EXCEPTION OF SPECIFIC SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN
REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. 10/18/89, § 5]
§ 27-6. MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.
§ 27-6.1. Submission of Application. [Ord. 10/18/89, § 6A]
The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the written application for approval
of a minor subdivision to the Secretary of the Planning Board on appropriate
forms supplied by Planning Board together with the fee prescribed by
subsection 27-6.3 of this section. The application shall include, in addition
to any other information which may be sought by the Planning Board,
the names and addresses of the owner, agent and engineer, if any, and
statements identifying and locating the property involved, together with a
preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in subsection
27-6.2 of this section.
1. The use will not affect existing drainage circulation, relationship of
buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other
considerations of site plan approval, and
2. That the existing facilities do not require upgraded or additional
site improvements.
c. Applications for certificates of exemption shall be made on forms
provided by the Planning Board and submitted to the Chairman of the
Planning Board with a nonrefundable review fee of $150.
d. The time period for determination as to whether the proposed
development qualifies for exemption under the terms of this section
shall be made at the next regular open public meeting after receipt of a
completed application by the Planning Board, with notice to be given in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
a. The Planning Board, when acting upon preliminary subdivision or site
plan approval or minor subdivision or minor site plan approval, shall
have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for site
plan or subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the requirements for site plan and
subdivision review and approval in this chapter, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the property in question.
b. Notwithstanding the above paragraph, no exemptions or waivers can be
granted by the Planning Board to Zoning Regulations without a
variance.
§ 27-4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-6.2
1:366
§ 27-6.2. Preliminary Plat. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6B]
The preliminary plat accompanying the application and each copy of the
application for a minor subdivision shall be clearly drawn and legibly
lettered on tracing cloth at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 50 feet;
it shall be accurate and certified by a licensed land surveyor and shall, in
addition to complying with the requirements of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9), show or include the following information:
a. Name of applicant.
b. Name of subdivision, if different from that of the applicant.
c. Name of owner, if other than applicant.
d. Tax map sheet delineating the name of the owner of the land being
subdivided and the names of the owners of all properties within 200
feet of the extreme boundaries of the subdivision.
e. The block and lot numbers on the current Tax Assessment Map of all the
properties shown on the plat.
f. North arrow.
g. Date of preparation of map and revision dates.
h. Graphic scale and reference meridian.
i. Zoned district in which property is located.
j. Zoning bulk requirements of district.
k. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to the
surrounding area, at least within 200 feet of all property lines of the
parcel being divided.
l. The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
m. All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and
within 200 feet thereof.
n. All streets and streams within 500 feet of the extreme boundaries of the
subdivision.
o. The location of all trees exhibiting a diameter of four or more inches,
measured 12 inches above ground.
p. A delineation of all trees having a diameter of four or more inches
proposed to be removed from the new lot being created, measured 12
inches above the ground.
q. Acreage of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
r. Metes and bounds of all property lines of the entire tract and the new
lot being created.
§ 27-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-6.2
1:367
§ 27-6.3. (Reserved)25
§ 27-6.4. Waiver of Notice and Public Hearing. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6D]
Planning Board will waive notice and public hearing for an application
for development of a minor subdivision if the application for development
conforms to the definition of minor subdivision.
§ 27-6.5. No Preliminary Approval Required. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6E]
Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board may condition such
approval ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38 to 40:55D-40 and 40:55D-53.
§ 27-6.6. Time Period for Review. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6F]
Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied by the Planning
Board within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete application to
the Secretary of the Planning Board, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval and a
certificate of the Secretary of the Planning Board as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall
be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence of approval,
herein required, and shall be so accepted by the Hudson County Register
for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 27-6.7. Standards for Review. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6G]
If the subdivision complies with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning
Ordinance, the Municipal Land Use law and all other applicable laws and
ordinances or resolutions, the Planning Board shall grant approval of the
subdivision.
§ 27-6.8. Conditional Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6H]
Whenever review or approval of the application by the Hudson County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the approval granted
hereby shall be conditioned upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
s. The area, in square feet, of all lots to be created.
t. Easements, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroad bridges, culverts,
drainage easements and prior variances.
u. The location of all building setback lines to be established on the
proposed new lots.
25.Editor's Note: Former subsection 27-6.3, Fees, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance Nos. 10/18/89 and 004/03, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 008-10. See Section 26-3 for Development Application Fees.
§ 27-6.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-6.8
1:368
the application by the Hudson County Planning Board or approval by the
Hudson County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
§ 27-6.9. Perfection of Approved Application. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6I]
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
approval by the Planning Board, unless within such period a plat in
conformity with such approval and the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9
et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed
by the developer with the Hudson County Register, the Town Engineer and
the Tax Assessor. The plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board.
§ 27-6.10. Conformity of Plat with Map Filing Act. [Ord. 10/18/89
§ 6J]
In reviewing the application for development for a proposed minor
subdivision, the Planning Board may accept a plat not in conformity with
the Map Filing Act (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) provided that if the developer
then chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided by subsection 27-6.8
of this section by plat rather than by deed, the plat shall be made to conform
with the provisions of the Map Filing Act (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9)
§ 27-6.11. Effect of Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 6K]
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or other-wise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor subdivision approval; provided that the approved minor subdivision
shall have been duly recorded by plat or deed with the Hudson County
Register.
§ 27-6.12. Application Determined as Major Subdivision. [Ord. 10/
18/89 § L]
If the Planning Board fails to unanimously determine that the application
and plat submitted therewith qualifies as a minor subdivision under the
terms of this chapter, the application and plat shall be returned to the
developer with instructions that he/she perfect a major subdivision
application in accordance with Section 27-7 of this chapter.
§ 27-7. PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
§ 27-7.1. (Reserved)26
26.Editor's Note: Former subsection 27-7.1, Submission of Application, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 10/18/89 and 004/03, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 008-10. See Section 26-3 for development application fees.
§ 27-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-7.2
1:369
§ 27-7.2. Preliminary Plat Details. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 7B]
The preliminary plat accompanying an application for a major subdivision
shall be designed in compliance with the design standards set forth in
Section 27 and be clearly drawn and legibly lettered in ink on tracing cloth
at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 50 feet. It shall be accurate
as to boundaries and existing features, but may be approximate as to
proposed features. The accuracy of the boundaries and existing features
shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor. The subdivision plat shall be in
accordance with the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). All design
features shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
The preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
a. Title of Development. North arrow, graphic scale and reference
meridian; lot and block number; name and address of record owner;
name and address of applicant; name and address, license number and
seal of the person preparing the subdivision; if the owner of the
premises is other than an individual, the name and address of the
partners or officers of the entity making the submission; certification of
owner, if other than applicant, authorizing submission.
b. Date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
c. Key map showing the location of the tract with reference to the
surrounding properties within 200 feet of all the boundaries of the
lands being subdivided and existing street intersections.
d. All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings shall
be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
e. The names, as shown on current tax records, of all owners of property
within 200 feet of the subdivision, together with the lot and block
numbers of the property.
f. The zone district in which the parcel is located, together with zoned
boundaries within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the property in
question; zoning limiting schedule requirements applicable to parcel
being subdivided.
g. Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or setback
lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots, reservations,
easements and areas dedicated to public use, including grants,
restrictions and rights-of-way. All existing rights of way and/or
easements on or within 200 feet of the site shall be shown.
h. Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions or
exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel. A copy of such
covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be submitted with the
application.
§ 27-7.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-7.2
1:370
i. The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing streets
abutting the property, to the nearest intersection with other public
streets.
j. Location of all existing and proposed buildings and all other structures,
including fences, culverts and bridges, and driveways [four inches
crushed stone or gravel in 1 1/2 inches S.M.], with spot elevations of
such buildings and structures. Structures to be removed shall be
indicated by dash lines; structures to remain shall be indicated by solid
lines. Also set forth the present and proposed uses of all such buildings.
Any or all lots where group houses and dwelling units or local stores or
shops are proposed to be built, indicate for each lot or proposed
building unit the approximate location and dimensions of the proposed
building and any or all automobile parking areas to be furnished in
connection therewith.
k. Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures and
utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe sizes,
grades and directions of flow, locations of inlets, manholes or other
appurtenances and appropriate invert and other elevations. The utility
lines and connections shall include storm drains, water, gas and
electrical facilities. If any existing utility lines are underground, the
estimated location of the utility lines shall be shown. Included shall be
plans and profiles of storm drains, sanitary sewers, water mains and
other structures.
l. Existing and proposed contours with a contour interval of one foot for
slopes of less than 3%; an interval of two feet for slopes of more than
3% but less than 15%; an interval of five feet for slopes of 15% or more.
Existing contours are to be indicated by dash lines; and proposed
contours are to be indicated by solid lines. All contour elevations shall
be referenced to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey level
bench marks, and such elevations shall be shown in feet and
hundredths of a foot.
m. Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of watercourses,
ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey. All trees exhibiting a
diameter of four inches or more shall be specifically located, and all
trees proposed to be removed shall be specified.
n. Name, location and dimensions of any existing or proposed streets on
or within 200 feet of the site. All proposed streets, with profiles,
indicating the grading; and cross sections showing width of roadway,
location and width of sidewalks and location and size of utility lines
conforming to the Town's standards and specifications. Proposed final
grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
horizontal on sheets 22 inches by 36 inches, and drawings shall include
both plans and profiles and shall show elevations of all monuments
referred to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey level bench
§ 27-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-7.2
1:371
§ 27-7.3. Review by County Board. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 7C]
The Secretary of the Planning Board, upon receipt of the application for
major subdivision approval, shall cause a copy of the preliminary plat to be
submitted to the Hudson County Planning Board for review.
§ 27-7.4. Additional Requirements. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 7D]
The application shall also include the following information:
marks, and such elevations shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a
foot.
o. The location of all existing and proposed water lines, valves and
hydrants and all sewer lines.
p. Existing and proposed stormwater drainage systems. All plans shall be
accompanied by a plan sketch showing all existing drainage within 500
feet of any boundary and all areas, such as paved areas, grassed areas,
wooded areas and any other surface area contributing to the
calculations, and showing methods used in the drainage calculations.
q. Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the tract to be subdivided
and the area, in square feet, of all lots.
r. Any lands subject to the Farmlands Assessment Act of 1964 shall be
duly noted as to the valuation, assessment and taxation.
s. Lighting plan and details.
t. Site identification signs, traffic control signs and directional signs.
u. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns.
v. Parking plans showing spaces, size and type, aisle width, curb cuts,
drives, driveways and dimensions of spaces.
w. Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
x. A chart showing the designation of all lines, symbols and characters as
demonstrated on the plan.
y. Appropriate blocks for the required approving authority's signature
(Chairman, Secretary and Town Engineer).
z. Such other information or data as may be required by the approving
authority or the County Planning Board for determination that details of
the subdivision are in accordance with the standards of this ordinance,
the Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable laws, ordinances or
resolutions.
aa. Certification blocks required by the Map Filing Law.
§ 27-7.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-7.4
1:372
§ 27-7.5. Certification of Complete Application for Hearing. [Ord.
10/18/89 § 7E]
If the Secretary of the Planning Board finds the application for major
subdivision approval to be in complete and proper form under the
provisions of this section, he/she shall certify the application for public
hearing to be held at the next regular meeting of the Planning Board,
provided that the date of such meeting shall be after the receipt of the
review report of the Hudson County Planning Board or at least 20 days after
the date that the copy of the preliminary plat is transmitted to the Hudson
County Planning Board for review. Notice of such certification for hearing
shall be given to the Building Department.
§ 27-7.6. Notice of Hearing. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 7F]
a. Proof that all taxes, assessments, water and sewer charges, on the
property, if any, are current.
b. Schedule of the required and provided zone district's requirements for
the property including lot area, width, depth, yard setbacks, building
coverage, parking, etc.
c. Affidavit of ownership of the property.
d. Copy and/or delineation on the plat of any existing or proposed deed
restrictions or covenants.
e. Copies of all existing easements and descriptions of any proposed
easements of land reserved or dedicated to public use.
f. Description of development stages or staging plans.
g. List of required or regulatory approvals or permits.
h. List of variances required or requested.
i. List of requested design waivers and exceptions.
j. Payment of any and all application fees.
k. Percolation test.
l. Drainage calculations.
m. Corporate or partnership applicants must comply with the
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 and 48.2.
a. At least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the applicant shall
give public notice of the hearing by publication in the official newspaper
of the Town of Guttenberg and the applicant shall give written notice of
the hearing to all owners of real property as shown on the current tax
map, located within the State and within 200 feet in all directions of the
subject property all in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12(b).
§ 27-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-7.6
1:373
§ 27-7.7. Copies of Preliminary Plat. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 7G]
At least five days before the hearing, copies of the preliminary plat, as
supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the Secretary of the
Planning Board to each of the following officials:
§ 27-7.8. Approval or Disapproval of Preliminary Plat. [Ord. 10/18/
89 § 7H]
§ 27-7.9. Reproductions of Approved Plat. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 71]
Before the Secretary of the Planning Board shall return any approved
preliminary or final plat to the applicant, the Secretary shall have sufficient
reproductions made (recovering the cost therefore from the applicant) to
furnish one copy to each of the following:
b. At or prior to the hearing, the applicant shall file with the Secretary of
the Planning Board an affidavit of proof of service of the notices
required by this section.
a. Town Engineer.
b. Town Tax Assessor.
c. Construction Official.
a. The Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval for
subdivisions of 10 or fewer lots within 45 days following the date of
certification for a public hearing pursuant to subsection 27-7.5 of this
section, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
b. The Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval for
subdivisions of more than 10 lots within 95 days following the date of
certification for a public hearing pursuant to subsection 27-7.5 of this
section or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
c. If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and proceeded
upon, as in the case of an original application.
d. If the subdivision complies with the provisions of this chapter, the
Zoning Ordinances and the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law,
and all other applicable laws and ordinances, the Planning Board shall
grant preliminary approval of the subdivision.
a. Town Engineer.
b. Town Tax Assessor.
§ 27-7.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-7.9
1:374
§ 27-7.10. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 7J]
§ 27-8. FINAL APPROVAL OF MAJOR SUBDIVISION;
IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 27-8.1. Submission Format. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 8A; Ord. #004/03;
Ord. #008-10 § 2]
c. Chairman of the Planning Board.
d. Construction Official.
a. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three year period from the date of approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed; and
2. That the applicant may submit the plat, in whole or in parts, for
final approval on or before the three-year expiration date.
b. On application by the applicant for an extension of the preliminary
approval, the Planning Board may grant extensions on such preliminary
approval for additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a
total extension of two years. However, if during any extension period
the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards may govern.
a. Submission and Fees. Application for approval of a final plat or part
thereof shall be submitted by the applicant to the Secretary of the
Planning Board, together with the required application fee as set forth
in Chapter XXVI, within three years following the date of approval of
the preliminary plat or within any extension of such three-year period.
b. Escrow Deposit Requirement. In addition to the application fee
established herein, the applicant shall be required to establish one or
more escrow accounts with the Town to pay the reasonable costs of
professional review, consultation, court reporting/transcript and other
fees engaged by the Board with reference to the application for which
the deposit has been established. The amount of the escrow deposit for
approval of a final subdivision plat approval shall be as follows:
Subdivision Type Escrow Deposit
Major Subdivision (Final) 3-5 lots $3,000
Major Subdivision (Final) Over 5 lots $5,000
§ 27-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-8.1
1:375
§ 27-8.2. Final Plat Details. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 8B]
Should additional funds be required after the original deposit has been
exhausted, such additional funds shall be paid by the applicant to
the Treasurer and placed in the appropriate account, subject to the
conditions provided for. Funds remaining in the escrow account at
the completion of the project or phase of the application procedure,
as the case may be, shall be returned to the applicant as soon as is
practicable.
c. Format. Twelve copies of the application for final approval shall be
submitted, in writing, together with an original cloth tracing and 12
black-and-white prints of the final plat.
a. The final plat shall not differ substantially from the preliminary plat as
approved. It shall be clearly drawn and legibly lettered in ink on tracing
cloth at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 50 feet; it shall be
accurate and certified by a licensed land surveyor or licensed engineer;
it shall be designed in compliance with the design standards set forth in
Section 27-9 of this section; the conditions of preliminary approval; and
it shall comply with the requirements of the Map Filing Law, (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.).
b. The final plat shall show or include or be accompanied by, in addition to
such other information as the Planning Board may require, the
following information:
1. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
2. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, lands to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves.
3. The names, exact location and widths of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting or paralleling the plot boundary within a
distance of 200 feet.
4. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the property use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
5. Lot, block and street numbers as approved by the Town Engineer,
including lot and block numbers of adjacent properties.
6. Main building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
7. Location and description of all monuments, which shall comply in
all respects with the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9 et seq.).
§ 27-8.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-8.2
1:376
§ 27-8.3. Required Improvements or Performance Guaranty. [Ord.
10/18/89 § 8C]
8. Names of owners of adjacent or adjoining unsubdivided lands.
9. A certification by an engineer or land surveyor as to the accuracy of
the details of the plat.
10. A certification that the applicant is the owner of the land to be
subdivided or the agent of the owner, or that the owner has given
consent under an option agreement.
11. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or department or
body of the Town, County or State, approval shall be certified on
the plat.
12. Plans and profiles of street, storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains.
13. Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments
are paid to date.
14. Written proof, satisfactory to the Planning Board, to the effect that
all liens or encumbrances on the lands set aside for highway or
street purposes do not exist or have been released and are properly
recorded.
15. A written statement that the specifications for the construction of
any proposed streets, sidewalks, curbs, storm drains and
appurtenances and all other contemplated improvements meet
with the requirements of all ordinances of the Town relating to the
acceptance of streets and with the standard specifications of the
Town on file with the Town Engineer, if any.
16. A written agreement to pay to the Town all engineering and
inspection fees incurred by it in connection with the proposed
inspection of the construction of said improvements.
17. A written estimate of the total cost of construction, installation and
completion of all the improvements and monuments.
18. Such additional requirements as the Board may deem reasonably
necessary to accomplish the intent and purpose of this chapter.
a. Prior to the granting of final approval, the Town Engineer must have
certified in writing to the Planning Board that he has received from the
applicant a map showing all improvements and installations, both
proposed and existing, in exact location and elevation, identifying those
portions already installed and those to be installed, and that the
applicant has made all installations in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter or has furnished one or more performance
guaranties in favor of the Town in sufficient amount for the ultimate
installation of all such improvements. Such performance guaranties
§ 27-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-8.3
1:377
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board in amounts
sufficient to cover the cost of completion of all the improvements,
as estimated by the Town Engineer, and ensuring the installation of
such uncompleted improvements on or before a date approved by the
Planning Board. The period of guaranty shall not exceed three years
unless extended by resolution of the Board of Council. As a condition
or as part of any such extension, the amount of any performance
guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as determined
as of the time of the passage of the resolution of the Board of Council.
b. All improvements or installations shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Town Engineer, who shall be notified by the applicant
within 24 hours prior to the commencement of construction or
installation. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved by the Town Engineer.
c. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements, and the connection of same to the public system, the
developer may notify the Town Clerk in writing, by certified mail, of the
substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the Town Engineer. Then the Town Engineer shall inspect all of the
improvements of which notice has been given and shall file a detailed
report, in writing, with the Mayor and Board of Council indicating
either approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
d. The Mayor and Board of Council shall either approve, partially approve
or reject the improvements, on the basis of the report of the Town
Engineer and shall notify the global obligor in writing, by certified mail,
of the contents of the report and the action of the Mayor and Board of
Council with relation thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt of the
notice from the obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where
partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements not yet
approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the Mayor and Board of Council to send or
provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed
to constitute approval of the improvements and the obligor and surety,
if any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance
guarantee for such improvements.
e. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the Mayor
and Board of Council may require the obligor to complete such
improvements and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as set forth in paragraph c hereof shall be followed.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
§ 27-8.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-8.3
1:378
§ 27-8.4. Requirements for Off-Tract Improvements. [Ord. 10/18/89
§ 8D]
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Mayor
and Board of Council or the Town Engineer.
f. The obligor shall reimburse the Town for all reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Town Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; provided that the Town may require of the developer a
deposit for all or a portion of the reasonably anticipated fees to be paid
to the Town Engineer for such inspection.
g. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 the provisions of this section shall be
applied by stage or section.
h. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Town for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Town may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete/correct
such improvements.
i. The Town may require as a condition of final approval that the applicant
post a maintenance guarantee with the Mayor and Board of Council for
a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the
improvement, in the amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement. However, in the event that other governmental agencies
or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or
the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the
Town for such utilities or improvements.
a. Any subdivision requiring off-tract improvements, as defined herein,
shall comply with the provisions of this subsection.
b. Off-Tract Improvement shall mean one or more required improvements
which are necessary for the successful completion of a development, in
the interest of furthering the public health, safety and general welfare,
and where the improvements are located off tract.
c. An off-tract improvement shall be required where either the existing
facilities serving the area are already operating at a deficient level of
service or the inclusion of a new development will make such present
level of service deficient according to the engineering standards
utilized in determining such levels of service.
d. The developer shall be required to pay its proportionate share of any
such off-tract improvements, which payment shall reasonably relate to
the benefit or use the total area so served.
§ 27-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-8.4
1:379
§ 27-8.5. Approval or Disapproval of Final Plat. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 8E]
e. Under the conditions of this chapter, off-tract improvements shall be
limited to:
1. New or improved water distribution, sanitary sewer disposal and
distribution and stormwater and drainage distribution facilities and
all necessary appurtenances thereto.
2. Utility easements in and to new or improved streets and right-ofway
widths.
3. Traffic regulation and control devices.
4. Intersection improvements.
5. Utility relocation, where not provided elsewhere.
6. Other traffic circulation and safety factors which are directly
related to the property or properties in question.
f. The provisions herein contained allowing the approving authority to
require the construction of off-site improvements by the applicant shall
in no way obligate the municipality to construct any such improvement
or to otherwise make them available to the applicant.
a. Action by Planning Board. The Planning Board shall act to approve or
disapprove the final plat within 45 days following the submission of a
complete application for final approval to the Secretary of the Planning
Board or within such further time as may be agreed to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the above specified time or
within the mutually agreed upon time extension shall be deemed to be
final approval; and a certificate of the Secretary of the Planning Board
as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval, and shall be so accepted by
the Hudson County Register for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
b. Disapprovals. If the Planning Board disapproves of a final plat, the
reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall
be attached to the application and sent to the applicant.
c. Approvals. If the Planning Board shall act to approve the final plat, the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board shall affix their
signatures to the plat, with a certification that it has received final
approval, provided (a) that payment has been made for all fees and
escrow funds in connection therewith, including planning consultant's
report, Engineer's report, Engineer's inspection of required
construction and improvements and all reproductions required by
subsection 27-8.1c; and (b) that the developer has posted the required
guarantees with the Town.
§ 27-8.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-8.6
1:380
§ 27-8.6. Certification of Final Subdivision Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89
§ 8F]
§ 27-8.7. Effect of Final Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 8G]
a. The Planning Board is hereby designated and authorized to make and
issue certificates as to the final approval of land subdivision.
b. Within seven business days after the receipt of written request therefor,
the Planning Board shall issue a certificate of final subdivision approval
to any interested person upon the payment of a fee of $25 for each such
certificate issued.
c. Each such certificate shall be designated a "Certificate as to Approval of
Subdivision of Land" and shall certify the following:
1. That there exists in the Town a duly established Planning Board
which meets regularly on a monthly basis and that this chapter of
the Code of the Town controls the subdivision of land and was
adopted under the authority of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
2. That the subdivision or resubdivision, as it related to the land
shown on the subdivision application, has been approved by the
Planning Board and the date of such approval.
3. That such subdivision or resubdivision, if the same has not been
approved, is exempted from the requirements of approval by virtue
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or by virtue of any provision of this
chapter.
a. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the Hudson County Recording Officer.
The Planning Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
b. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the Hudson County
Recording Officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as
indicated on the instrument by the signatures of the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board or a certificate has been issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, 40:55D-50, 40:55D-56, 40:55D-61,
40:55D-67 or 40:55D-76. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary
of the Planning Board shall not be affixed until the developer has posted
the guarantees required as a condition of approval. If the Hudson
County Recording Officer records any plat without such approval, such
recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the Town,
the plat shall be expunged from the official records.
c. It shall be the duty of the Hudson County Recording Officer to notify the
Planning Board and the Town Tax Assessor in writing within seven days
§ 27-8.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-8.7
1:381
§ 27-9. DESIGN STANDARDS.
In acting upon all subdivision applications (both major and minor), the
Planning Board shall require compliance with the design standards
contained in this section, and the applicant shall observe such standards
and principles of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or
portion thereof.
§ 27-9.1. General Standards. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9A]
of the filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of
filing, and official number.
a. The layout or arrangement of the subdivision plat must be consistent
with the Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan and Official Map.
b. The tracts shall be adequately drained and the streets shall be of
sufficient width, suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate
the prospective traffic, to provide access for fire fighting and
emergency equipment to buildings and to be coordinated so as to
compose a convenient system consistent with the Official Map and the
circulation element of the Master Plan and so oriented as to permit
consistency with the reasonable utilization of land, the buildings
constructed thereon to maximize solar gain. However, no street of a
width greater than 50 feet within the right-of-way lines shall be
required unless the street constitutes an extension of an existing street
of the greater width, or has already been shown in greater width on
either the Official Map or Master Plan.
c. All lots shown on the plat shall provide for adequate water supply,
drainage, shade trees, sewage facilities and other utilities necessary for
the provision of essential services to residents and occupants.
d. The subdivision plan shall conform to the applicable provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.
e. The subdivision plan must be in conformity with the Municipal
Recycling Ordinance required by N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16.
f. All lots shown on the plat shall be adaptable for the intended purpose
without danger to health or peril from flood, fire, erosion or other
menace.
g. If portions of the Master Plan contain proposals for drainage rights-ofway,
schools, parks or playgrounds within the proposed subdivision or
in its vicinity, or if standards for the allocation of portions of
subdivisions for drainage rights-of-way, school sites, park and
playground purposes have been adopted, then before approving
subdivisions the Planning Board may further require that such drainage
rights-of-way, school sites, parks or playgrounds be shown in locations
and sizes suitable for their intended uses. The Planning Board is hereby
permitted to reserve the location and extent of school sites, public
§ 27-8.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-9.1
1:382
§ 27-9.2. Street Standards. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9B]
parks and playgrounds shown on the Master Plan or any part thereof
for a period of one year after the approval of the final plat or within
such further time as agreed to by the applicant. Unless during such
one-year period or extension thereof the Town shall have entered into a
contract to purchase or instituted condemnation proceedings according
to law for the school site, park or playground, the applicant shall not be
bound by the proposals and such areas shown on the Master Plan. This
provision shall not apply to the streets and roads or drainage rights-ofway
required for final approval of any plat and deemed essential to the
public welfare.
a. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the logical extension of existing
streets and to provide for street access for remaining land areas.
b. Minor streets in residential areas shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic.
c. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets or regional highways shall
provide a marginal service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip
for planting or some other means of separation for local traffic as the
Planning Board may deem appropriate.
d. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than 50 feet in any case; when shown at a greater
width on the Master Plan or Official Map, such greater width shall be
required.
e. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved unless the control and disposal of land comprising such
strips has been placed in by the Mayor and Board of Council under
conditions approved by the Planning Board.
f. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street width
requirements of this chapter shall provide for the dedication of
additional width along either one or both sides of the street of
substandard width. If the subdivision is along one side only of the
street, one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
g. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 6%. Grades of
other streets shall not exceed 10%. However, the Planning Board and
the governing body shall have the right to require grades of less than
10% where special conditions exist, provided that such special
conditions are set forth in writing upon the minutes of the Planning
Board and governing body. No street shall have a minimum grade of
less than 0.5%.
h. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as circumstances
will allow and in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at
§ 27-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-9.2
1:383
§ 27-9.3. Block Standards. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9C]
§ 27-9.4. Lot Standards. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9D]
intersections shall be rounded at the curbline or property line with a
curve having a radius of not less than 15 feet.
i. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
j. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
k. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a center line radius of not less than 100 feet for minor
streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
l. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
length and curvature to provide a smooth transition and proper sight
distance.
m. Permanent dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600
feet and shall provide a circular turnaround at the end with a right-ofway
radius of not less than 50 feet and tangent whenever possible to the
right side of the street. Temporary dead-end streets shall provide a
similar turnaround and provisions for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
n. No street shall have a name which duplicates the name of an existing
street or is so similar to the name of an existing street as to be easily
confused with it. The continuation of an existing street shall have the
same name.
a. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
b. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and shall be straight from street to street.
c. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, the block size shall be
sufficient in the judgment of the Planning Board to meet all land and
yard requirements for such use.
a. All lots created by subdivision shall conform strictly to the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance as to area and dimensions and as
to adequacy of space and grade to provide off-street parking
requirements specified in that ordinance.
§ 27-9.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-9.4
1:384
§ 27-9.5. Maintenance of Watercourses, Environmental Protection.
[Ord. 10/18/89 § 9E]
§ 27-9.6. Water Mains, Culverts and Storm Sewers. [Ord. 10/18/89
§ 9F]
All installations of water mains, culverts and storm sewers shall be
connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to serve all
present and probable future development.
§ 27-9.7. Sanitary Installation. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9G]
Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the ordinances of the
Town.
§ 27-9.8. Installation of Underground Utilities. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9H]
b. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
c. Each lot must front upon an improved street at least 50 feet in width,
except lots fronting on streets described in subsection 27-9.2f of this
section.
d. Where extra width has been dedicated for the widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
e. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions,
drainage or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
a. In large scale developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required by the Planning
Board. Such easements shall be of the width and location determined
by the Planning Board after consultation with the public utility
companies or municipal departments concerned.
b. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse or channel, and such further width or construction, or
both, as the Planning Board may deem adequate for the purpose.
c. Natural features, such as trees, brooks and ponds, shall be preserved
wherever possible in designing any subdivision pertaining to such
features. No trees four inches or larger in diameter measured 12 inches
above the ground shall be removed from the subdivided plot unless the
same shall interfere with the construction of buildings or utilities,
except as is otherwise provided or may otherwise be provided by
ordinance.
§ 27-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-9.8
1:385
§ 27-9.9. Soil Removal and Redistribution. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9I]
§ 27-9.10. Planting of Shade Trees. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9J]
Shade trees exhibiting a diameter of no less than 2 1/2 inches measured six
inches above the ground shall be planted on center at sixty-foot intervals as
determined by the Planning Board and shall be located on the street line in
a manner not to interfere with utilities or sidewalks. The shade trees shall
be of the following types: Norway maple, sugar maple or plane tree.
§ 27-9.11. Location of Sidewalks. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9K]
Sidewalks shall be located within the subdivision on all arterial and
collector streets and on such other streets as may serve as corridors for
pedestrian traffic to schools, shopping and public facilities.
§ 27-9.12. Location of Fire Alarms. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9L]
Fire alarms and apparatus shall be constructed at such locations as may be
accessible to and serve the public safety, general welfare and convenience.
§ 27-9.13. Installation of Street Lights. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9M]
Street lights shall be installed on center at such intervals providing a
luminescence sufficient to assure the safe passage of motor vehicles and
pedestrians.
a. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange for the services
of its lands by the installation of underground utilities and service
connections in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
standard terms and conditions incorporated as a part of the tariffs of
the serving utility, as the same are then on file with the State of New
Jersey, Board of Public Utility Commissioners, and shall submit to the
approving authority, prior to the granting of final approval, a written
instrument from each such serving utility which shall evidence full
compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
b. Whenever a utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than 20 feet in width shall be
provided.
a. Soil removal and relocation shall be in accordance with Chapter 251 of
Laws of 1975, the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act.
b. Minimally, topsoil removed during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of
the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting so as to
remain in place.
§ 27-9.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-9.14
1:386
§ 27-9.14. Monuments. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9N]
Monuments shall be established and located as required by the Map Filing
Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), as the same may be amended and
supplemented.
§ 27-9.15. Connection of Water Mains. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9O]
Water mains and their connections to the curblines and fire hydrants,
culverts and storm sewers shall be properly connected with an approved
system and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
§ 27-9.16. Air Safety Act. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9P]
The plan must conform with the standards promulgated by the
Commissioner of Transportation, pursuant to the Air Safety Hazardous
Zoning Act of 1983, P.L. 1983, C.260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.), for any airport
hazard areas delineated under that act.
§ 27-9.17. Open Space. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 9Q]
For any areas reserved as open space under the Zoning Ordinance or a
planned unit development, the size, shape and location of the area must be
suitable and reserved for such purposes.
§ 27-10. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 10]
a. Premature Sale.
1. If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or
sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a
part of a subdivision on which, by this chapter, the Planning Board
is required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000. Each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be
deemed a separate violation.
b. Civil action. In addition to the foregoing the Town may institute an
action for injunctive relief and to set aside and invalidate any
conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a certificate of
compliance has not been issued in accordance with law.
c. Liens upon Property. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or
grantees shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from
which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
subdivider or his assigns or successor, to secure the return of any
deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee
survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must
be brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land, or within six
years if unrecorded.
§ 27-9.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-11
1:387
§ 27-11. MINOR SITE PLANS.
§ 27-11.1. Application Procedure. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 111A; Ord.
#008-10 § 2]
§ 27-11.2. Waiver of Notice and Public Hearing. [Ord. 10/18/89
§ 11B; Ord. No. 4-1-92]
a. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor site plan as
defined in this chapter shall submit to the Secretary of the Planning
Board the following information:
1. Eighteen copies of a sketch plat meeting the requirements of
subsection 27-11.3;
2. An executed application form, which form may be obtained by the
applicant from the Secretary of the Planning Board;
3. The prescribed fee as set forth in Chapter XXVI;
4. Evidence that no taxes, assessments or other municipal charges
are outstanding against the property.
b. The application shall be declared complete or incomplete by the
Planning Board no later than 45 days after its submission.
c. Once the application has been deemed complete, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny minor site plan approval within 45 days of the date
of submission of a completed application, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to
act within the period described shall constitute a minor site plan
approval.
a. If the Planning Board finds that the completed application for
development conforms to the definition of a minor site plan under this
chapter, the Planning Board may waive the requirements of Notice and
Public Hearing as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
b. A subcommittee of the Planning Board is hereby established to review
all waiver requests upon the forwarding of a letter and the appropriate
copies of the plan to the Planning Board subcommittee for their review.
The subcommittee is thereby empowered to work with the Building
Official, and/or his/her successors, and/or agents, to review these
applications within three days of receipt thereof. If the finding is that
the completed application for development conforms to the definition of
a minor site plan under this chapter, the subcommittee may grant a
waiver to the applicant and report same back to the Planning Board at
the next regular scheduled meeting.
c. There shall be no application fee attendant to such a waiver request
under the Community Development Block Grant Program.
d. The Mayor hereby appoints a subcommittee of the Planning Board.
§ 27-11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-11.2
1:388
§ 27-11.3. Standards for Review. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 11C]
If the proposed site plan complies with subsection 27-12.3, as well as the
requirements and standards set forth in this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance,
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and all the
applicable laws, ordinances, regulations or resolutions, the Planning Board
shall grant approval of the development plan.
§ 27-11.4. Conditional Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 11D]
§ 27-11.5. Effect of Approval of Minor Site Plan. [Ord. 10/18/89
§ 11E]
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was granted,
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor site
plan approval.
§ 27-11.6. (Reserved)27
§ 27-12. PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF MAJOR SITE PLAN.
§ 27-12.1. Submission of Application. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 12A; Ord.
#008-10 § 2]
e. Said persons are empowered hereby on a vote of the majority of the
subcommittee to grant said waivers and execute appropriate
application forms submitted by the Hudson County Planning Board with
regard to the Community Development Block Grant Program on behalf
of the Planning Board of the Town.
a. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required, approval by the Planning Board shall be conditioned
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
b. The Planning Board may condition approval of a minor site plan on such
terms which ensure the provision of the improvements pursuant to
Section 27-9 and subsections 27-12.9 and 27-12.10 and the payment of
all taxes, assessments and other charges due the municipality.
a. The applicant shall simultaneously file 18 copies of the application for
site plan approval and a detailed site development plan with the
Secretary of the Planning Board.
b. The application for site plan approval shall be on the form of application
supplied by the Secretary of the Planning Board.
27.Editor's Note: Former subsection 27-11.6, Fees, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance Nos. 10/18/89 and 004/03 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 008-10. See Section 26-3 for development application fees.
§ 27-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-12.1
1:389
§ 27-12.2. Determination of Completion. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 12B]
§ 27-12.3. Site Development Plan Details. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 12C]
Site development plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer, surveyor and where applicable, an architect and shall include the
elements listed below which are appropriate to the proposed development
or use:
c. The site development plan shall be in a form and contain the elements
listed in subsection 27-12.3 of this section.
d. The application and plan shall be accompanied by all requisite fees as
set forth in Chapter XXVI.
e. The application and plan shall be submitted as set forth herein at least
21 days prior to the date of the Planning Board Meeting at which
approval is requested.
f. The officials to whom a copy of the site development plan has been
submitted shall forward to the Planning Board not later than eight days
prior to the second regular meeting of the approving authority
succeeding the completion of the application, their recommendations
and comments, if any, in writing, concerning the site developments
plan. The Planning Board shall consider the recommendations thus
advanced but shall proceed in the absence of such recommendations.
a. The Planning Board shall have 45 days from the submission of the items
required in subsection 27-12.1 of this section to deem the application
complete for purposes of review.
b. An application shall be considered complete when the application forms
have been duly submitted, the fees and deposits paid and the Town
Engineer shall have certified that the site development plan has been
drawn in accordance with subsection 27-2.3 of this section and is
otherwise in a form required for the formal action of the Planning
Board.
a. Scale and Dimensions. The map shall be at least 16 inches by 26 inches,
but not more than 24 inches by 36 inches and a scale of 10 feet, 20 feet,
30 feet or 40 feet to the inch, except that if the property has a maximum
dimension in excess of 900 feet, a scale of 50 feet to the inch may be
used.
b. Description Data.
1. Lot and block designation of the property.
2. Name and address of the record owner of the property and name
and address of applicant.
3. Name and address of the person, firm or organization preparing
the map and for whom the map has been prepared.
§ 27-12.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-12.3
1:390
4. Date, North point and written graphic scale.
5. Sufficient description or information to design precisely the
boundaries of the property on bearings which begin to the nearest
10 seconds or closer. The error of closure shall not exceed one in
10,000.
6. Key map showing the location of the tract with reference to the
surrounding properties within 200 feet of all boundaries of the
lands being developed and existing street intersections.
7. The location, names and existing widths of adjacent streets, rightsof-
way and curblines.
8. The names as shown on the current tax records of all owners of
property within 200 feet of the subject property together with lot
and block numbers of the said property.
9. Location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed
easements, setbacks, reservations and areas dedicated to the
public use within or adjoining the property.
10. A complete outline of existing deed restrictions or covenants
applying to the property.
11. Existing zoning of the property and all adjacent lands.
c. Natural Features.
1. Contours at six inch intervals for land with less than a 2% slope,
one inch intervals between 2% and 5% and five inch intervals for
land with grades of 5%. Contours shall be related to a datum
acceptable to the Town Engineer.
2. Location and width of any existing watercourses, marshes, wooded
areas and isolated trees with a diameter of six inches or more when
measured three feet above the base.
3. Approximate boundaries of any areas subject to flooding or
stormwater overflow.
4. Size of the site in square feet.
d. Existing Structures and Utilities.
1. Location of all uses and outlines of the structures drawn to scale on
and within 100 feet of the property.
2. Paved areas, sidewalks and vehicular access between the site and
public streets.
3. Location, dimensions, grades and flow direction of existing streets,
culverts, waterlines, as well as other underground and
aboveground utilities within or adjacent to the property.
§ 27-12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-12.3
1:391
§ 27-12.4. Preliminary Approval of Completed Applications. [Ord.
10/18/89 § 12D]
4. Other existing developments, including fences and existing
landscaping.
e. Proposed Development.
1. The applicant shall set forth in detail the exact use to be made of
the property and the building and structures thereon.
2. The location of the proposed buildings or structural improvements.
3. The location of all uses not requiring structures.
4. The location and plans for any outdoor signs.
5. The location, direction, power and time of use for any proposed
outdoor lighting.
6. The location and arrangement of proposed sidewalks, driveways,
loading areas, off-street parking areas or other paved areas.
7. Any proposed grading, screening and other landscaping including
types and locations of proposed structures.
8. All electric and telephone lines must be underground.
9. An outline of any proposed deed restrictions or covenants.
10. Any contemplated public improvements on or adjoining the
property as indicated by the Town Engineer.
11. If the site development plan indicates only a first stage, a
supplementary plan shall indicate ultimate development.
12. Preliminary plans illustrating the aesthetics of the building and
further illustrating a floor plan layout and all elevation views.
13. A chart showing the designation of all lines, symbols and
characters as demonstrated on the plan.
14. Appropriate blocks for the required approving authorities
signatures.
15. Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority or the County Planning Board for
determination that the details of the site plan are in accordance
with the standards of all ordinances including the Zoning
Ordinance and all other applicable laws, ordinances and
resolutions.
a. The Planning Board shall, within 45 days after submission of a
completed application, or within 95 days after submission of a
completed application involving a development of more than 10 acres of
§ 27-12.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-12.4
1:392
§ 27-12.5. Review Standards for Preliminary Approval. [Ord. 10/18/
89 § 12E]
The Planning Board shall, if the proposed development complies with this
Ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.),
grant preliminary approval of the site development plan.
land or 10 dwelling units, grant or deny preliminary approval of the
proposed development or construction, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval of the site plan.
However, whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c.285 (N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6), the reviewing board shall condition any approval on the
timely receipt of a favorable report or approval on the application
by the County Planning Board; and when a site plan is submitted
as a function of a use or conditional use variance, the time limit
requirements for the variance shall prevail.
b. If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of the improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original
development.
a. In the course of its review of a site plan application for preliminary
approval, the Planning Board shall consider but not be limited to such
factors as the following:
1. The adequacy of access for fire and police protection and
otherwise.
2. The adequacy of provision for drainage of surface waters and for
disposal of all wastes.
3. The location and the layout of accessory off-street parking and offstreet
loading spaces, the width and grading of all entrances and
exits to such places, the location of such exits and entrances, the
traffic floor on site and ingress and egress to the site, together with
the distance from street intersections, the likelihood of left-hand
turns and other turning movements and the likelihood of drawing
vehicular traffic to and through local residential streets.
4. The arrangements for safe and convenient pedestrian circulation
on the site and on its approaches.
5. The arrangements for exterior lighting needed for safety reasons in
addition to any requirements for street lighting.
6. Arrangements to conserve energy and the use of renewable energy
sources, if practicable.
§ 27-12.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-12.5
1:393
7. The impact of the proposed layout upon the surrounding area and
particularly upon any nearby residences including, but not limited
to:
(a) The location, bulk and height of buildings and the extent of
their shadows.
(b) The location, intensity and direction of any outdoor lighting
and the proposed times for its use.
(c) The location of any utilities.
(d) The likelihood of any other nuisances.
(e) Whether appropriate and adequate screening is provided.
8. The size, location and type of any signs and/or outdoor display and
their appropriateness in the area involved.
9. The proposed landscaping and its appropriateness in the area
involved. Reservation of substantial trees and, where appropriate,
existing vegetation is to be encouraged to the maximum extent
possible.
10. The arrangement of buildings, structures and open spaces on the
site, with particular emphasis on setback requirements and the
architectural design of the structure(s) and their impact on
surrounding properties.
b. In its review, the Planning Board shall encourage creative design of the
site to provide a more convenient and attractive layout.
c. As a prerequisite to the issuance of any building permit or Certificate of
Occupancy for any use in the nonresidential districts, the applicant
shall be required to demonstrate the following:
1. Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities of operation involving fire
or explosive hazards shall be carried on in conformity with the
provisions of the Town Fire Prevention Code.
2. Smoke, Fumes, Gases, Dust, Odors. There shall be no emission of
any smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odors or any other atmospheric
pollutant which will disseminate beyond the boundaries of the lot
occupied by such use.
3. Liquid or Solid Waste. No use or occupancy shall discharge
industrial waste of any kind into any reservoir, pond, pool or other
body of open water. The discharge of untreated industrial waste
into a stream shall be approved by the Town and New Jersey State
Health Departments. Effluence from a treatment plant shall at all
times comply with the standards and requirements of the Town
Sewer Ordinance.
§ 27-12.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-12.5
1:394
§ 27-12.6. (Reserved)28
4. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the
human sense of feeling beyond the immediate site on which use is
conducted.
5. Glare. There shall be no direct sky-reflected glare exceeding 0.5
candle measured at the property line of the lot occupied by such
use. This regulation shall not apply to light used at the entrance
and exits of service drives leading to a parking lot.
6. No uses shall be permitted which are violative of any of the
provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the
ordinances of the Board of Health. There shall be no vehicular
access to any use established in nonresidential districts from any
street that primarily serves residential neighborhoods.
7. Signs. All signs shall comply with the Town Sign Ordinance.
8. All buildings shall have adequate fire protection facilities and
equipment and shall comply in all respects with the Guttenberg
Fire Prevention Code.
9. Landscaping.
(a) Effective landscaping, including the placement of trees, shrubs
and grass, shall be provided in order to ensure the harmonious
development of the area wherein a site is located and the
attractiveness of the subject premises and to protect the
natural resources of the premises. The above mentioned
landscaping plan shall include screening as is otherwise
required by this chapter.
(b) It is the intention of this subsection to provide appropriate
screening to conserve the existing natural resources and to
develop a natural environment in harmony with the
surrounding areas.
10. Trash Disposal. Each site shall provide an area or areas concealed
from any parking areas or any adjacent property for the orderly
disposal and pickup of trash, approved as part of the site plan.
11. Recyclable Materials. Each site shall provide for the recycling of
any and all designated recyclable materials.
28.Editor's Note: Former subsection 27-12.6, Fees, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance 10/18/89 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 008-10. See
Chapter XXVI for development application fees.
§ 27-12.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-12.7
1:395
§ 27-12.7. Payment of Taxes and Liens as Condition to Development
Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 12G]
As a condition for approval of any development application, an applicant
shall be required to submit proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which the
application is made.
§ 27-12.8. Deviations from Site Plan Standards. [Ord. 10/18/89
§ 12H]
If it can be demonstrated that, because of peculiar conditions relating to
the property or proposed construction, any of the above details are not
necessary to properly evaluate the site plan, the Planning Board upon
written application may modify or waive any of the specific site plan details.
§ 27-12.9. Developers Agreement. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 12I]
The Planning Board may require, as a condition of its approval, that the
applicant enter into an agreement with the Board providing for such
reasonable conditions as the Board finds necessary to assure that the
required improvements shall be properly installed and will function so as
not to create any nuisance or condition adverse to the public interest.
§ 27-12.10. Off-Tract Improvements. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 12J]
As a condition for approval of a site plan, the Planning Board may require
the developer to pay his pro rata share of the costs of providing reasonable
street improvements and water, sewage and drainage facilities and
easements therefor, located outside the property limits of the development
but necessitated or required by the construction of improvements within
the developments; provided, however, that this subsection shall in no way
obligate the Town to install such improvements in order to facilitate
development, nor shall the Planning Board approve a development
requiring capital expenditure without appropriate action by the Mayor and
Board of Council.
§ 27-13. FINAL APPROVAL OF MAJOR SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT.
§ 27-13.1. Procedure. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 12A; Ord. #008-10 § 2]
The Planning Board shall grant final approval upon application of the
developer to the Planning Board and upon the Planning Board's final
determination that all of the conditions of the preliminary approval,
including site development work, have been completed and are so certified
by the Town Engineer to the Planning Board and the Mayor and Board of
Council. The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the application for final
approval together with the required fees set forth in Chapter XXVI.
§ 27-12.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-13.2
1:396
§ 27-13.2. Time for Review. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 13B]
Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after submission
of a complete application to the Planning Board, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval.
§ 27-13.3. Conditional Approval. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 13C]
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by law, the Planning Board shall condition any approval
that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
§ 27-13.4. Violations. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 13D]
Failure to comply with any of the conditions of site plan approval
subsequent to the receipt of a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy,
as the case may be, shall be construed to be a violation of this chapter and
shall be grounds for the revocation of any building permit, or Certificate
of Occupancy, as the case may be. If the Construction Official finds that
any conditions of site plan approval have not been met, he shall give the
applicant 10 days' written notice to comply with the conditions and failure
to comply within this ten-day period shall result in the revocation of the
building permit or Certificate of Occupancy, as the case may be. Such
violations may additionally or singly also be prosecuted by law.
§ 27-14. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 27-14.1. Fee for Updating Tax Map. [Ord. #09-12]
Upon the approval of any minor or major subdivision, the applicant shall pay
to the Town of Guttenberg a fee of $250 for the purpose of updating and
amending the Town of Guttenberg Tax Map to reflect any necessary changes
occasioned by said subdivision.
§ 27-14.2. Enforcement. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 14B]
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Building Code
Officials and Planning Board.
§ 27-14.3. Interpretation. [Ord. 10/18/89 § 14C]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
§ 27-15. FACILITIES FOR THE COLLECTION OR STORAGE OF
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS IN NEW
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS.
§ 27-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-15.1
1:397
§ 27-15.1. Definitions. [Ord. #10-20-1993B § 1]
As used in this section:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a building
containing three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied
by persons living independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — Shall mean space allocated for collection and storage
of source separated recyclable materials.
§ 27-15.2. Required. [Ord. #10-20-1993B § 2]
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling
area for the collection and storage of residentially-generated recyclable
materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and
number, and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current
methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the municipal recycling coordinator, and
shall be consistent with the district recycling plan adopted pursuant to
section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13) and any applicable
requirements of the municipal master plan adopted pursuant to section 26
of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
§ 27-15.3. Location. [Ord. #10-20-1993B § 3]
The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably near, but
clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
§ 27-15.4. Accessibility. [Ord. #10-20-1993B § 4]
The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and easily accessible
by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to
access the recycling area without interference from parked cars or other
obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of recyclable
materials, bins or containers.
§ 27-15.5. Bins and Containers. [Ord. #10-20-1993B § 5]
The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. Any
bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable paper
or cardboard, and which are located in an outdoor recycling area, shall
be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
§ 27-15.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 27-15.6
1:398
§ 27-15.6. Signs. [Ord. #10-20-1993B § 6]
Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area.
Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs indicating the
materials to be placed therein.
§ 27-15.7. Landscaping and Fencing. [Ord. #10-20-1993B § 7]
Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling
area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
Chapter 28
ZONING
§ 28-1. TITLE AND PURPOSE.
§ 28-1.1. Title. [Ord. 3/87 § 1.100]
This chapter shall be known as "The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Guttenberg."
§ 28-1.2. Application. [Ord. 3/87 § 1.200]
No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, not shall any
building or structure or part thereof be constructed, erected, moved,
enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of
this chapter.
The interpretation of the regulations of this chapter is intended to be such
that, whenever its requirements are in variance with any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants
which refer particularly to the area and bulk regulations, and which impose
higher standards than those contained herein, the most restrictive
requirements shall govern.
§ 28-1.3. Purpose. [Ord. 3/87 § 1.300]
This chapter is designed to accomplish the following objectives:
a. To promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and general
welfare, and to make provisions for adequate community facilities and
utilities;
b. To promote orderly development;
c. To prevent loss of life, health or property from fire, panic, floods and
other dangers;
d. To provide adequate light and air;
§ 27-15.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.3
1:399
§ 28-2. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE.
§ 28-2.1. Interpretation of Language. [Ord. 3/87 § 2.200]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning assigned to them: words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular member includes the plural and the plural the singular;
the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "building" shall include the
word "structure" and any portion thereof; the phrase "used for" includes
individual, partnership, corporation, incorporated, association or any other
similar entity.
§ 28-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. 3/87 § 2.300; Ord. #005-10 § I, 28-2.2;
Ord. No. 32-2016]
As used in this section:
ACCESS DRIVE — Shall mean a paved surface, other than a street, which
provides vehicular access from a street or private road to a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — Shall mean a building subordinate to and
detached from the main building on the same lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to the main building.
ACCESSORY USE OR ACCESSORY — Shall mean:
e. To prevent the overcrowding of land;
f. To avoid undue concentration of population;
g. To lessen congestion in the streets and to determine the proper location
and function streets;
h. To facilitate the adequate provision of vehicle parking and loadings,
transportation systems, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements;
i. To regulate the intensity of the use of land;
j. To prohibit the incompatible use of land;
k. To attain the Municipality's developments as outlined in the
Municipality's Master Plan;
l. To conserve, maintain and strengthen the Municipality's tax base.
A use conducted on the same lot as a principal use to which it is
related, and located either within the same structure or in an accessory
structure or as an accessory use of land; except that off-street parking
need not be located on the same lot.
a.
Clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with a
particular principal use, and
b.
§ 28-1.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:400
AIR POLLUTION — Shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of
any form of contaminant in such place, manner, or concentration inimical
or which may be inimical to the public health, safety or welfare or which is,
or may be injurious to human, plant or animal life, or to property, or which
unreasonably interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
ALLEY — Shall mean a minor way, which may not be legally dedicated,
used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Shall mean areas subject to periodic flooding.
ALTERATIONS — Shall mean any change or rearrangement in the
supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, guides or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or
windows, or an enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure,
whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure
from one location to another.
Either in the same ownership as such principal use or operated and
maintained on one lot with such principal use for the express benefit of
its owner, employees, customers or visitors.
An accessory use includes:
a. Residential accommodations for caretakers of institutions and large
commercial or industrial uses.
b. Keeping of domestic animals, but not for sale or hire.
c. Swimming pools whose use is restricted to the occupants of the
principal use and guests for whom no admission or membership fee is
charged.
d. Domestic or agricultural storage customarily found in barn, shed,
tool room or similar structure.
e. Incinerators.
f. In connection with permitted commercial or manufacturing uses,
the storage of goods normally carried in stock, used in, or produced
by such uses, unless the storage is expressly prohibited under the
applicable district regulations. The floor area used for such accessory
storage shall be included in the maximum floor area permitted for the
specified use.
g. The removal for sale or otherwise of loam, clay, sand, gravel, or
stone in connection with the construction of a building or other
structure on the same lot, but in no case to a point below the legal
street grade.
h. Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed.
i. Accessory off-street loading berths.
j. Accessory signs.
k. Accessory radio or television antennas.
l. Home occupation.
c.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:401
AMENDMENT — Shall mean a change in use in any district which includes
revisions to the zoning text and/or the Official Zoning Map; and the
authority for any amendment lies solely with the municipality.
AMUSEMENT GAME MACHINES — Shall mean a coin-operated machine or
device which, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready
for play by the insertion of a coin, and may be operated by the public
for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to
achieve either a high or low score, which by comparison to the score of
other players whether playing concurrently or not, demonstrates relative
skill or competence, or indicates in any other way competitive advantages
of one player or team over another, regardless of skill or competence.
It shall include devices such as pinball machines or any device which
utilizes a video tube to reproduce symbolic figures and lines intended to be
representative of real games or activities.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE COMPLEX — Shall mean a group of more than
two amusement games or other amusement machines, in the same place,
location or premises.
AMUSEMENT MACHINES, OTHER — Shall mean a coin-operated machine
or device, not including amusement games, which provide a ride, sensation,
electronic reading or weight, photograph, lamination or item of
merchandise provided at random among other items of merchandise, for
use by and to the amusement of the public.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Shall mean a building used for the treatment,
housing or boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits,
and birds or fowl by a veterinarian.
APARTMENT CONVERSION — Shall mean a multifamily dwelling
constructed by converting an existing dwelling into apartments for more
than two families.
APARTMENT HOUSE — Shall mean a building occupied by three or more
dwelling units.
AREA, BUILDING — Shall mean the total area taken on a horizontal plane
at the level of the ground surrounding the main building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AUTOMOBILE — Shall mean a self-propelled, free moving vehicle, primarily
for conveyance on a street.
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR MOBILE HOME SALES LOT — Shall mean an open
lot, used for the outdoor display or sales of new or used automobiles,
recreation vehicles, or mobile homes, and where minor and incidental
repair work (other than body and fender) may be done.
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP — Shall mean a building on a lot that is used
for the repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers, and/
or accessories of automobiles and other vehicles or conveyance.
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE, MAJOR — Shall mean a building on a lot designed
and/or used primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental,
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:402
servicing, or supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks, or similar
motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE, MINOR — Shall mean an accessory building for
the storage of one or more automobiles and/or other vehicles accessory and
incidental to the primary use of the premises, provided that no business,
occupation, or service is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for
more than one automobile is leased to a non-occupant of the premises.
AUTOMOBILE OR GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Shall mean a building
on a lot or part thereof, that is used primarily for the retail sale of gasoline,
oil, other fuel, and which may include facilities used for polishing, greasing,
washing, dry-cleaning, or otherwise cleaning or servicing automobiles and
other vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE WASHING (CAR WASH) — Shall mean a building on a lot
designed and used primarily for the washing and polishing of automobiles,
and which may provide accessory services as set forth herein for automobile
service stations.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — Shall mean the dismantling or wrecking of
used automobiles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENT — Shall mean a story whose floor is more than 12 inches,
but not more than half of its story height, below the average level of the
adjoining ground (as distinguished from a cellar which is a story more than
one-half below such level). Any portion of a basement, when used as a
dwelling shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
BILLBOARD — Shall mean:
BLOCK — Shall mean a tract of land bounded by any combination of the
following:
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean a building, where for compensation,
provisions are made for lodging and meals for at least three persons and
shall also include dormitories whether or not such include cooking facilities.
A sign indicating a business other than one conducted on the premises
on which said sign is located, and
a.
Upon which matter of any character is printed, posted, or lettered by
any means, for the purpose of advertising.
A billboard may be either freestanding or attached to a surface of a
building or other structure.
b.
a. Streets.
b. Public park.
c. Railroad right-of-way, excluding siding and spurs.
d. Corporate boundary lines of the Municipality.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:403
BUILDING — Shall mean any structure permanently affixed to the land
having a roof supported by columns or walls used for shelter or enclosures.
When divided into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls extending
from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building, except as
regards minimum side yard requirements.
BUILDING LINE — Shall mean a line parallel to the front, side, or rear lot
line set so as to provide the required yard.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — Shall mean a building which contains the
principal use of the building site on which it is situated. In a residential
district, a dwelling is a principal building on the zone lot.
BULK — Shall mean the term used to describe the size of buildings or other
structures and their relationship to one another to open areas such as yards,
and to lot lines. The term bulk, therefore, includes:
CARPORT — Shall mean an accessory building open on three sides which
is attached to the main building and primarily designed or used for parking
automobiles.
CELLAR — Shall mean a story partly underground and having more than
one-half of its clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
A cellar shall not be considered in determining the required number of
stories.
CLUB — Shall mean any organization catering exclusively to members and
their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes,
which are not conducted primarily for gain, provided there are no vending
stands, merchandising or commercial activities except as required for the
membership and purposes of such club.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Shall mean a recreation facility operated
for profit available to the general public upon payment of an entrance or
use fee. Such facility shall include bowling alleys, billiard halls, amusement
arcades, miniature golf courses, mechanical rides and other similar
activities.
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization
thereof by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — Shall mean an ownership arrangement, not a land use;
therefore, it is allowed in any district and under the same restrictions as the
residential land uses that it comprises. A condominium shall not negate lot
nor other requirements intended to provide adequate light, air, and privacy.
a. The size, including height and floor area, of building or other structure.
The relation of the number of dwelling units in a residential building to
the area of the lot.
b.
c. The relation of buildings and other structures to areas in open yards.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:404
A condominium is a dwelling unit which has all of the following
characteristics:
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition, for
or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
CONVERSION — Shall mean the changing of use or occupancy of a dwelling
by alteration or by other reorganization so as to increase the number of
families or dwelling units in a structure.
COURT — Shall mean any unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the
same lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls
of such building.
COURT, INNER — Shall mean a court which does not extend to a street,
alley, yard or outer court.
COURT, OUTER — Shall mean a court which extends to a street, alley, yard
or other outer court.
COVERAGE — Shall mean the percentage of the plot or lot area covered by
the area of all buildings and structures thereon.
CURB LEVEL — Shall mean the officially established grade of the curb in
front of the mid-point of the lot.
DAIRY — Shall mean a commercial establishment for the manufacture or
processing of dairy products.
DEMOLITION — Shall mean any dismantling, intentional destruction or
removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or
similar property.
DENSITY — Shall mean a measure of the number of dwelling units per acre
of area. It shall be expressed in dwelling units per acre.
The unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for
private use in the development plan) is owned by the occupant.
a.
b. The unit may be any permitted dwelling type.
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community interior
spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the provisions for
open space, roads, or other development features as specified in this
ordinance.
c.
Density, gross. This is the maximum density that may be permitted
in any zoning district. It is calculated by dividing the total number of
dwelling units by the base site area. This density is illustrative only, net
density is controlling.
a.
Density, net. This is the maximum density permitted on the buildable
portion of the site. All tracts of land within a district may be developed
to the same net density. Net density is calculated by dividing the total
b.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:405
DETACHED BUILDING — Shall mean one which has yards on all four sides.
DISTRICT — Shall mean a portion of the territory of the municipality
within which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DRIVE-IN COMMERCIAL USES — Shall mean any retail commercial use
providing considerable off-street parking and catering primarily to
vehicular trade such as drive-in restaurants, drive-in theaters and similar
uses.
DUMP — Shall mean a lot or land or part thereof used primarily for the
disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, or any other means
and for whatever purposes of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk,
discarded machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof or waste material of any
kind but not including approved sanitary land fill disposal.
DUPLEX HOME — Shall mean a two-family unit consisting of a family unit
on the first level and a family unit on the second level.
DWELLING OR RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure
containing one or more rooms providing sleeping and sanitary facilities, not
including a motel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity or sorority
house, rooming house, boarding house or similar structure.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean one or more rooms for living purposes,
together with separate cooking and sanitary facilities used or intended to
be used by one or more persons living together and maintaining a common
household, and accessible from the outdoors either directly or through an
entrance hall shared with other dwelling units.
DWELLING, GROUP — Shall mean a group of two or more one-family, twofamily
or multiple dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having
any yard in common.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY, ATTACHED (ROW) — Shall mean a dwelling
used by one family, and having two party walls in common with other
buildings (such as row houses or townhouses).
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY, DETACHED — Shall mean a dwelling other
than a mobile home used by one family, having only one dwelling unit and
having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — Shall mean a dwelling
used by one family, having one side yard, and one party wall in common with
another building. References to single family semidetached dwellings shall
include two-family detached dwellings.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, DETACHED — Shall mean a dwelling used by
two families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other and having two
side yards.
number of dwelling units by the new buildable site area. This density
controls actual site capacity.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:406
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — Shall mean a dwelling used
by two families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one
side yard, and one party wall in common with another building.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES — Shall
mean electric public utilities transmission distribution facilities including
substations.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances
involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
ENFORCING OFFICER — Shall mean the Construction Official, License
Inspector or such other official as may be designated by the governing body
to administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance.
ENLARGEMENT — Shall mean an addition to the floor area of an existing
building or an increase of a tract of land into a contiguous tract of land.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES — Shall mean any activity conducted for
gain which is generally related to the entertainment field, such as motion
picture theaters, bowling alleys, roller skating rinks, miniature golf, golf
driving ranges, commercial swimming pools, carnivals and related uses.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Shall mean the construction or maintenance,
by public utilities, public authorized cable television companies or
governmental agencies, of gas, solid waste, electrical, telephone, sewage or
water distribution systems. These include equipment such as poles, towers,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment
which conform to the height regulations of the district in which they are
proposed; except that buildings and electric substations are excluded.
FAMILY — Shall mean:
FLOOD — Shall mean a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD FRINGE — Shall mean that portion of the flood plain outside the
floodway.
FLOOD PLAIN — Shall mean:
A single competent and responsible person occupying a dwelling unit
and maintaining a household, or
a.
A household head and one or more other persons related by blood or
marriage, occupying a dwelling unit, living together and maintaining a
common household, or
b.
Two or more but not in excess of five unrelated competent responsible
persons, at least one of whom shall be an adult occupying a dwelling
unit, living together and maintaining a common household.
c.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation.
a.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:407
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the designated area of a flood plain required to
carry and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the
100-year magnitude.
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the sum of the gross area of the several floors
of a building or buildings measured from the face of exterior walls or
from centerlines of walls separating two buildings. In particular, floor area
includes:
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Shall mean the total floor area allowable on a given
lot, divided by the area of that lot. (For example, a building containing
15,000 square feet of floor area on a given lot of 10,000 square feet of lot
area has floor area ratio of 1.5).
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — Shall mean the sum of the horizontal areas
of all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, kitchen, or bedroom,
but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service rooms or utility
rooms, bathrooms, closets, nor unheated areas such as enclosed porches,
nor rooms without at least one window or skylight opening onto an outside
yard or court. Such area shall have a clear height of 7 1/2 feet.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Shall mean:
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Shall mean any enclosed or covered space other than
a private garage, which is used for storage, repair, rental, servicing, or
supplying of gasoline or oil to motor vehicles.
GARDEN APARTMENTS — Shall mean:
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
b.
Basement space, except such enclosure as does not have any windows
or exterior walls.
a.
Elevator shafts, stairwells and attic space (whether or not a floor has
been laid) providing structural headroom of eight feet or more.
b.
Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches, provided
that over 50% of the perimeter of these is enclosed.
c.
Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter where
located within a building.
d.
Accessory buildings, excluding space used for accessory off-street
parking or for loading berths.
e.
Any other floor space not specifically excluded, except space used for
air conditioning machinery or cooling towers and similar mechanical
equipment serving the building and cellar space.
f.
a. Accessory to a principal building, either attached to it or separate, and
Used for storage purposes, and other professional uses of an owner, or
tenant.
b.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:408
GENERAL NUISANCE — Shall mean any use considered to be inconsistent
with the public comfort, convenience, health, safety, and general welfare.
The following factors are included:
GRADE, FINISHED — Shall mean the completed surfaces of lawns, walks,
and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating
thereto.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — Shall mean the vertical distance measured from
the average level of finished grade along all the exterior walls of a building
to:
HEIGHT OF SIGN — Shall mean the vertical distance measured:
HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Shall mean a multi-story building
consisting of nine to 15 stories.
HOME OCCUPATION — Shall mean an accessory use which:
Free-standing multiple dwellings, two or three stories in height, in
which not less than two and not more than four dwelling units per floor
are served by one staircase.
a.
a. Fire and explosion hazards.
b. Electrical and radioactive disturbances.
c. Noise and vibration.
d. Dust, dirt, fly ash.
e. Glare.
f. Smoke, odors.
g. Other forms of air pollution not listed above.
a. The highest point of the roof, in the case of a flat roof;
b. The mean height between eaves and ridge, in the case of a pitched roof;
The highest point on any structure which rises wholly or partly above
the roof line, and whose area equals or exceeds 20% of the ground floor
area of the building which supports it.
c.
From ground level to the highest point on the sign itself and/or its
supporting structure.
a.
Along the face of the sign or its supporting frame from lowest point to
the highest.
b.
Is clearly incidental or secondary to the residential use of the dwelling
unit; or
a.
Is customarily carried on within a dwelling unit or accessory building by
one or more occupants of such dwelling unit, except that, in connection
with the practice of the medical profession or with other offices whose
b.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:409
HOSPITAL — Shall mean a place for the diagnosis, treatment, or other
care of humans and having facilities for inpatient care including such
establishments as a sanatorium, sanitarium, and preventorium.
HOTEL — Shall mean a building designed for occupancy as the temporary
residence of individuals who are lodged with or without meals. No cooking
is provided in any individual rooms or suites, but restaurants, cocktail
lounges, banquet halls, ballrooms and meeting rooms are permitted as
accessory uses.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Shall mean those that do not absorb rain. All
buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any other areas
in concrete and asphalt shall be considered impervious surfaces within
this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the Engineer to be
impervious within the meaning of this definition will also be classed as
impervious surfaces.
JUNK YARD — Shall mean buildings or premises where junk, waste,
discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, stored, packed, or handled,
"junk yards" include automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking, and
structural steel materials and equipment. The purpose of storage of used
furniture, household equipment, and used cars in operable condition are not
included, but the keeping or storage of two or more automobiles not under
registration or not operable will constitute a junk yard in the sense of this
chapter.
LANDOWNER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of
land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether
or not such operation or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee
having a remaining term of not less than 40 years, or other person having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purposes of this act.
operations require supplementary secretarial, clerical, accounting or
drafting skills, one person not residing in such dwellings may be
employed.
Does not include the housing, care or education, etc., of persons who
normally would be subject to institutionalization for mental, physical,
criminal or like reasons.
In connection with the operation of a home occupation it shall not be
permitted:
a. To sell articles produced elsewhere than on the premises.
b. To have exterior displays of goods visible from the outside.
c. To store materials or products outside a principal or accessory
building or other structure.
d. To make external alterations which are not customary in residential
buildings.
e. To produce offensive and disturbing noise, smoke, odor or other
objectionable affects.
c.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:410
LAUNDROMAT — Shall mean a business premises equipped with individual
clothes washing and/or drying machines for the use of retail customers,
exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an apartment
house or an apartment hotel.
LOT OR ZONE LOT — Shall mean a piece or parcel of land occupied by a
principal building or a group of such buildings, or utilized for a principal use
and uses accessory or incidental to the operation thereof. It includes open
spaces as required by this chapter, and has frontage on a public street. The
lot lines are the property lines bounding the lot.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — Shall mean a street or highway designated as
an existing or planned major thorough-fare.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE, RESTRICTED ACCESS — Shall mean a major
thoroughfare or part thereof, which when open to public use, access is
limited from abutting property and other streets to locations and in the
manner approved by the municipality and/or New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
MID-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Shall mean a multi-story building
consisting of at least four stories and no more than eight stories.
MOBILE HOME — Shall mean a transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained
in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral until
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at
a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
Lot, corner shall mean a lot abutting upon the intersection of two or
more streets which form an interior angle of less than 135°. The point
of intersection of the street lot lines is the "corner." A lot other than a
corner lot is known as an "interior" lot.
a.
Lot depth shall mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear
lot lines.
b.
Lot lines shall mean:
1. Lot Line, Front. The line separating the lot from a street.
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line.
2.
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side
lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line.
3.
Lot Line, Street or Alley. A lot separating the lot from a street or
alley.
4.
c.
Lot width. The mean width of the lot measured at right angles to its
depth.
d.
e. Lot area. The computed area contained within the lot lines.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:411
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — Shall mean a parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances
necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased
by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Shall mean a parcel of land that has been planned
and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use and
consisting of two or more mobile home lots. Mobile home parks may be
planned as single-family detached, single-family cluster, or performance
subdivisions.
MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT — Shall mean a mobile home which is not
equipped with a toilet and/or bathtub or shower.
MOBILE HOME, INDEPENDENT — Shall mean a mobile home equipped
with a toilet and bathtub or shower.
MOTEL — Shall mean a building or a group of buildings which:
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — Shall mean a building, or portion of a
building, arranged, intended or designed to be used for making repairs to
motor vehicles.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE — Shall mean a building designed for or
utilized as two or more dwelling units, each supplied with individual
cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities.
NOISE — Shall mean any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which
causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Shall mean a zone lot in single ownership,
adjacent on all sides to properties in different ownership, which does not
conform with the minimum dimensions specified for the district or for the
use contained upon the lot.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Shall mean a legally established sign which
does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure or part of
a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
Contain living and sleeping accommodations used primarily for
transient occupancy, and in which no provisions have been made for
cooking in any individual room or suite, and
a.
Have individual entrances from outside the building to serve each such
living or sleeping unit.
b.
Restaurants, cocktail lounges, banquet halls, ballrooms and waiting
rooms are permitted as accessory uses.
c.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:412
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance
or amendment to its location by reasons of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use, whether of land or of
structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a
zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where
such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. No principal
permitted use or special use shall be considered nonconforming if the
yards, height, area, coverage dimensions, signs or off-street parking do not
conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — Shall mean a building designed
and used for the full time care of human beings and which may include
housing or lodging; meals; and nursing care.
OFFICE BUILDING — Shall mean a building comprised of more than 50%
of offices.
OFFICIAL MAP — Shall mean a map officially adopted by ordinance of
the Municipality consisting of surveys of the exact location of the lines
of existing and proposed public streets, watercourses and public grounds,
including widenings, narrowings, extensions, diminutions, openings or
closings of same for the whole of the municipality.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean land used for recreation, agriculture, resource
protection, amenity, or buffers; is freely accessible to all residents of the
development, and is protected by the provisions of this chapter to ensure
that it remains in such uses. Open space does not include land occupied by
nonrecreational buildings, roads, or road rights of way; nor does it include
the yards or lots of single or multifamily dwelling units or parking areas as
required by the provisions of this chapter.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — Shall mean the measure of the intensity of land use.
It is arrived at by dividing total amount of open space within the site by the
base site area.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Shall mean a parcel or parcels of land on an
area of water, or a combination of land and water within a development
site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the
planned residential development, not including streets, off-street parking
areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISEMENT — Shall mean an advertisement used
outdoors, including painted walls, or rock face, of a product or service
unrelated to the use of the land or structure on which it is located, but not
including official notices or directional road signs of a governmental body.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — Shall mean an open area for the same uses as
a private garage, and subject to the same conditions.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — Shall mean an open area other than a street or
other public way used for the parking of automobiles, and available to the
public.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:413
PARKING LOT OR GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — Shall mean a lot or structure
whose principal use is parking or storing motor vehicles for specified time
periods or on a rental basis, but no parking or storing commercial or public
utility vehicles, or the dead storage of motor vehicles.
Minor repairs incidental to the parking and storing of motor vehicles are
permitted as an accessory use.
PARKING SPACE — Shall mean:
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USE — Shall mean any use requiring no special
action by this Board before a zoning permit is granted by the Zoning
Official, subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, public or private corporation for
profit or not for profit, association, partnership, firm, trust, estate,
department, board, bureau or agency of the State, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Shall mean any enterprise conducted for gain,
which primarily offers services to the general public such as shoe repair,
valet service, watch repairing, barber shops, beauty parlors, and related
activities.
PLAN OR PLAT — Shall mean a map, plan, or layout showing the subdivision
of land indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number
of dwelling units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot
size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one residential district created, from
time to time, under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
PLANNING BOARD — Shall mean the Joint Planning Board of the Town of
Guttenberg, created pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PREMISES — Shall mean any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building
constructed thereon.
PRIVATE — Shall mean not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PRIVATE ROAD — Shall mean a right-of-way other than a street which
provides vehicular access to two or more lots but which has not been
dedicated for public use.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — Shall mean the use of offices and related
spaces for such professional services as are provided by doctors, dentists,
lawyers, architects, engineers, planners, realtors and the like.
Open space with a dustless all weather surface, or space in a private
garage or other structure.
a.
An area of at least 10 feet by 20 feet in size, for the storage of one
automobile, accessible from a public way.
b.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:414
PUBLIC — Shall mean owned, operated or controlled by a government
agency (Federal, State or local, including a corporation created by law for
the performance of certain specialized governmental functions, and the
Board of Public Education).
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Shall mean and include (a) parks, playgrounds and
other public areas; and (b) sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse
disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard,
highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by
a governmental entity.
RECREATION — Shall mean:
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean a dwelling which has more than one
sleeping room for rent to persons not related to its other occupants. The
term "rooming house" includes the term "boarding house."
SCHOOL — Shall mean a place offering instruction in any branch of
knowledge under the supervision of the State of New Jersey or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership or
corporation meeting the requirements of the State of New Jersey.
SCHOOL, NURSERY — Shall mean any place designed and operated to
provide regular instruction and daytime care for two or more children under
the age of elementary school.
SEMIDETACHED BUILDING — Shall mean a building that is:
SEMIPUBLIC USES — Shall mean churches, Sunday schools, parochial
schools, colleges, hospitals, and other institutions of an educational,
religious, charitable or philanthropic nature.
SEX SHOP — Shall mean any establishment which:
Recreation, commercial. Recreation facilities operated as a business
and open to the general public for a fee.
a.
Recreation, private, noncommercial. Clubs or recreation facilities,
operated by a nonprofit organization.
b.
Recreation, public. Recreation facilities operated as a nonprofit
enterprise by a governmental entity or a nonprofit organization, and
open to the general public.
c.
Recreation facility, outdoor. Any activity normally conducted outdoors,
including swimming, tennis, baseball, football, and similar recreational
and/or athletic activities. Such activities conducted within an enclosed
building or structure shall be considered to be outdoor recreational
facilities.
d.
a. Surrounded on three sides by yards.
Located so that one wall is on or adjoins a side lot line, and abuts on the
neighboring house.
b.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:415
SIGN — Shall mean any surface, fabric, device or structure (including
billboard, or poster panel) bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter
designed for visual communication and used for the purpose of bringing the
subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag,
badge or insignia of any government or any official traffic control sign or
device.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment which is not sold or offered
upon the same premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS — Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment which is sold or offered
upon the same premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean signs advertising the sale or
development of the premises upon which they are erected.
SIGN, FLASHING — Shall mean an illuminated sign which revolves or has
alternating light or color while in use.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF — Shall mean the entire area within a
single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign and not
passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, the
perimeter does not include any structural or framing elements lying outside
the limits of the sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL — Shall mean signs of schools, colleges, churches,
hospitals, sanitariums or other institutions of a similar public or semipublic
nature.
SIGN, NAME PLATES AND IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean signs indicating
the name or address of the occupant, or a permitted home occupation.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Shall mean:
SIGNS, DIRECTIONAL — Shall mean signs, indicating the location and
direction of premises available for or in process of development, but not
erected upon the premises and bearing the name of the owner, developer,
builder or agent.
In whole or in part, sells, leases, dispenses or displays photographs,
drawings, films or reproductions of any type depicting explicit or
implied sex acts; or
a.
Exhibits or permits the exhibition of live sexual acts or implied sexual
acts; or solicits, or permits solicitation, persons and/or animals for
purposes of indulging in sexual relations or implied sexual relations.
b.
a. Offers premises for sale, rent or development.
Advertises the services of building trades engaged in construction or
alteration of the premises upon which the sign is located or
b.
c. Advertises a special event.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-2.2
1:416
SITE — Shall mean a parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more
buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA — Shall mean all land area within the site as defined in the deed.
Area shall be from an actual site survey rather than from a deed description.
STORY — Shall mean the portion of a building included between the
surfaces of any floor and the floor above it. If there is no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — Shall mean and include street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or
intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or
private. The term "street" as defined above shall include the land within the
right-of-way lands whether improved or unimproved.
STREET GRADE — Shall mean the officially established grade of the street
upon which a lot fronts or in its absence the establishment grade of other
streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midway of the frontage of the lot
thereon. If there is no official established grade, the existing grade of the
street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — Shall mean the dividing line between the street and lot,
also known as right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale,
development or lease.
TEMPORARY SIGNS — Shall be removed upon occupation of premises or
immediately after work has been completed or the event advertised has
taken place.
THEATER — Shall mean a building or part of a building devoted to the
showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions on a commercial basis.
TRAILER OR MOBILE HOME COURT — Shall mean a tract of land
specifically planned and equipped to accommodate two or more residential
trailers. The term includes all buildings, structures, tents, vehicles, utilities
and accessories used for or intended as equipment for such courts.
Story, half. A partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall
places of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than four feet above the floor of such story. Any partial story used for
residence purposes, other than for a janitor and his family, shall be
deemed a full story.
a.
Story, first. The lowest story or the ground story of any building, the
floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the average contact
ground level at the exterior walls of the building. Any basement or
cellar used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker
or his family, shall be deemed the first story.
b.
§ 28-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.2
1:417
USE — Shall mean the specific purpose for which land or a building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may not be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed
to include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE — Shall mean the authorized departure from the requirements
of the chapter in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
WINDOW — Shall mean an opening to the outside, other than a door, which
provides all or part of the required natural ventilation, natural light or both
to an interior space.
YARD — Shall mean a space open to the sky and unoccupied by any building,
structure or merchandise for display or sale, located on the same lot with a
building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean a yard extending the full width of the lot and
situated between the street right-of-way line and the required front setback
line projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall
be measured between the required front setback line and the street rightof-
way line.
YARD, INTERIOR — Shall mean an open, unoccupied space between the
buildings of a dwelling group or its accessory buildings, not a front, side or
rear yard.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean a yard extending the full width of the lot and
situated between the rear line of the lot and the required rear setback line
projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be
measured between the rear line of the lot and the required rear setback
line.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean a yard situated between the required setback
line and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard. Any yard not a rear yard or a front yard shall be deemed a side yard.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — Shall mean the written authorization issued by
the Zoning Officer, for use of land or buildings or other structures.
ZONING MAP — Shall mean the map or maps containing the zoning
districts of the Town of Guttenberg, together with all amendments
subsequently adopted.
ZONING OFFICIAL OR ZONING OFFICER — Shall mean the administrative
officer, appointed by the municipality, who shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
NOTE: Definitions of all other terms, i.e., terms not defined herein, shall
be as included within the latest edition of "Webster's New Collegiate
Dictionary". Any term not defined in this subsection or not within the
latest edition of "Webster's Collegiate Dictionary" shall be as determined
by the Zoning Board taken from any other appropriate source. After the
application of any such definitions, they shall become part of this
subsection and may not be changed without amending this Zoning Chapter.
§ 28-2.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-3
1:418
§ 28-3. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 28-3.1. Zone Districts. [Ord. 3/87 § 3.100; Ord. #005-10 § I,
28-3.1; Ord. No. 32-2016]
The Town is hereby divided into the following districts:
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 High Density Residential
R-3 Waterfront Residential
R-4 Mid-Rise Mixed-Use
R-5 High-Rise Residential Use [Ord. No. 32-2016]
C Commercial
P Parks and Recreation
§ 28-3.2. Official Zoning Map. [Ord. 3/87 § 3.200; Ord. #005-11;
Ord. No. 32-2016 § II; Ord. No. 32-2016 § III]
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be as shown upon the Map
entitled Zoning Map for the Town of Guttenberg, prepared by Boswell
McClave Engineering, dated September 22, 2010. Said Map shall be made
part of this Ordinance. Any change in the boundaries as delineated on the
Zoning Map shall be made on the Map promptly after any amendment to
the Zoning Ordinance has been approved by the Mayor and Council of the
Town of Guttenberg.
a. Zoning Map Amendments pursuant to Ordinance No. 32-2016 which
established the R-5 Zone:
1. The zoning district classifications for the following properties,
which are to the west of Boulevard East, are changed as follows:
Block Lot Current Zone New Zone
38 4 R-4 R-5
38 6 R-4 R-5
38 7 R-4 R-5
38 8.01 R-4 R-5
38 8.02 R-4 R-5
39 4 R-4 R-5
39 5 R-4 R-5
39 6 R-4 R-5
39 7 R-4 R-5
39 8 R-4 R-5
39 9 R-4 R-5
§ 28-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-3.2
1:419
Block Lot Current Zone New Zone
39 10 R-4 R-5
39 11 R-4 R-5
39 12 R-4 R-5
39 13 R-4 R-5
39 14 R-4 R-5
40 1 R-4 R-5
2. The zoning district classifications for the following properties,
which are between Kennedy Boulevard and Adams Street, are
changed as follows:29
Block Lot Current Zone New Zone
1 1 R-4 R-5
1 2 R-4 R-5
1 3 R-4 R-5
1 4 R-4 R-5
1 5 R-4 R-5
1 6 R-4 R-5
1 7 R-4 R-5
1 8 R-4 R-5
1 9 R-4 R-5
1 10 R-4 R-5
1 11 R-4 R-5
1 12.01 R-4 R-5
1 12.02 R-4 R-5
1 12.03 R-4 R-5
1 13 R-4 R-5
1 14 R-4 R-5
1 15 R-4 R-5
1 16 R-4 R-5
1 17 R-4 R-5
1 18 R-4 R-5
1 19 R-4 R-5
1 20 R-4 R-5
29.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter. A
full size color version of the Zoning Map may be found in the Town offices.
§ 28-3.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-3.2
1:420
§ 28-3.3. Interpretation of District Boundaries. [Ord. 3/87 § 3.300]
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
Block Lot Current Zone New Zone
1 21 R-4 R-5
1 22 R-4 R-5
1 23 R-4 R-5
1 24 R-4 R-5
1 25 R-4 R-5
1 26 R-4 R-5
1 27 R-4 R-5
1 28 R-4 R-5
1 29 R-4 R-5
1 30 R-4 R-5
1 31 R-4 R-5
2 1 R-4 R-5
2 2 R-4 R-5
2 3.01 R-4 R-5
2 4.01 R-4 R-5
2 5 R-4 R-5
2 6 R-4 R-5
2 7 R-4 R-5
2 8 R-4 R-5
2 9 R-4 R-5
2 10 R-4 R-5
2 11 R-4 R-5
2 12 R-4 R-5
2 13 R-4 R-5
2 14 R-4 R-5
2 15 R-4 R-5
2 16 R-4 R-5
2 17 R-4 R-5
a. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streets, highways, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, streams, etc., shall be
construed to follow such center line;
§ 28-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-3.3
1:421
§ 28-4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
§ 28-4.1. Basic Regulations. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.100]
The basic regulations governing the use of land and buildings, the size of
lots, yards and buildings within each zoning district, are hereby established
in this section.
§ 28-4.2. Conformity Required. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.101]
In addition to the uses specifically prohibited by this section, no building
shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered,
added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building or portion of a building
be used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose unless in
conformity with the regulations as herein contained for that specific district.
§ 28-4.3. Lot Requirements. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.102]
Every principal building shall be located on a lot as defined in this chapter.
Except as otherwise prescribed, no more than one principal residential
building and its accessory buildings shall hereafter be erected on any one
lot.
§ 28-4.4. Schedule of District Regulations. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.200; Ord.
#005-10 § I, 28-4.4; Ord. #09-11; Ord. No. 32-2016]
The regulations prescribed for each of the zoning districts listed in
subsection 28-3.1 are described in the "Schedule of District Regulations."
The Schedule is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter and may be
amended in the same manner as any other part of this chapter.30
§ 28-4.5. District Regulations for R-1 Low-Density Residential Zone.
[Ord. #005-10 § I, 28-4.5; Ord. #09-11; Ord. No. 32-2016]
b. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines and municipal
limit lines shall be construed as following such lot lines and the
municipal limit lines;
c. Any dimensions shown shall be in feet and measured horizontally and,
when measured from a street, shall be measured from the street rightof-
way line;
d. In cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true location of any
district line, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district
boundary.
a. Use Regulations.
1. Permitted Principal Uses:
30.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 28-3.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-4.5
1:422
(a) One-family detached dwellings.
(b) Two-family detached dwellings.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
(a) Off-street parking or garages.
(b) Home professions.
(c) Home occupations.
(d) Swimming pools.
(e) Signs.
(f) Public parks.
3. Permitted Conditional Uses:
(a) Townhouses or row houses.
(b) Multifamily mid-rise residential.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Public or private schools.
(e) Philanthropic institutions.
(f) Public utility installations.
(g) Places of worship.
(h) Museums.
(i) Nursing homes or assisted living residences.
(j) Off-site or joint parking facility.
(k) Retail and service commercial uses.
b. Bulk Regulations:
1. Permitted Principal Use Standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: existing average.
(d) Minimum side yard (one): two feet.
(e) Minimum side yard (both): five feet, one inch.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
§ 28-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4.5
1:423
§ 28-4.6. District Regulations for R-2 High-Density Residential
Zone. [Ord. #005-10 § I, 28-4.6]
§ 28-4.7. District Regulations for R-3 Waterfront Residential Zone.
[Ord. #005-10 § I, 28-4.7]
(g) Maximum building height: three stories/35 feet.
(h) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(i) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
2. Permitted conditional use standards: see Section 28-9.
a. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted Principal Use: high rise residential apartments.
2. Permitted Accessory Use: shopping mall.
3. Permitted Conditional Uses: none.
b. Bulk Regulations:
1. Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
2. Maximum building height: 50 stories/550 feet.
3. Maximum floor area ratio: 3:1.
4. Maximum building coverage: 60%.
a. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted principal use: townhouses or row houses.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
(a) Off-street parking or garages.
(b) Home professions.
(c) Home occupations.
(d) Swimming pools.
(e) Signs.
(f) Public parks.
3. Permitted conditional uses: none.
b. Bulk Regulations:
1. Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
§ 28-4.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-4.7
1:424
§ 28-4.8. District Regulations for R-4 Mid-Rise Mixed-Use Zone.
[Ord. #005-10 § I, 28-4.8; Ord. No. 32-2016]
3. Minimum front yard: five feet.
4. Minimum side yard: five feet.
5. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
6. Maximum building height: three stories/35 feet.
7. Maximum building coverage: 60%.
a. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted Principal Uses:
(a) Multifamily mid-rise residential as defined in subsection
28-2.2.
(b) Retail and service commercial uses on ground floor only.
(c) Restaurants.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
(a) Off-street parking or garages.
(b) Home professions.
(c) Home occupations.
(d) Subordinate uses typically associated with multifamily
residential development including, but not limited to
swimming pools, gymnasiums, barbecue areas, meeting rooms,
storage facilities, outdoor private park areas.
(e) Signs.
(f) Public parks.
3. Permitted Conditional Uses: none.
b. Bulk Regulations:
1. For Lots Less Than 20,000 Square Feet in Area:
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard: 10 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard: five feet.
§ 28-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4.8
1:425
(f) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(g) Maximum building height — buildings without ground floor
parking: three stories/40 feet.
(h) Maximum building height — buildings with ground floor
parking: three residential stories above parking level/50 feet.
(i) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
2. For Lots 20,000 Square Feet or Greater in Area:
(a) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 10 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: zero feet. If a side a yard is
proposed then the minimum setback is five feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: five feet.
(g) Maximum building height inclusive of indoor garage parking:
five stories and 90 feet exclusive of roof appurtenances.
(h) Maximum impervious surface coverage inclusive of building
coverage: 90%.
(i) Minimum open space: 10%.
c. Additional Regulations:
1. Minimum parking structure setbacks: parking structures shall
comply with the yard requirements for principal buildings.
2. Exposed parking areas underneath buildings are prohibited.
Below-building parking within the building footprint shall only be
permitted when such parking is screened by permitted uses or by
architectural detailing. The architectural detailing for parking
areas shall use a similar or complimentary type and quality of
materials as the remainder of the building.
3. Off-Street Parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
(a) Parking spaces shall be dedicated to the respective residential
units as part of any lease or deed, and to the extent that the
total number of parking spaces for any development exceeds
the ratio of one space per residential unit then at least one
space shall be designated for each residential unit. Such
dedication shall be included as part of the lease/rental
§ 28-4.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-4.8
1:426
§ 28-4.9. District Regulations for C Commercial Zone. [Ord.
#005-10 § I, 28-4.9; Ord. No. 32-2016]
agreement or deed, and shall not require a separate fee,
charge or payment from the owner/tenant/lessee/occupant.
Such parking spaces shall not be made available for use other
than by the owner/tenant/lessee/occupant of the respective
units or visitor thereto.
(b) Table 4.4 of N.J.A.C. 5:21 of the New Jersey Administrative
Code, entitled Residential Site Improvement Standards
governs the required off-street parking for all residential
development in the Town of Guttenberg. However, N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.14(c) permits alternate parking standards if the
applicant can demonstrate these standards better reflect local
conditions. Factors affecting minimum number of parking
spaces include household characteristics, availability of mass
transit, urban verses suburban location and available off-site
parking resources. If the applicant can demonstrate that
reduced off-street parking better reflects the conditions
associated with the proposed development, the following
parking standards, may be used to provide off-street parking;
and, if the applicant so demonstrates, an exception pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.1 will be granted.
(1) One Bedroom Unit: 1.00 space/unit.
(2) Two Bedroom Unit: 1.25 spaces/unit.
(3) Three Bedroom Unit: 1.50 spaces/unit.
4. One curb cut is permitted for every 75 feet of lot frontage.
5. Bedroom distribution:
(a) One Bedroom Unit: 85% minimum.
(b) Two Bedroom Unit: 10% maximum.
(c) Three Bedroom Unit: 5% maximum.
a. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted Principal Uses:
(a) Retail and service commercial uses.
(b) General business and commercial offices.
(c) Medical and dental offices.
(d) Public and quasi-public offices and facilities.
(e) Restaurants.
§ 28-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4.9
1:427
§ 28-4.10. District Regulations for P Parks and Recreation Zone.
[Ord. #005-10 § I, 28-4.10]
§ 28-4.11. District Regulations for R-5 High-Rise Residential Use
Zone. [Ord. No. 32-2016]
(f) Commercial entertainment facility.
(g) Multifamily residential.
(h) Multifamily residential above permitted uses listed in
subsection 28-4.9a,1(a) through (f) located on the ground floor.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
(a) Off-street parking or garages.
(b) Signs.
(c) Public parks.
3. Permitted Conditional Uses:
(a) Museums.
(b) Nursing homes or assisted living residences.
(c) Off-site or joint parking facility.
(d) Multifamily mid-rise residential as defined in subsection 28-2.2
either alone or above permitted uses listed in subsection
28-4.9a, 1(a) through (f) located on the ground floor.
b. Bulk Regulations:
1. Permitted Principal Use Standards:
(a) Maximum building height: five stories/55 feet.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 60%.
2. Permitted conditional use standards: see Section 28-9.
a. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted principal uses: Public park and recreation areas.
2. Permitted accessory use: Marina.
b. Other Regulations: Site plan subject to Planning Board approval.
a. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted Principal Uses:
§ 28-4.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-4.11
1:428
(a) Multifamily high-rise residential as defined in subsection
28-2.2.
(b) Retail and service commercial uses on ground floor only.
(c) Restaurants.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
(a) Off-street parking or garages.
(b) Home professions.
(c) Home occupations.
(d) Subordinate uses typically associated with multifamily
residential development including, but not limited to
swimming pools, gymnasiums, barbecue areas, meeting rooms,
storage facilities, outdoor private park areas.
(e) Signs.
(f) Public parks.
3. Permitted Conditional Uses: None.
b. Bulk Regulations:
1. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
4. Minimum front yard setback: 10 feet.
5. Minimum side yard setback: zero feet. If a side yard is proposed
then the minimum setback is five feet.
6. Minimum rear yard setback: five feet.
7. Maximum building height inclusive of indoor garage parking: 15
stories and 180 feet exclusive of roof appurtenances.
8. Maximum impervious surface coverage inclusive of building
coverage: 90%.
9. Minimum open space: 10%.
c. Additional Regulations:
1. Minimum parking structure setbacks: Parking structures shall
comply with the yard requirements for principal buildings.
2. Exposed parking areas under the buildings are prohibited. Parking
within the building shall be screened with appropriate
§ 28-4.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4.11
1:429
§ 28-5. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.
§ 28-5.1. General. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.300]
In addition to the above Schedule of District Regulations, the following
regulations of general applicability are herein voted and made part of this
chapter.
§ 28-5.2. Exclusions. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.310]
The omission of any use or type of use from the Schedule shall be deemed
to be an exclusion thereof from all districts.
§ 28-5.3. Home Occupations. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.311; New]
Home occupations shall be permitted provided that:
architectural detail material. The architectural detailing for
parking areas shall be similar or complimentary to the materials
used on the remainder of the building.
3. Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
(a) Parking spaces shall be dedicated to the respective residential
units as part of any lease or deed, and to the extent that the
total number of parking spaces for any development exceeds
the ratio of one space per residential unit then at least one
space shall be designated for each residential unit. Such
dedication shall be included as part of the lease/rental
agreement or deed, and shall not require a separate fee,
charge or payment from the owner/tenant/lessee/occupant.
Such parking spaces shall not be made available for use other
than by the owner/tenant/lessee/occupant of the respective
units or visitor thereto.
(b) Table 4.4 of N.J.A.C. 5:21 of the New Jersey Administrative
Code, entitled Residential Site Improvement Standards
governs the required off-street parking for all residential
development in the Town of Guttenberg.
4. One curb cut is permitted for every 75 feet of lot frontage.
5. Bedroom distribution:
(a) One Bedroom Unit: 70% minimum.
(b) Two Bedroom Unit: 20% maximum.
(c) Three Bedroom Unit: 10% maximum.
a. Such occupation is incidental to the residential use of the premises and
is carried on in the main residential building by a resident on the
premises without nonresident assistants.
§ 28-4.11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-5.3
1:430
§ 28-5.4. Professional Offices. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.312]
An office for a licensed professional in the fields of law, medicine, dentistry,
architecture, engineering or other similar occupations shall be permitted in
a residence provided that:
§ 28-5.5. Access to Street. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.313]
In order to facilitate the orderly arrangement of streets, no permit shall be
issued for the erection of a building on any lot unless such lot abuts either
an existing public street, or a street shown on a recorded subdivision plat
or delineated in the comprehensive Master Plan of the Town.
§ 28-5.6. Fences and Walls. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.314]
Fences and walls shall be permitted provided that no fence or wall shall
exceed the height of six feet along the side and rear lot line. No fence or
wall along the front lot line shall be permitted.
§ 28-5.7. Buffer Areas. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.315]
A buffer area shall be provided on every lot in a commercial district that
abuts a residential district, and as specified in connection with uses
requiring a special permit. This buffer strip shall extend along all side and
rear lines abutting residence district properties, but shall not be required
in any front yard. This buffer strip shall more particularly be provided and
maintained as follows:
b. Such occupation is carried on in an area not more than 25% of the
dwelling.
c. Any display of goods or signs identifying such occupation shall be
prohibited, except as provided in subsection 28-7.2.
d. Such occupation generally does not generate truck delivery or pickup
activities as part of the operation.
a. Such office is incidental to the residential use of the premises, is carried
on in the main building, and that the office space does not exceed 45%
of the total floor area of the residence.
b. There shall be not more than one sign for each such premises and the
sign shall not exceed one square foot.
a. Width of buffer strip shall be at least five feet.
b. This strip shall be in addition to any side or rear yard measurement.
c. This strip shall contain no sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, drying
yards, trash stations, playgrounds, or construction of any sort.
d. A five foot high solid fence shall be erected on the inner edge of the
strip; the buffer strip shall be landscaped with shrubs, trees, and lawns,
§ 28-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5.7
1:431
§ 28-5.8. Swimming Pools. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.316; Ord. #18-13]
Private swimming pools shall be a permitted accessory use in any district
and shall comply with the following conditions and requirements:
§ 28-5.9. Sex Shops. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.317]
Sex shops (as defined in subsection 28-2.2) where not expressly prohibited
by proper authority shall not be permitted:
§ 28-5.10. (Reserved)31
so arranged and grouped to screen all service and activity areas. The
fence and planting shall be subjected to approval by the Planning Board
in a site plan which will be submitted.
e. This strip shall be maintained as a landscaped area and kept free of
storage, litter, etc., at all times.
f. Buffer areas shall not be used for parking.
a. The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the
occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located.
b. It may not be located, including any walks, or paved areas or accessory
structures adjacent thereto, closer than five feet to any property line on
which located.
c. For excavated swimming pools, the entire property on which the
swimming pool is located shall be so walled or fenced so as to prevent
uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent
properties. The fence or wall to be not less than four feet in height and
maintained in good condition. When a fence is used, it shall not have
any openings greater than four inches by six inches, except for
approved gates; and when the fence is formed of metal or wire, such
metal or wire shall not be less than number nine gauge.
a. In any residential zone.
b. In any other zone within 500 feet of the following:
1. Churches or schools.
2. Commercial enterprises catering primarily to children under 18
years of age.
3. Any tavern, restaurant or bar.
4. Any other sex shop.
The distance shall be taken between the centers of the subject use
areas measured in a straight line.
§ 28-5.7 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-5.11
1:432
§ 28-5.11. High Rise Apartment Buildings. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.319]
Subject to site plan review and approval by the Planning Board, high rise
residential structures shall be permitted provided that:
§ 28-5.12. Trailers. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.320]
The use of trailers are hereby regulated as per the following:
§ 28-5.13. Drainage of Lots. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.321]
No building shall be erected on any land and no change shall be made
in the existing contours of any land, including any change in the course,
a. There shall be a minimum site of 40,000 square feet for each
development.
b. The maximum height of the principal structure shall not exceed 50
stories or 550 feet.
c. The floor area ration shall not exceed 3:1.
d. The maximum building coverage of any lot shall not exceed 60%.
e. One paved on-site parking space shall be provided for each dwelling
unit.
f. At least one loading space per structure shall be provided.
g. A shopping area or mall may be provided as an accessory use provided
that such area shall not exceed a height of three stories or 35 feet.
NOTE: Site plan for any shopping mall or area must be approved by the
Planning Board.
h. All open areas other than those used for parking, loading, recreation,
vehicular pedestrian use shall be graded, planted, landscaped and
properly maintained. All parking areas shall be screened on their
periphery by means of planting or fencing or a decorated block wall
having a height of at least 4 1/2 feet.
a. No trailer may be used as a dwelling except as provided below:
1. The owner of a residential structure containing not more than four
dwelling units may permit a trailer or house car of a guest to be
kept on his property for a period not to exceed two months
provided that the vehicle shall not be parked in the right-of-way of
any public street and that the toilet or toilets shall be sealed or
locked and that all waste water shall be disposed of through the
public sewers.
31.Editor's Note: Former subsection 28-5.10, Garden Apartments, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance 3/87 § 4.318, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 005-10.
§ 28-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5.13
1:433
width or elevation of any natural or other drainage channel, in any manner
that will obstruct, interfere with or change the drainage of such land;
taking into account land development that may take place in the vicinity
under the provisions of this chapter, without providing adequate drainage
in connection therewith.
§ 28-5.14. Front Yards. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.322]
§ 28-5.15. Side Yards. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.323]
§ 28-5.16. Corner Lots. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.324]
§ 28-5.17. Fences and Walls. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.325]
Fences or walls not to exceed six feet in height shall be permitted along the
rear and side lot lines, but not forward of a required front yard setback.
a. Front Yard Requirements. No building shall be erected or shall be
reconstructed or altered so as to project in any way beyond the average
setback line observed by the buildings existing on the same side of the
street within the block at the time of the passage of this chapter.
b. Variance of Front Yard Requirements. When a vacant lot is situated
between two improved lots, each having a principal building within 25
feet of any side lot line of such unimproved lot, the front yard may be
reduced to the greatest depth of the front yard of the such adjoining
improved lots, provided, however, that where any lot shall front on a
right-of-way which is proposed, on the Official Map of the Town, to be
widened, the front yard of such lot shall be as required in the district
where such lot is located and shall be measured from such proposed
future right-of-way.
a. Variance of Side Yard Width. Where a side lot line is irregular, the
average width of the side yard shall not be less than the required
minimum width, provided that such side yard shall not be narrower at
any point than 1/2 the required minimum width.
a. Side Yard Requirements of a Corner Lot. The side street setback line of
any corner lot plotted on the Town's tax maps as the lot existed at the
time of adoption of this chapter or any corner lot shown on any
subdivision plat which received final approval prior to the adoption of
this chapter shall not be less than 1/2 of the depth of the minimum front
yard required on any adjoining lot; however, a lot delineated by
subdivision after the adoption of this chapter shall provide a side street
setback line which shall not be less than the minimum front yard
required on any adjoining lot fronting on a side street.
b. Visual Obstruction of Corner Lots. On every corner lot in every district
there shall be no obstruction to vision within a triangle formed by the
street lines of such lot and a line drawn between points on such street
lines at a distance of 10 feet from the point of intersection thereof.
§ 28-5.13 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-5.18
1:434
§ 28-5.18. Through Lots. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.326]
Where a lot extends from a street to an alley or another street, the widest
street shall be deemed the street upon which the property fronts.
§ 28-5.19. Location of Accessory Uses in Residence Districts. [Ord.
3/87 § 4.330]
The following yard regulations shall apply to accessory uses or buildings in
all residential districts:
§ 28-6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE. [Ord. 3/87
§ 4.400]
In all districts, in connection with every use therein, there shall be provided,
at the time any structure is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, offstreet
parking and loading space and access thereto in accordance with the
requirements set forth below.
a. An accessory use or structure attached to a principal building shall
comply in all respects with the yard requirements for such principal
building.
b. An accessory use or structure not attached to a principal building shall
comply with the following requirements.
1. No accessory use shall be located in a required front yard.
2. No accessory building or structure shall be located closer than 10
feet from a principal building.
3. An accessory use or uses may occupy part of the area of a required
rear yard, with a maximum permitted height of 15 feet.
4. The side or rear yard for a detached accessory use shall be 1/2 of
the required side yard for a principal building in the district in
which it is located, but in no case less than three feet, unless
otherwise specified in this chapter.
5. On an interior lot that runs through a block and faces on two
streets, an accessory use in a rear yard shall conform to the
average setback of buildings on the two adjacent lots.
6. On a corner lot, an accessory building or structure shall observe
the same requirements as a principal building, except that when a
rear lot line of a corner lot forms part of the side lot of an adjacent
lot, an accessory use shall be located not less than three feet from
such lot line, and shall observe the setback line of the principal
building on the adjacent lot.
§ 28-5.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6.1
1:435
§ 28-6.1. General. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.410]
Required area and dimensions for off-street parking and loading spaces
shall be calculated on the following basis:
§ 28-6.2. Location. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.411; Ord. No. 32-2016]
a. Each off-street parking space shall have a minimum area of 190 square
feet, exclusive of aisles or driveways.
b. Each off-street loading space shall have a minimum area of 350 square
feet, exclusive of access roads with a minimum width of 10 feet and a
clear height of 14 feet.
a. General. Any off-street parking space and any off-street loading space
required by this chapter shall be provided on the same lot as the use to
which it is appurtenant, and shall comply with the regulations for the
location of accessory uses and structures as described above.
b. In R Districts, the required off-street parking space for more than two
vehicles may not be located in a required front yard. On a corner lot,
this restriction shall also apply to the space between the side street
right-of-way line and the side building line.
c. In C Districts, required off-street loading spaces may occupy all or part
of a required rear yard, except when abutting a residence district,
where a buffer strip is to be maintained as provided in subsection
28-5.7f.
d. Off-site Parking in a Commercial District. Where there are practical
difficulties in the way of the location of parking space or if the public
safety or the public convenience or both would be better served by the
location of such parking space other than on the same lot with the use
to which it is appurtenant, the Board of Adjustment on specific
application may authorize such alternative required parking space as
will adequately serve the public interest, under the procedures for
special permit uses, as described in this chapter.
e. Joint facilities for parking or loading. The Board of Adjustment on
specific application may authorize such joint use of off-street parking or
loading facilities for uses on the same or adjoining lots subject to the
procedures for special permit uses as described in this chapter.
f. Places of Worship and Schools. The required off-street parking shall be
located on the same lot as the place of worship or school, or within 100
feet of the place of worship or school. All off-street parking shall be
located within the Town of Guttenberg. Any off-site parking shall be
accompanied by a fully executed lease agreement.
§ 28-6.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-6.3
1:436
§ 28-6.3. Access. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.412]
All off-street parking space and off-street loading space shall be provided
with safe and convenient access to a street. Access drives or driveways
shall not be less than 10 feet in width. If such space is located contiguous
to a street, the street side thereof shall be curbed and ingress and egress
shall be provided only through driveway openings through the curb not
exceeding 25 feet in width and located and constructed in accordance with
specifications prescribed by the Enforcing Officer.
No access drive or driveway in any R District shall be used to provide access
to uses other than those permitted in such R Districts.
§ 28-6.4. Development and Maintenance. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.413]
a. Any public or private parking or loading area for three or more vehicles,
including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained
in accordance with the following requirements. Plans for such areas
shall be reviewed by the Enforcing Officer to insure compliance with
these regulations.
b. Screening and Landscaping. Off-street parking areas for three or more
vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be effectively screened as
provided in subsection 28-5.6. The screening shall be on the side or
sides which adjoin or face premises situated in any Residential District,
or institutional premises.
c. Minimum Distances and Setbacks. No off-street loading area or parking
area or part thereof for three or more vehicles shall be closer than 10
feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for human care
located on an adjoining lot.
d. Surfacing. Any off-street parking area or off-street loading area for
three or more vehicles shall be surfaced with an asphalt or Portland
cement concrete pavement or similar durable dustless surface. All
areas shall be marked so as to provide for the orderly and safe loading,
parking and storage of motor vehicles.
e. Lighting.
1. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or loading
area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises.
2. Off-street parking facilities for multifamily structures containing
three or more families and off-street parking facilities for all
commercial and industrial uses shall be adequately lighted.
f. Drainage. Any off-street parking area and off-street loading area shall
be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without
detriment to surrounding uses.
§ 28-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6.5
1:437
§ 28-6.5. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.414; Ord.
12/7/87; Ord. No. 32-2016]
a. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be set forth in
the following schedule:
Uses Required Parking Spaces
1. Bowling alleys, swimming
pools, dance halls, roller rinks,
etc.
5 for each 500 square feet of
floor area or of water areas in
swimming pools.
2. Places of worship and schools
[Ord. No. 32-2016]
1 space/3 seats.
1 space/36 linear inches of
bench/pew.
1 space/20 square feet of floor
area without designated
seating.
3. Community buildings and
social halls
1 for each 300 square feet of
floor area.
4. Dwellings 1 for each family or dwelling
unit excepting that 1 for each 2
dwelling units shall be provided
for units designed exclusively
for elderly persons.
5. Funeral homes, mortuaries 5 for each parlor, plus 1 for
each employee.
6. Hospitals, nursing and
convalescing homes
1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for
each employee.
7. Rooming houses and
dormitories
1 for each bedroom.
8. Manufacturing plants, research
or testing laboratories, bottling
plants
1 for each 1,500 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 for each 4
employees in a maximum
working shift. The total parking
area shall not be less than 25%
of the building floor area.
9. Medical or dental offices 5 spaces for each doctor or
dentist.
10. Hotels 1 space for each living or
sleeping unit.
11. Restaurants, beer parlors and
night clubs
1 for each 5 seats.
12. Retail stores, shops, etc., in
Commercial Districts
1 for each 300 square feet of
floor area.
§ 28-6.5 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-6.5
1:438
§ 28-6.5A. Parking Regulations for R-4 Mid-Rise Mixed-Use Zones.
[Ord. #005-10 § I, 28-6.X; Ord. No. 32-2016]
Uses Required Parking Spaces
13. Banks or professional offices 1 for each 300 square feet of
floor area.
14. Sports arenas, auditoriums,
theaters, assembly halls
1 for each 2.5 seats.
15. Wholesale establishments or
warehouses
1 for each 2 employees on
maximum shift. The total
parking area shall not be less
than 25% of the building floor
area.
16. Motels 1 space for each living or
sleeping unit.
Where a use is not specifically mentioned in this table, the
requirements for similar uses shall apply.
b. In C Districts, where no substantial change or changes in an existing
structure are affected, notwithstanding the fact that there may be a
change in the use of such structure, the off-street parking requirements
of this ordinance shall not apply.
"Substantial change or changes," for purposes of this amendment shall
include but not be limited to, any change or changes which result in
an increase in the commercial floor area to a number of square feet
equal to or in excess of 125% of the square footage of the structure
as it existed prior to the change or changes and/or any increase in the
number of bedrooms in the structure from the number which existed
prior to the change or changes.
Any portion of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Guttenberg which
shall be inconsistent with this amendment is hereby modified to the
minimum extent necessary to bring it into conformance with this
amendment.
a. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be set forth in
the following schedule:
§ 28-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6.5A
1:439
§ 28-6.6. Required Loading Spaces. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.415]
The number of off-street loading spaces required shall be as set forth in
the following schedule. In the case of any use not specifically mentioned
herein, the Board of Adjustment shall determine the number of loading
spaces required.
Uses Required Parking Spaces
1. Swimming pools 1 for each 100 feet of water
area
2. Places of worship and schools
[Ord. No. 32-2016]
1 space/3 seats
1 space/36 linear inches of
bench/pew
1 space/20 square feet of floor
area without designated seating
3. Philanthropic institutions,
museums and commercial
entertainment facilities
1 for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
4. Dwellings In accordance with the New
Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.
5. Hospitals, nursing homes and
assisted living residences
1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for
each employee
6. Medical or dental offices 1 space for each 150 square
feet of gross floor area
7. Restaurants and nightclubs 1 for each 5 seats
8. Retail and service commercial
uses
No off street parking is required
for the first 1,000 square feet of
floor area of ground floor
commercial use, 1 space for
each 400 square feet of gross
floor area above the first 1,000
square feet
9. Banks or professional offices 1 for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 28-6.5A GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-6.6
1:440
Use
Square feet of Total
Floor Area or Other
Unit of
Measurement
Minimum Required
Off-Street Loading
Berths
a. Schools For each 15,000
square feet
1
b. Hospitals (In addition
to space for
ambulances)
For each 50 beds 3
c. Undertaking
establishments
1
d. Offices, hotels
Commercial
wholesale, industrial,
manufacturing,
storage, and
miscellaneous use
Under 20,000 square
feet
20,000-50,000 square
feet
51,000-100,000
square feet
For each additional
50,000 square feet or
major fraction thereof
1
2
3
1
§ 28-7. SIGNS.
§ 28-7.1. General. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.421]
All signs shall be considered an accessory use and, unless otherwise
specified in this chapter, the construction, alteration, erection, maintenance
and location of signs and outdoor displays, shall be governed by the
provisions of the Building Code of Guttenberg.
§ 28-7.2. Signs in Residence Districts. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.422]
a. General.
1. Every sign in an R District shall either (a) be placed flat against a
building, projecting not more than six inches therefrom, on the
front thereof, and not extending above the actual height thereof, or
(b) be located completely apart from a building, directly in front
thereof, at a distance of not less than 15 feet from the front lot line,
and not exceeding five feet in height.
2. No sign in an R District shall be illuminated by other than indirect
lighting, with the source thereof so shielded that it illuminates only
the face of the sign.
b. The following types of signs are permitted in all residence districts.
§ 28-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-7.2
1:441
1. Nameplates and Identification Signs.
(a) Signs indicating the name or address of the occupant, or a
permitted home occupation or profession, provided that they
shall not exceed one square foot in area.
(b) Only one sign shall be permitted per dwelling unit except in the
case of corner lots where two such signs, one facing each
street, shall be permitted.
(c) For multiple dwelling structures, a single identification sign
not exceeding six square feet in area.
2. Sales or Rental or Development Signs.
(a) Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which
they are located, provided they shall not exceed six square feet
in area for one and two-family houses and 20 square feet in
area for other structures.
(b) Not more than one such sign may be erected per building.
(c) Not more than one such sign may be placed upon any property
unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in
which case two signs may be erected, one facing each street.
(d) Such signs shall be promptly removed when premises are sold
or rented.
3. Institutional Signs.
(a) Signs of schools, churches, hospitals, clubs, hotels or other
institutions of a similar public or semipublic nature, provided
the size of any sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(b) Not more than one such sign shall be permitted for an
institution, unless the property fronts upon more than one
street, in which event two such signs may be erected, one
facing each other.
4. Signs Accessory to Parking Areas.
(a) Signs designating entrances or exits to or from a parking area,
provided the size of any sign shall not exceed two square feet
in area.
(b) Signs designating the identity and conditions of use of parking
areas, provided the size of any such sign shall not exceed nine
square feet in area. Not more than one sign may be placed
upon any property unless such property is located on a corner,
in which event two such signs may be permitted, one facing
each street.
5. Artisan's Signs.
§ 28-7.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-7.2
1:442
§ 28-7.3. Signs in Commercial Districts. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.423]
§ 28-7.4. Types of Signs Prohibited. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.424; Ord. #013/
03]
(a) Signs of mechanics, painters and other artisans may be erected
and maintained during the period in which such persons are
performing work on the premises, provided that the size of any
such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(b) Such signs shall be removed promptly upon completion of the
work.
6. Private Driveways.
(a) Signs indicating the private nature of a driveway provided, that
the size of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
a. All signs permitted in residence districts as described in subsection
28-7.2 shall be permitted in commercial districts subject to the same
regulations.
b. Business signs are permitted in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Size of Signs. The surface area of all business signs on a single lot
shall aggregate to no more than two square feet of sign area per
front foot, with a maximum of total area of 100 square feet.
2. Projection of Signs. No sign shall project into or over the right-ofway
of any street.
3. Height of Signs. No sign shall extend higher than the maximum
permitted height of principal structures in the district in which the
sign is located.
4. Clearance. No hanging or suspended sign shall be erected or
maintained less than 15 feet above grade.
a. Any sign of which all or any part is in motion by any means, including
fluttering, rotating, or other moving signs set in motion by movement of
the atmosphere.
b. Any sign displaying flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing
degrees of intensity.
c. Any illuminated tubing or strings of lights outlining roof lines, door,
windows or wall edges of any building.
d. Any sign that obscures a sign displayed by public authority for the
purpose of giving traffic instructions or directions or other information.
e. Any sign that uses the word "stop" or "danger" or otherwise presents or
implies the need or requirement of stopping or caution or the existence
§ 28-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-7.4
1:443
§ 28-8. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.430]
All proposed uses shall provide documentation to the satisfaction of the
Enforcing Officer that the proposed use will be in conformance with the
performance standards listed herein. In the case of a structure being built
for future lease, in whole or in part, the Enforcing Officer shall waive
this documentation for purposes of issuing a Building Permit if all other
applicable requirements are met, but shall not issue a Certificate of
Compliance or a Certificate of Occupancy until such time as all
requirements with respect to a particular occupant and/or use are met.
In the event that any use fails to meet the performance standards after
a Certificate of Compliance or Occupancy is issued, the Enforcing Officer
may, after proper notice, require that the use be terminated within 60 days
unless the condition can be corrected to satisfactorily meet the performance
standards listed herewith:
of danger, or which is a copy or imitation of, or which for any reason is
likely to be confused with any sign displayed by a public authority.
f. Any sign within the area of vision clearance at the street corner of a
corner lot.
g. Any sign that causes any direct glare into or upon any dwelling.
h. Any portable sign, including any sign displayed on a vehicle when used
primarily for the purpose of such display.
i. Advertising sign.
j. Any "sign" structure or use that uses sound to advertise or identify the
premises, owner or use in any manner.
k. Banner. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended with a rope, wire, or
string from the outside of a commercial building.
a. Smoke, Dust, Dirt and Fly Ash. Shall not exceed the limits set by State
and local Air Pollution Codes.
b. Odor. The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be
permitted.
c. Gases. No gas shall be emitted which is deleterious to the public health
or safety.
d. Glare. Arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes that
produce glare shall be performed within an enclosed building or shall
be screened from view from any point beyond the property line.
e. Vibration. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions detectable
beyond its property lines, without the aid of instruments, with the
exception of that vibration produced as a result of constructional
activity.
§ 28-7.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-8
1:444
f. Fire and Safety Hazard. The storage of crude oil or any of its volatile
products or other highly inflammable liquids in aboveground tanks shall
be in accordance with local and State regulations. The permitted
manufacture or storage of explosive or poisonous gases shall be in
accordance with local and State regulations.
The storage, baling or treatment of rags, wastes, scrap paper or similar
materials shall be in an enclosed masonry building, no part of which
may be located closer than 50 feet from any property line.
g. Sewage Waste. Liquid wastes and effluents shall be discharged into an
approved existing sewage treatment plant in accordance with the
regulations of that system or shall be treated in a treatment plant
operated by the permitted use which is in compliance with applicable
State and local requirements.
h. Open Storage.
1. Other than junk and/or scrap and auto wrecking yards, all open
storage shall be located within an area not closer than 50 feet from
any street right-of-way line and shall be enclosed with a greenbelt
planting strip, or other approved screening, not less than eight feet
in width, and not less than eight feet in height, to normally screen
view of stock piles. The storage of lumber, coal or other
combustible material shall not be less than 20 feet from any
interior lot line, and a roadway shall be provided, graded, surfaced
and maintained from the street into the property to permit free
access of fire trucks at any time.
2. Junk and/or scrap and auto wrecking yards shall be permitted only
when enclosed within a fence not less than six feet in height, not
less than 50 feet from any street or right-of-way line, and fronted
with an evergreen planting strip to attain not less than eight feet in
height to screen yard from outside view.
i. Noise. At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall the sound
pressure level resulting from any use or activity, whether open or
enclosed, (except noise not directly under control of the property user,
no noises resulting from the construction and maintenance of buildings
and facilities including site preparation, and the noises of safety
signals, warning devices, railroads, the automobile traffic) exceed the
minimum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave band as set
forth below:
Octave Band, Frequency in Cycles
per Second
Sound Pressure Level in
Decibels
0 to 74 73
75 to 149 68
150 to 299 60
300 to 599 53
§ 28-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-8
1:445
§ 28-9. CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS.
§ 28-9.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. 3/87 § 4.510; Ord. #005-10 § I,
28-9.1]
Certain uses are found to possess such unique characteristics and special
forms each specific instance of their establishment or modification requires
individual consideration.
All such uses shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective
districts, but shall be subject to the specific additional standards and
requirements pertaining solely to such uses.
Octave Band, Frequency in Cycles
per Second
Sound Pressure Level in
Decibels
600 to 1,199 47
1,200 to 2,399 41
2,400 to 4,799 35
4,800 and over 33
j. Topography. The topography of any parcel shall remain substantially
unaltered by development of any type unless same is approved by the
Planning Board and further approved by the Board Engineer, and in
those cases where it has jurisdiction, by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
k. Liquid or Solid Waste. There shall be no discharge of any kind of waste
into a reservoir or river. The discharge of untreated waste into any body
of water is prohibited. All methods of industrial waste treatment shall
be approved by the appropriate County Health Agency. Effluent from
treatment plants shall at all times comply with the following standards:
1. Maximum five day biochemical oxygen demand: Five parts per
million.
2. Maximum quantity of effluent: 10% of minimum daily stream or
river flow.
3. Maximum five day biochemical oxygen demand after dilution
(B.O.D. of effluent multiplied by quantity of effluent divided by
quantity of stream flow): 0.25 parts per million.
4. Maximum phenol: 0.01 parts per million.
No effluent shall contain other acids, oils, dust, toxic metals,
corrosive or other toxic substance in solution or suspension which
would create odors, discoloration, poison or otherwise pollute the
stream or river in any way.
§ 28-8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-9.2
1:446
§ 28-9.2. Standards Applicable to All Conditional Uses. [Ord. 3/87
§ 4.521; Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-9.2]
§ 28-9.3. Standards Applicable to Particular Conditional Uses. [Ord.
3/87 § 4.522; Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-9.3; Ord. No. 32-2016]
a. The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of operation
involved, the size of the site in relation to it and the location of the site
with respect to existing or future streets giving access to it, shall be
such that it will be in harmony with the orderly development of the
district and the location, nature and height of buildings, walls and
fences will not discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.
b. Operations in connection with any special permit use shall not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes, vibration,
light or glare than would be the operations of any other use permitted
in the district.
a. Nursing Home; Assisted Living Residence; Philanthropic or
Eleemosynary Institution; Museum.
1. Minimum lot area: in all districts where permitted 20,000 square
feet.
2. Minimum frontage: in all districts where permitted 100 feet.
3. Maximum coverage: in all districts where permitted 50%.
4. Usable Open Space. A minimum of 100 square feet of usable open
space shall be provided for each inhabitant, patient or student of a
use providing permanent or temporary living quarters, up to 50%
coverage.
5. No required parking shall be permitted within five feet of any side
or rear lot line.
b. Nursery School.
1. Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
2. A minimum of 50 square feet of usable open space shall be
provided for each student, up to 50% coverage standard.
c. Multifamily Mid-Rise Residential.
1. Bulk Regulations.
(a) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 10 feet.
§ 28-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-9.3
1:447
(e) Minimum side yard setback: zero feet. If a side yard is
proposed then the minimum setback is five feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: five feet.
(g) Maximum building height inclusive of indoor garage parking:
eight stories and 90 feet exclusive of roof appurtenances.
(h) Maximum impervious surface coverage inclusive of building
coverage: 90%.
(i) Minimum open space: 10%.
2. Additional Regulations:
(a) Minimum parking structure setbacks: Parking structures shall
comply with the yard requirements for principal buildings.
(b) Exposed parking areas under the building are prohibited.
Parking within the building shall be screened with appropriate
architectural detail material. The architectural detailing for
parking areas shall be similar or complimentary to the
materials used on the remainder of the building.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
(1) Parking spaces shall be dedicated to the respective
residential units as part of any lease or deed, and to the
extent that the total number of parking spaces for any
development exceeds the ratio of one space per residential
unit then at least one space shall be designated for each
residential unit. Such dedication shall be included as part
of the lease/rental agreement or deed, and shall not
require a separate fee, charge or payment from the owner/
tenant/lessee/occupant. Such parking spaces shall not be
made available for use other than by the owner/tenant/
lessee/occupant of the respective units or visitor thereto.
(2) Table 4.4 of N.J.A.C. 5:21 of the New Jersey Administrative
Code, entitled Residential Site Improvement Standards
governs the required off-street parking for all residential
development in the Town of Guttenberg. However, N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.14(c) permits alternate parking standards if the
applicant can demonstrate these standards better reflect
local conditions. Factors affecting minimum number of
parking spaces include household characteristics,
availability of mass transit, urban verses suburban
location and available off-site parking resources. If the
applicant can demonstrate that reduced off-street parking
better reflects the conditions associated with the proposed
development, the following parking standards, may be
used to provide off-street parking; and, if the applicant so
§ 28-9.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-9.3
1:448
demonstrates, an exception pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.1
will be granted.
[a] One Bedroom Unit: 1.00 space/unit.
[b] Two Bedroom Unit: 1.25 spaces/unit.
[c] Three Bedroom Unit: 1.50 spaces/unit.
(d) One curb cut is permitted for every 75 feet of lot frontage.
(e) Bedroom distribution:
(1) One bedroom units: 85% minimum.
(2) Two bedroom units: 10% maximum.
(3) Three bedroom unit: 5% maximum.
d. Townhouses or Row Houses.
1. Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
3. Minimum front yard: zero feet if parking is provided to the rear of
the dwelling; 20 feet if parking is provided in front of the dwelling.
4. Minimum side yard: five feet.
5. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
6. Maximum building height: three stories/35 feet.
7. Maximum building coverage: 60%.
e. Public Utility Installations.
1. Public utility installations shall include facilities and services
related to the distribution and transmission of communications,
electricity, gas and water and the collection and treatment of
sewage.
2. No facility or use related to public utility service shall be permitted
in a residence district unless the Board of Adjustment finds, with a
statement of reasons for such findings, that the location proposed
is necessary for the rendering of efficient service by such facility.
3. In a residence district, no land or buildings related to a public
utility service subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be used
for the storage of materials or equipment, for the repair or
servicing of vehicles or equipment or for the parking of vehicles,
except as an accessory use necessary for the proper operation of
the services to which it may be appurtenant.
§ 28-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-9.3
1:449
§ 28-9.4. (Reserved)
§ 28-9.5. (Reserved)
§ 28-9.6. (Reserved)32
4. Such installations shall be operated in accordance with the
performance standards previously set forth in Section 28-8.
5. A buffer strip with adequate fences, landscaping and other safety
devices shall be provided as previously set forth in subsection
28-5.7.
f. Public or Private School.
1. Such school or educational facility shall be duly licensed by the
New Jersey State Board of Education if a license is required by law.
2. The minimum lot area of any school shall be 1/2 acre plus 1/2 acre
for every 75 pupils for whom the school is designed.
3. Land coverage of the sum of the principal building plus accessory
buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.
4. No health, correctional or any other facility not directly related to
the general education of students shall be permitted.
g. Places of Worship. Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in
this chapter, incorporated places of worship shall be permitted
provided that:
1. A place of worship may be erected to a height of 75 feet, provided
that the number of stories at any point along the perimeter of such
building shall not exceed three and no building or part thereof shall
be erected nearer than a distance equal to three times the height of
such building to any property line other than a street line.
2. Land coverage of the sum of the principal building plus accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the area of the lot.
3. Each place of worship shall be permitted to maintain an exterior
bulletin board with an area of not more than six square feet.
h. Off-Site or Joint Parking. Site Plan approval shall be required.
i. Retail and Service Commercial Uses in the R-1 District. Such uses shall
be permitted on the ground floor only of properties fronting on Palisade
Avenue or Park Avenue.
32.Editor's Note: Former subsections 28-9.4, Standards Applicable to Limited Retail and
Service Uses, 28-9.5, Standards Applicable to Gasoline Service Stations and 28-9.6,
Standards Applicable to Sale of Used Automobiles, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ord. 3/87 §§ 4.523 — 4.525 respectively were repealed by Ordinance
No. 005-10.
§ 28-9.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-10
1:450
§ 28-10. through § 28-13. (RESERVED)
§ 28-14. NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS.
§ 28-14.1. Statement of Intent. [Ord. 3/87 § 5.100]
§ 28-14.2. Continuation of Use. [Ord. 3/87 § 5.200]
§ 28-14.3. Regulation of Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. 3/87 § 5.300]
An existing nonconforming use, building or structure cannot be altered,
reconstructed, substituted or restored or repaired, unless required to do so
by law or order and as follows:
a. The zoning districts established by this chapter are designed to guide
the future use of land in the Municipality, encouraging the development
and preservation of desirable residential and commercial areas, with
appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses, to the end of
promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, prosperity
and other aspects of the general welfare.
To achieve this end, lawful existing uses which would be prohibited
or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments,
and which do not conform to the character and regulations of the
zoning district in which they are located, must be subject to certain
regulations.
b. To avoid such hardship nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and
structures shall be permitted to remain. The purpose of this regulation
in nonconforming uses which are not appropriate in their location is to
restrict further investment in such uses. Exceptions shall be made in
those instances where extensive investment is involved to avoid any
unnecessary hardships in the use of such facilities.
c. To eliminate any undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to require any change in plans, specifications, construction or
intended use of any building or structure for which plans,
specifications, contract negotiations, or construction started, prior to
the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereof.
a. A use, building or structure which shall be made nonconforming, as
defined in subsection 28-2.2, at the time of passage of this chapter, or
any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued except as
otherwise set forth in this section.
b. The provision regarding nonconformity shall apply only to a use,
building or structure legally established or erected, but not to any use
established or building or structure erected in violation of law,
regardless of the time of establishment or erection.
a. Repairs and Maintenance. Normal maintenance repairs and incidental
alteration of a building or the structure containing a nonconforming use
§ 28-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-14.3
1:451
§ 28-15. through § 28-17. (RESERVED)
§ 28-18. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 28-18.1. Enforcing Officer. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.100]
It shall be the duty of the Enforcing Officer to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter. The Enforcing Officer shall be appointed
by the governing body of Guttenberg. No Building Permit or Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued by the Enforcing Officer unless all the provisions
of this chapter are met.
is permitted, provided it does not extend or expand the area or volume
of space occupied by the nonconforming use, or change the functional
use of the building or structure.
b. Restoration. When a nonconforming building or structure is destroyed,
or partially destroyed, by fire, explosion or other disaster, or is
otherwise damaged to the extent of 50% of the appraised replacement
value of such building or structure, it shall not be restored or rebuilt,
except in such manner as to conform to the regulations of this chapter
and amendments thereto. When a nonconforming building or structure
is partially destroyed by fire, explosion or other disaster to less than
50% of its appraised replacement value, it may be restored to its
original use in accordance with provisions of this chapter, but must be
restored within one year of such happening.
c. Abandonment or Discontinued Use. A nonconforming use shall be
considered abandoned or discontinued:
1. If it is terminated by the owner;
2. If the structure or land or both is discontinued or abandoned for 12
consecutive months.
d. Sale. Any nonconforming use, structure or lot may change ownership
and continue to function as the same nonconforming use, structure or
lot provided that the appropriate provisions of this chapter are met.
e. Construction Under Permit Granted Prior to Passage. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in plans, construction, or
designated use of a building for which a building permit has been
heretofore issued and the construction of which shall have been
diligently prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit,
and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of
beams, shall have been completed within six months of the date of such
permit, and which entire building shall be completed according to such
filed plans within one year from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 28-14.3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-18.2
1:452
§ 28-18.2. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.110]
It shall be the duty of the Enforcing Officer to administer and enforce this
chapter. No structure will be erected without a Building Permit and no
structure or lot shall use or have its use changed so as to be in violation
of this chapter. In no case shall a Building Permit be issued for the
construction or alterations of any structure nor shall a Certificate of
Occupancy be issued for a new occupant with a new use, or new use
by the present occupant, until the proposed construction or alteration or
use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of
the Enforcing Officer to cause any structures, plans or premises to be
inspected or examined and order the owner, in writing, that any condition
be remedied which is found to exist in violation of any provisions of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of the Enforcing Officer to keep a record of
all applications and all permits which are either issued or denied, with
notations of any conditions involved, which data shall form a part of the
public records. Specifically, the Enforcing Officer shall have the following
duties and powers:
a. Inform Applicants. The Enforcing Officer shall provide information for
prospective applicants as to the type of form(s) to be filled, the
information to be submitted, and explain the procedures for filing
applications. Such information shall be offered as a public service and
no charge shall be made for such service.
b. Form of Applications, Permits and Certificates. The form of all
applications, permits and certificates to be used by the Enforcing
Officer under the terms of this chapter shall be prescribed by the
municipality. The applications, permits and certificates may be
combined with other applications, permits and certificates required by
the Building Code.
c. Receive Applications. He shall receive and examine all applications for
permits, certificates and variances and other applications required
under the terms of this chapter.
d. Issue Permits. He shall issue permits for the construction, major
alteration and occupancy of all uses which are in accord with the
requirements of this chapter within 30 days of the receipt of the
applications for such permit.
e. Refuse Permits. He shall refuse applications for permits or certificates
which are not in accord with the requirements of this chapter within 30
days of the receipt of such application. The refusal shall be in writing
and shall state the reasons for such action. Duplicate copies of such
refusals shall be forwarded to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
f. Issue Notice of Violations. He shall made a written notice of violation
and issue the same on the person violating any provisions of this
chapter. The written notice shall set forth the action on the part of such
persons or corporation that he deems to be in violation. Duplicate
§ 28-18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-18.2
1:453
§ 28-19. BUILDING PERMITS.
§ 28-19.1. Required. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.200]
No building or structure in any district shall be erected, enlarged or
structurally altered without a Building Permit duly issued, upon application,
by the Enforcing Officer. No Building Permit shall be issued by the
Enforcing Officer except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter
or unless he is directed to issue same under written order from the Zoning
Board of Adjustment in the form of a variance special permit or
administrative review as provided by this chapter.
§ 28-19.2. Building Permit Applications. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.210]
All applications for Building Permits shall be in writing on forms provided
by the Enforcing Officer. Applications shall be accompanied by plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale, and showing the following information:
copies of said notice are to be referred to the governing body and to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
g. Keep Records. He shall keep records of applications, or permits or
certificates issued or denied, of variances granted, of inspections made,
of reports rendered and of notice of orders issued.
h. Annual Report. He shall submit an annual report to the governing body,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board on the number
of applications made, of permits or certificates issued or denied, of
variances granted, of inspections made or reports rendered, of notice of
orders issued, and of any other information requested by the governing
body, the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board in the
furtherance of their duties.
i. Other Powers and Duties. He shall perform all other duties as may be
provided or made necessary by the terms of this chapter.
a. The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
b. The exact size and location of all existing or proposed buildings,
structures, signs, parking or loading areas.
c. The existing and proposed use of each building or parts thereof,
including number of families, dwelling units, employees, office or other
units of occupancy.
d. Plans for screenings and landscaping as may be required under
provisions of this chapter.
e. Any other information as may be necessary to determine compliance.
§ 28-18.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-19.3
1:454
§ 28-19.3. Permits to be Shown. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.211]
Building Permits shall be issued in duplicate and one copy shall be kept
conspicuously on the premises affected whenever construction work is
being performed thereon. No owner, contractor, workman or other person
shall perform building operations of any kind unless a Building Permit
covering such operation has been previously issued, and is being displayed
as required by this chapter, nor shall they perform building operations of
any kind after notification of the revocation of the permit.
§ 28-19.4. Denial of Building Permit. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.212]
If the Enforcing Officer determines that the application or plans as
submitted fail to satisfy the requirements of this chapter, he shall refuse
to issue a Building Permit. If a Building Permit is so denied, the Enforcing
Officer shall promptly cause to be sent to the applicant a notice of the
Officer's action, which shall specify, in writing, the grounds upon which
the denial was made. The applicant then may apply to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment for a reversal of the Enforcing Officer's refusal to issue a
Building Permit.
§ 28-19.5. Special Use Permit. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.213]
If the Enforcing Officer makes a preliminary determination that a proposed
use requires a special permit, he shall notify the applicant of any additional
materials that may be required in order that the Board of Adjustment and
the Planning Board may conduct their respective reviews of the proposal.
Upon receipt of such material to complete the file, the Enforcing Officer
shall transmit the application and supporting documents to the Board of
Adjustment.
§ 28-19.6. Revocation of Building Permits. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.214]
The Enforcing Officer may revoke a permit at any time if it appears that
the application or accompanying plan is in any material respect false or
misleading, or that work being done upon the premises differs materially
from that called for in the application. In such a case, the person holding
the permit shall immediately surrender it and all copies thereof to the
Enforcing Officer. Before issuing a new permit, the Enforcing Officer may
require the applicant to file an indemnity bond in favor of the municipality
with sufficient surety conditioned for compliance with this chapter and all
building laws and ordinances then in force and in a sum sufficient to cover
the cost of removing the building if it does not so comply.
§ 28-20. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
§ 28-20.1. Required. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.300]
No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected,
altered, or extended, shall be occupied, used or changed in use, whether
in whole or part until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued
§ 28-19.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-20.1
1:455
by the Enforcing Officer. Such Certificate shall state that the structure or
use complies with all the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
codes and ordinances of the Town pertaining to use.
§ 28-20.2. Application and Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.
[Ord. 3/87 § 6.310]
§ 28-20.3. Records. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.320]
A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept in the Office of the
Enforcing Officer and one copy shall be forwarded by the Enforcing Officer
to the Town Assessor and additionally, to any Town agency or to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
§ 28-21. (RESERVED)33
§ 28-22. TEMPORARY USES.
§ 28-22.1. Authorization of Temporary Uses. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.421]
The Board may, after due notice and public hearings, permit the temporary
occupancy and use of a structure in any district for a purpose that does not
conform with the regulations for that district. Such occupancy and use shall
be subject to any reasonable conditions and safeguards which the Board
may impose to minimize any injurious effects upon the neighborhood or to
protect contiguous property. Such approval and permit based thereon shall
not be valid for more than 12 months.
§ 28-23. (RESERVED)34
§ 28-24. VARIANCES.35
a. Application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be made in writing on a
form furnished by the Enforcing Officer setting forth such information
as the Enforcing Officer may require.
b. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within 10 days after the
Enforcing Officer determines that the structure or use, as completed, is
in full conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable codes and ordinances of the Town, including but not limited
to: building codes, fire prevention codes, electrical codes, plumbing
codes, sanitary codes and housing codes.
c. The occupancy permit, once granted, shall continue in effect so long as
there is no change of use.
33.Editor's Note: Former Section 28-21, Special Use Permits, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance 3/87 § 6.330, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 005-10. See Section 28-9 for Conditional Use Permits.
34.Editor's Note: Former Section 28-23, Special Permit Procedure, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance 3/87 § 6.422, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 005-10.
§ 28-20.1 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-24.1
1:456
§ 28-24.1. Hardship Variance Procedure. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.423]
§ 28-24.2. Use Variance Procedure. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.424]
a. The determination of the facts of the case shall indicate that the
appropriate application was filed with the Enforcing Officer and was
disapproved by him as not meeting the requirements of this chapter for
the district in which located and the circumstances of ownership or
other conditions that create the alleged hardship. The Board may, at its
discretion, forward a copy of the application to the Planning Board for
review.
b. The report and recommendations, if any, of the Planning Board shall be
summarized.
c. The findings shall include the following as a minimum:
1. The special circumstances or conditions, as described, apply to the
land or buildings concerned but do not apply generally to land or
buildings in the neighborhood.
2. The circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application
of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the
reasonable use of the land or buildings.
3. For reasons set forth, the granting of a variance is the only means
to provide for the reasonable use of the land or buildings.
4. The variance as granted by the Board of Adjustment is the
minimum variance that will permit the reasonable use of the land
or buildings.
5. The relief afforded by the variance can be granted without
substantial detriment to the intent and purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance.
a. The determination of the facts shall indicate that an appropriate
application was submitted to the Enforcing Officer and was disapproved
by him, the nature and extent of the proposed use, the special reasons
as submitted to the Board for consideration in support of the request to
permit a use in a district from which it is otherwise excluded by this
chapter. And, at the discretion of the Board, the transmittal of the
appropriate documents to the Planning Board for review.
b. The report and recommendations, if any, of the Planning Board shall be
summarized.
c. The findings shall include the following as a minimum:
35.Editor's Note: The Zoning Board of Adjustment referred to in this chapter was combined
with the Planning Board by Ord. #017-1995. See also Section 26-2.
§ 28-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-24.2
1:457
§ 28-25. APPEALS.
§ 28-25.1. Filing Procedure. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.500]
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be filed by any interested party
affected by any decision of an administrative officer, board or agency of
the Municipality based on, or made in, the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance or Official Map. Such appeal shall be made within 20 days by
filing a notice of appeal in writing with the officer from whom the appeal
is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
§ 28-25.2. Information to Accompany Appeal. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.510]
An appeal shall be made in writing on the forms prescribed by the Board
of Adjustment. Each appeal shall cite the specific provisions of this chapter
that are involved and shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, the
interpretation that is claimed on an allegation of error, the variance that is
applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the same should be
granted, the use for which a special permit is required, and any other such
information that the Board may require.
§ 28-25.3. Time for Appeal. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.511]
1. The special reasons as set forth, apply to the particular property
and do not apply generally in the neighborhood.
2. The same general purposes cannot be accomplished by amendment
of the Zoning Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map as provided for
in this chapter.
3. The use is one that is otherwise a legal use permitted elsewhere in
the Town under the provisions of this chapter.
4. The use will be compatible with the general character of the
neighborhood.
5. The use will not cause substantial injury to the value of property in
the neighborhood.
6. The use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety and convenience will be protected.
7. The variance, if granted, will not result in substantial detriment to
the public good and will not impair the intent and purpose of the
Comprehensive Development Plan or the Zoning Ordinance.
d. Should the Planning Board recommend any special conditions to the
approval of a use variance, the resolution may describe such
recommendations and the action taken by the Board of Adjustment with
respect to each of them.
§ 28-24.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-25.3
1:458
§ 28-25.4. Procedure for Appeal. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.512]
§ 28-25.5. Referral to Planning Board. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.513]
Immediately upon receipt of an appeal, the Board of Adjustment shall
forward a copy of the appeal to the Planning Board. The Planning Board
may submit to the Board of Adjustment an advisory opinion on such appeal
at any time prior to the rendering of a decision.
a. The Board shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the date
an appeal is taken from the decision of the administrative officer.
b. Failure of the Board to render a decision within the 120-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
a. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for a
hearing, giving the notice thereof to the appellant.
b. Within 30 days of the filing of an appeal, the Board shall publish a notice
of the time and place of a public hearing of such appeal or application in
a local newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
c. At least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the Board of
Adjustment shall post on the land or building involved in any appeal for
a variance or application for a special permit, a notice of said hearing
and a statement indicating clearly both the property affected and the
nature of the proposal.
d. At least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the appellant shall
give personal notice to all owners of property situated within 200 feet of
the property affected by such appeal.
1. If the owners are the occupants of the property affected by the
appeal, such notice may be either by registered mail or by personal
service at their usual place of abode.
2. If the owners are not residents of the Town, such notice may be
given by sending written notice by registered mail to the last
known address of the owner or owners as shown on the most recent
tax list of the Town.
3. Where an owner is a partnership, service upon any partner shall be
sufficient, and where the owner is a corporation, service on any
officer shall be sufficient.
4. The appellant shall by affidavit present proof to the Board of
Adjustment at the time of the hearing that said notices have been
duly served as aforesaid.
5. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by agent or by
attorney.
§ 28-25.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-25.6
1:459
§ 28-25.6. Time Limit on Action by Appellant. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.514]
§ 28-25.7. Repeated Hearing. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.515]
Once the Board of Adjustment has heard all the evidence presented upon
an application or appeal as provided in this chapter, and denies the same,
the Board shall refuse to hold further hearings on the substantially similar
application or appeal by the same applicant, successor, or assignee for a
period of six months.
If the Board of Adjustment determines from the information supplied with
a request for a rehearing that changed conditions have occurred relating to
the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity,
and general welfare, the appeal or application may be considered within the
six-month period.
§ 28-26. PLANNING BOARD REVIEW.
§ 28-26.1. General. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.521]
The Zoning Ordinance must be substantially consistent with the land use
element of the Master Plan of the Town, pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, Chapter 291, Laws of N.J.; 1975. At least 30 days prior to final
action of the governing body, the Zoning Ordinance and any revisions and/
or amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and
comment.
§ 28-26.2. Special Permits and Variances. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.522]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall forward all applications for special
permit uses to the Planning Board for review and comment at least 30 days
prior to any action or scheduled public hearing.
The Zoning Board may, at its discretion, forward any applications for any
variance to the Planning Board for review and comment prior to any action
or scheduled public hearing.
a. Unless otherwise specified by the Board of Adjustment, a decision on
any appeal for a variance or application for a special permit shall expire
without further notice if the applicant fails to obtain any necessary
building permit or to comply with the conditions of an authorized
permit within one year from the date of such decision.
b. An extension of time may be granted by the Board of Adjustment
because of the occurrence of conditions unforeseen at the time of the
original action. An application for an extension of time shall be subject
to the same procedures as specified for the original issuance of the
variance or special permit.
§ 28-25.6 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-26.3
1:460
§ 28-26.3. Materials Submitted. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.523]
The Board of Adjustment shall forward to the Planning Board all relevant
material pursuant to appeals, applications and variances as required. Such
material shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
§ 28-26.4. Criteria for Review. [Ord. 3/87 § 6.524]
The Planning Board shall review each item before it with respect to but not
limited to:
§ 28-27. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 28-27.1. Complaints of Violations. [Ord. 3/87 § 7.000]
Any person may file a complaint if there is any reason to believe a violation
of this chapter exists. All such complaints must be in writing and shall
be filed with the Enforcing Officer, who shall record such complaint and
immediately investigate. Upon his becoming aware of any violation of any
provisions of this chapter, the Enforcing Officer shall serve notice of such
violation on the person committing or permitting the same, and if such
violation has not ceased within such reasonable time as the Enforcing
Officer has specified in such notice, he shall institute such action as may be
necessary to terminate the violation.
§ 28-27.2. Procedures for Abatement of Violations. [Ord. 3/87
§ 7.100]
In the event that any structure is erected, altered or repaired, or used in
violation of this chapter, the Enforcing Officer, in addition to other remedies,
a. Applications.
b. Maps.
c. Studies.
d. Photographs.
e. Any and all other relevant documents.
a. Conformity to the Master Plan.
b. Conformity to the Official Map.
c. Impact within the community.
d. Impact of traffic.
e. Impact of government services.
f. Kind and intensity of uses permitted in the district.
g. Social and economic characteristics of the community.
§ 28-26.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-27.2
1:461
may institute any appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful construction, alteration, or repair, or abate such violation and to
prevent the occupancy of the structure or land.
§ 28-27.3. Penalties. [Ord. 3/87 § 7.200]
It shall be the duty of the Enforcing Officer, to strictly enforce all the
provisions of this chapter. The general agent, architect, builder, contractor,
owner or tenant, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in
any violation of this chapter or who maintains any building or premises in
which any violation of this chapter shall exist, shall for each and every day
that such a violation continues, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, no submission to
or final report, action or approval by Planning Board shall not be required
or authorized, under this temporary interim ordinance, until adoption of
land use element of comprehensive development plan and final permanent
Zoning Ordinance and related ordinances, upon which adoption, the
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall commence full operations
and functions, under this and any succeeding ordinance. While this interim
ordinance is in effect, the role of the Planning Board shall be advisory,
except that variances shall require approval of the Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment, according to law.
§ 28-28. FEES.
§ 28-28.1. Application Fees for Building Permit. [Ord. 3/87 § 8.000]
§ 28-28.2. Review or Hearing by Board. [Ord. 3/87 § 8.200; Ord. No.
005-10 § I, 28-28.2]
§ 28-28.3. Miscellaneous Fees.
The Board of Adjustment reserves the right to assess any fees or charges
that it deems reasonable in conjunction with the discharge of its duties.
a. For construction less than $350,000, a fee of $200.
b. For construction of $350,000 to $750,000, a fee of $300.
c. For construction from $750,000 to $1,500,000, a fee of $400.
d. For construction of $1,500,000 and over, a fee of $500.
a. Appeals $250.
b. Conditional Use $500.
c. Interpretation of Zoning Map $500.
d. Variance $500.
§ 28-27.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-28.4
1:462
§ 28-28.4. Escrow Fees for Professional Review and Expert Witness.
[Ord. 016/96; Ord. #003/05]
a. Escrow Deposits. The Planning Board shall require, in addition to its
base application fees, escrow deposits in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Such deposits shall be utilized to pay the cost
of any professional services incurred for the review of an application for
development to the Board. The Town shall make all of the payments to
professionals for services rendered to the municipality for review of
applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements or other purposes under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The deposit received from an applicant shall
be placed in an escrow account pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1. Such deposit shall be utilized to pay the cost of any
professional services incurred for the review of an application for
development to the Board and may also be utilized to pay the cost of
review and/or testimony by an expert witness or witnesses retained by
the municipal agency. All payments charged to the deposit shall be
pursuant to vouchers from the professionals stating the hours spent,
the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. The municipality shall
render a written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to which
the deposit was put. Thereafter the municipality shall, upon written
request, provide copies of the vouchers to the developer. Payment due
professionals retained by the municipality shall be made upon receipt of
adequate moneys from applicants for development.
b. Professional Services Defined. The term "professional services," as
utilized herein, shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer,
surveyor, planner, attorney, scientist, realtor, appraiser, certified
shorthand reporter or other professional or expert who provided
services for review, advice, preparation of reports and/or expert
testimony, for inspection of the property and surrounding area and for
tests performed, in order to assist the Board in the review of the
application before it.
c. Amount of Escrow. Subject to the provisions of paragraph d below, each
applicant shall, prior to his/her or its application being ruled complete
pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law and this
section, submit the sums requested pursuant to Schedule A hereof36 to
the Chief Financial Officer of the Town of Guttenberg.
d. Completeness of Application; Escrow Fees.
1. Within 45 days after the filing of an application for development,
the Planning Board or its authorized committee or designee, as the
case may be, shall, in connection with the appropriate
representatives of the staff of the Town of Guttenberg, review said
application for development to determine whether the escrow
36.Editor's Note: Schedule A, referred to herein, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 28-28.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-28.4
1:463
amount set forth above is adequate. In conducting such review, said
Board shall consider the following criteria:
(a) The presence or absence of public water and/or sewer
servicing the site.
(b) Environmental considerations, including but not limited to
geological, hydrological and ecological factors.
(c) The traffic impact of the proposed development.
(d) The impact of the proposed development on existing water
quality.
(e) Any other unique land use concerns relating to the application.
2. Upon completion of said review and within said forty-five-day
period, the Board or its authorized committee shall adopt a
resolution specifying whether the escrow amount specified above is
sufficient, excessive or insufficient. In the event that the Board or
its authorized committee shall determine that the amount is
excessive, it shall in the resolution specify the amount that shall be
deemed sufficient, including a specification, if appropriate, that no
escrow be posted. In the event that the Board or its authorized
committee shall determine that the amount specified above is
insufficient, it shall so specify and shall further set forth the amount
required to be posted in light of the criteria specified herein.
3. No application for development shall be deemed complete until
such time as the applicant shall have posted with the Town of
Guttenberg in cash, certified check or money order the amount of
escrow deposit determined by the Planning Board to be required in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
e. Additional Escrow Deposits.
1. The Board may require additional escrow deposits by the applicant
to be posted during the course of the review of an application,
provided that:
(a) The original amounts escrowed pursuant to this section have
been exhausted; and
(b) Additional professional services or expert services must
reasonably be incurred because of the presence of one or more
factors enumerated in paragraph d above, in order to complete
the review of the application and to properly decide the same.
2. In the event that additional escrow moneys are required they shall
not be deemed items required for the application to be complete
but may be required as additional information reasonably required
to decide the application. Their payment shall be required as a
condition of any approval granted.
§ 28-28.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-28.4
1:464
f. Charge for Certain Professional Services to the Applicant. Applicants
shall be responsible to reimburse the Town with regard to certain
specific professional services in accordance with the following:
1. The applicant shall be required to reimburse the Town for the cost
of attendance by the Town's professional personnel at any meeting
of the Town agency or board at which a hearing is held on the
application. However, where hearings on other applications are
held at the same meeting at which the attendance of the Town's
professional personnel are also required, the cost of the attendance
of the Town's professional personnel shall be reimbursed to the
Town on a pro rata basis.
2. The Town shall be entitled to be reimbursed for attendance of its
professional personnel at special meetings of a Town agency or
Board which were requested to be called by the applicant.
3. The applicant shall pay for the review of any revisions of the
applications or maps in the event that the application is declared
incomplete.
4. The cost of the preparation of a resolution or memorializing
resolution setting forth the findings of fact and conclusions of law
of the Town agency or board with respect to an application shall be
reimbursable to the Town.
5. The fees for other professional services incurred by the Board shall
be reimbursed by the applicant to the Town.
g. Reasonable Charges for Professional and Expert Services. No
professional personnel submitting charges to the Town for any of the
services referred to in this subsection shall charge for any of the
services at any higher rate or in any different manner than would
normally be charged the Town for similar work, as ascertained by the
professional's contract of employment with the Town or by provisions of
the Municipal Salary Ordinance. The charges shall be reasonable.
h. Deposit of Escrow Funds; Refunds. Deposits received from any
applicant shall be held by the Chief Financial Officer in a special
interest-bearing deposit account, and upon receipt of bills for
professionals duly approved by the Board, or governing body, as
appropriate, the Chief Financial Officer may use such funds to pay the
bills submitted by such professionals or experts. All sums not actually
so expended and any interest earned thereon shall be refunded to the
applicant within 60 days after the final decision by the appropriate
Board with respect to such application, upon certification by the Board
Secretary that such application has been finally decided and all
professional fees have been paid.
i. Reimbursement for Inspection of Improvements. The applicant shall
reimburse the Town for all reasonable inspection fees paid to the Town
Engineer for the inspection and/or testing of improvements. The Town
§ 28-28.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-28.4
1:465
may require the applicant to make a deposit for all or a portion of the
reasonably anticipated fees to be paid for the Town Engineer for such
inspections pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53h.
j. Inspection of Improvements. All of the improvements in a subdivision or
site plan shall be inspected and approved by the Town Engineer. The
subdivider or his, her or its agent, employee or contractor shall notify
the Town Engineer and the Secretary of the reviewing Town Board
when the work is ready for any required inspection specified herein or
required to be performed by the Town Engineer, the Construction
Official or the appropriate subcode official. This notice shall be given at
least 48 hours prior to the time the inspection is desired. The inspection
shall be performed within three business days of the time for which it
was requested; however, failure to inspect within three business days
shall in no way constitute approval of the work. The work shall not
proceed in a manner which shall preclude the inspection until it has
been made. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved.
k. Liens on Property.
1. Should any fees for applications for development, expert witness
fees, consultant's fees, review fees, inspection fees or fees of any
nature connected with an application for development be due and
unpaid by an applicant for development and/or owner of a subject
property for a period of 14 days after written notice of the amount
due was mailed to the owner and applicant, the Town Clerk or
Mayor or Assistant Clerk or other officer or employee of the Town
of Guttenberg may execute a written statement of lien showing the
amount due to the Town and may record the same in the Hudson
County Register's and/or Clerk's office as a lien on the subject
property. The lien shall include interest at the rate of 12% per
annum, recording fees and a reasonable attorney's fee.
2. Should the lien remain unpaid, the Town Tax Collector, Clerk or
other officer authorized by the Mayor and Board of Council shall
have the power to foreclose the property to collect the amount of
the lien, together with interest, attorney's fees and recording fees
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 et seq., and other applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey.
l. Special Meetings. Special meetings may be requested by a motion of
the Joint Planning/Zoning Board Chairman or two commissioners for
Board approval.
Special meetings may be requested by an applicant and approved by
the Joint Planning/Zoning Board Chairman or two commissioners for
Board approval and the payment of fees.
1. Fees — Minor Site Plan Application.
§ 28-28.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-28.4
1:466
Minor site plan application with or without a minor subdivision.
Maximum development — two — two-family dwellings on two — 25
by 100 lots with or without a subdivision.
First 3-hour meeting $1,000
Second 3-hour meeting $750
* If application is not completed at the first meeting, a second
special meeting must be requested. Application may not be
continued to a regular meeting. Decision may be memorialized by
resolution at next regular meeting.
Two minor applications may be heard at a special meeting called
by an attorney; however, the fees apply to each application. No
sharing of fees is permitted.
2. Fees — Major Site Plan Application.
Major site plan application with or without minor or major
subdivision. This includes garden apartments, mid-rise or high-rise
apartments, condominium buildings, and three or more lots each
being developed with a one- or two-family dwelling.
First 3-hour meeting $1,500
Second 3-hour
meeting
$1,000
* If an application is not completed at the first meeting, it must
be continued to a second special meeting. Application may not be
continued to a regular meeting. Decision may be memorialized by
resolution at the next regular meeting.
The Board, when acting upon applications, shall have the power,
for good cause shown, to grant a remission or waiver from all or
any portion of the fee schedules hereinabove established based
upon any of the following: (1) the nonprofit status of the applicant;
(2) a determination that collection of the fees would constitute
an economic hardship upon the applicant; (3) the unique
characteristics of the application, making collection of the full fees
substantially disproportionate to the regulatory costs applicable to
reviewing the application; or (4) for other good cause established
in the record.
The fees set forth in the aforementioned schedules are exclusive
of any other charges which may be required by the Town to cover
the costs of the furnishings of copies, ordinances, list or property
owners, or transcripts, or the inspection of buildings or
improvements in conjunction with the issuance of construction
permits or Certificates of Occupancy.
§ 28-28.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-28.4
1:467
§ 28-29. REPEALER. [Ord. 3/87 § 9]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter to the
extent of such conflict and no further, are hereby repealed.
Fees for Court Recorder are payable from the escrow account of
the applicant. Court Recorder fees are charged per applicant and
per meeting.
Fees for professional review by Board Engineer and Board
Attorney are payable from the escrow account of the applicant.
The Board may refuse to grant a special meeting at its discretion,
or due to lack of available commissioners or an available date.
Zoning Board applications requiring seven commissioners (use
variance) may be granted a new special meeting with the fee
waived if seven commissioners fail to attend the meeting.
Publication of the revised date will be the responsibility of the
Board Secretary. If it is necessary to re-notice, this will be the
responsibility of the applicant.
Failure to appear by witnesses for the applicant that cause the
Board to be unable to hear the case will necessitate the applicant
to request another special meeting at the required fee. Improper
notice by the applicant that causes the Board to lack jurisdiction
to proceed with the hearing will cause the applicant to request
another special meeting for the required fee and re-notice and
republish at the applicant's expense.
m. Waiver of Fees. Any board, agency, committee or entity of the Town of
Guttenberg may make application to the Planning Board without the
requirement for making payment of any of the fees hereinabove
provided. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection to the
contrary, the Planning Board may waive any base application fees or
supplemental base application fees, or portions thereof as hereinabove
provided, for nonprofit organizations and other organizations, persons
or entities where it is deemed to be in the best interests of the Town of
Guttenberg; provided, however, that the Planning Board shall not be
empowered to waive the making of a review fee escrow deposit absent
the concurrence of the Mayor and Board of Council, which concurrence
shall be expressed in a formal resolution of the Mayor and Board of
Council adopted by 2/3 of the full membership thereof.
A computer generated error in the 200-foot list which causes the Board
to lack jurisdiction to proceed will entitle the applicant to a rescheduled
special meeting with the fee waived for a corrected 200-foot list and
the rescheduled meeting. However, re-notice and republication, if
necessary, will still be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 28-28.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-30
1:468
§ 28-30. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. 3/87 § 10]
This chapter shall take effect immediately, subsequent to the adoption
thereof.
§ 28-31. TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
§ 28-31.1. Intent and Goals. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.1]
a. Intent. The intent of this section is to establish general guidelines for
the placement and appearance of wireless telecommunications facilties
in a manner that achieves the stated goals of this section.
b. Goals. The goals of this section are to:
1. Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas.
2. Encourage the location of new towers in industrial areas.
3. Minimize the total number of towers and antennas throughout the
community.
4. Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers.
5. Encourage wireless telecommunications carriers to locate towers
and antennas, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse
impact on the community is minimal.
6. Minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation
and clustering of towers.
7. Encourage wireless telecommunications carriers to configure them
in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscaping screening and
innovative camouflaging techniques.
8. To the greatest extent feasible, ensure that towers and wireless
telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land
uses.
9. Enhance the ability of the wireless telecommunications carriers to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
10. Consider the public health and safety as it relates to wireless
telecommunications facilities.
11. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
§ 28-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.2
1:469
§ 28-31.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.2]
a. Any word or term not defined herein shall be as defined in subsection
28-2.2 (Town of Guttenberg's Zoning Ordinance). Any word or term not
defined herein or in subsection 28-2.2 shall be as defined in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or shall be utilized
in standard usage for the context in which the word is used.
b. Word Usage. In interpreting this section, words in one tense shall
include other tenses or derivative forms; words in the singular shall
include the plural and in the plural, the singular; either gender shall
include the other; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is
permissive.
c. Definitions. As used in this Section 28.31, the following words shall
have the meanings as indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Shall mean and include but
shall not be limited to water towers, manmade trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for
telephonic, radio or television communications through the sending
and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog
signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
telecommunications signals or other communications signals. Parabolic
dish antennas used for satellite communications shall not be included
within this definition.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — Shall mean the lines that connect a
provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching
offices and/or long distance providers or the public switched telephone
network.
COLLOCATION — Shall mean when wireless telecommunications
facilities for two or more wireless telecommunications carriers are
placed together on the same tower, alternative tower structure or
building.
FAA — Shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Mayor and Council of the
Town of Guttenberg or the Town of Guttenberg.
HEIGHT — Shall mean when referring to a tower or antenna, the
vertical measurement from the highest point in elevation of the tower
or antenna to the average finished grade/elevation adjoining the
foundation of the tower, building or structure.
MOUNT — Shall mean the surface or structure upon which antennas
are mounted, including building mounted, tower mounted and structure
mounted.
§ 28-31.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.2
1:470
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — Shall mean the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PLANNING BOARD — Shall mean the Town of Guttenberg Joint
Planning/Zoning Board whose statutory authority is defined by the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55 D-1 et seq.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS — Shall mean any tower
or antenna on which a permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this section. This includes permitted towers or
antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is
current and not expired. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred
to in this section as "preexisting antennas" and "preexisting towers."
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the Zoning Official of the Town of
Guttenberg.
TARGETED MARKET COVERAGE AREA — Shall mean the area that
is targeted to be served by a proposed wireless telecommunications
facility.
TOWER — Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including
but not limited to self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term includes the
structure and any support thereto.
TOWER RECONSTRUCTION — Shall mean demolition and rebuilding
of a tower on the same lot where the center point of the newly
constructed tower is located no greater than 10 feet from the center
point of the demolished tower. For the purpose of this definition, the
center point of a tower shall be the geographic midpoint of the tower
and all support structure as depicted in plan view.
TOWER, GUY — Shall mean a type of tower that is supported or braced
through the use of cables (guy wires) which are permanently anchored.
TOWER, LATTICE — Shall mean a type of tower that is self-supporting,
generally constructed of vertical metal struts and cross braces forming
a structure which often tapers from the bottom to the top of the tower
and is securely anchored to a foundation.
TOWER, MONOPOLE — Shall mean a type of tower that is constructed
of a single self-supporting shaft of wood, steel or concrete and a
platform (or racks) for panel antennas arrayed at the top.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Shall mean the transmission
of information of the user's choosing, such as voice, data, text, sound
and/or video, using wireless telecommunications networks, between or
among points specified by the user(s), without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received.
§ 28-31.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.2
1:471
§ 28-31.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.3]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Shall mean a type
of antenna that is used specifically for the purpose of providing wireless
telecommunications services.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — Shall mean any
business establishment engaged in the offering of personal wireless
telecommunications services. The term "carrier" or "provider" shall be
synonymous with wireless telecommunications carrier.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Shall mean an
unstaffed or staffed facility designed for the transmission and/or
reception of radio frequency (RF) signals for the purpose of providing
personal wireless telecommunications services as defined in the
Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. These facilities include but
are not limited to: buildings, cabinets, other structure and facilities,
generating and switching stations, repeaters, antennas, transmitters,
receivers, towers and all other buildings and structures linking the
wireless network of RF signal devices to conventional wired and other
communications systems.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Shall mean the
offering of personal wireless telecommunications, as regulated in the
Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, for a fee directly to the public,
or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to
the public. Wireless telecommunications services include those services
such as cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging
and similar services that currently exist or may be developed in the
future.
a. New Towers and Antennas. All new towers, antennas and wireless
telecommunications facilities in the Town of Guttenberg shall be
subject to the regulations of this section, except as provided in
paragraphs b through f, inclusive.
b. District Height Limitations. The requirements set forth in this section
shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are
installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for
each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and
structures shall not apply to towers and antennas.
c. Amateur Radio; Receive-Only Antennas. This section shall not govern
any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in
height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio
station operator or is used exclusively as a reception-only antenna. Any
permits under this section shall be subject to the appropriate federal
regulations.
d. Preexisting Towers and Antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas, as defined herein, shall not be required to meet the
§ 28-31.2 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.3
1:472
§ 28-31.4. General Guidelines and Provisions. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I,
28-31.4]
requirements of this section other than provisions specifically relating
to Federal requirements, building codes, safety standards and
monitoring report requirements.
e. AM Array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array by right.
f. Satellite Dishes. This section shall not govern any satellite dish
presently regulated under the Town Code.
a. Principal or Accessory Use or Structure. Antennas and towers shall be
considered principal uses and structures regardless of whether or not a
wireless telecommunications facility is the sole use of the lot. A
different existing principal use of an existing structure on the same lot
shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. All
other structures and ancillary facilities shall be considered accessory
uses and structures.
b. Lot Size and Setbacks. For the purpose of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage
requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lots.
c. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of
municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
d. Not Essential Services. Wireless telecommunications facilities, towers
and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section
and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public
utilities or private utilities.
e. Multiple Antenna/Tower Plans. The Town of Guttenberg encourages the
users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval
of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
f. Availability of an Alternative Suitable Site/Structure Analysis. No
wireless telecommunications facility not meeting all of the required
minimum separation distance or conditional use standards set forth in
this section shall be permitted unless the applicant affirmatively
demonstrates that no other site, existing tower or structure or
§ 28-31.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.4
1:473
§ 28-31.5. Zones Where Permitted; Permitted and Conditional Uses.
[Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.5]
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or
structures is available that can accommodate the applicant's targeted
market coverage area in full compliance with the separation distance or
conditional use standard. Evidence to demonstrate the absence of any
other available option shall include a written report as specified in the
submission requirements subsection (§ 28-31.11) of this section.
a. Wireless telecommunications facilities operated under the regulations
of the FCC and/or the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 shall be
permitted in certain zoning districts in accordance with the provisions
set forth in this section, subject to site plan review and approval.
b. Wireless telecommunications facilities not expressly permitted are
hereby prohibited.
c. Wireless Telecommunications Facilities as a Permitted Use. A wireless
telecommunications facility located on a property owned, leased or
otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be considered a
permitted use, in accordance with the following provisions and
exemptions:
1. A lease authorizing such wireless telecommunications facility shall
be approved by resolution of the governing authority. The decision
to extend such leases to an applicant or carrier shall be vested
solely with the governing authority.
2. Site plan approval requirements of this section may be exempted;
however, the governing authority may, as a condition of such lease,
require site plan approval.
3. The facility shall be exempt from all zoning/bulk standards except
that towers and antennas shall not exceed maximum height
restrictions established in this section for a permitted use.
Performance and design standards shall be applicable.
d. Wireless Telecommunications Facilities as a Conditional Use. Certain
types of wireless telecommunications facilities shall be permitted as a
conditional use in certain zones specified as follows:
1. Permitted as a conditional use in the following zones:
(a) R-2 High Density Residential.
(b) R-4 Mid-Rise Mixed-Use.
(c) C Commercial.
2. Types of wireless telecommunications facilities permitted as a
conditional use are limited to antenna arrays mounted on:
§ 28-31.4 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.5
1:474
§ 28-31.6. (Reserved)
§ 28-31.7. Conditional Use Zoning Regulations for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.7]
(a) Existing towers;
(b) Existing buildings;
(c) Existing alternative tower structures; or
(d) A reconstructed tower.
a. Applicability. The requirements contained in this section shall govern
all wireless telecommunications facilities that are specified as a
conditional use in certain zoning districts. All requirements contained
in this section shall be considered conditional use standards.
b. Minimum Structure and Antenna Height.
1. No antenna shall be installed on a structure that is less than 50 feet
in height.
2. No antenna shall be installed at a height lower than 50 feet.
c. Maximum Antenna Height. No antenna shall extend above the following
maximum height standards:
1. Antennas mounted on an existing building or existing alternative
tower structure shall not exceed by more than 20 feet, or 20% of
the existing height of the building or structure, whichever is less.
2. Antennas mounted on an existing or reconstructed tower shall not
exceed the height of the existing tower.
d. Tower Reconstruction Provisions. Tower reconstruction, as defined
herein, shall be in accordance with all of the following:
1. Demolition and reconstruction of a tower that does not meet the
definition of tower reconstruction shall not be permitted,
conditionally or otherwise.
2. Reconstruction of an existing tower shall only be reconstructed as a
monopole tower.
3. Reconstruction of an existing tower may be demolished and rebuilt
to a height no greater than the demolished tower. The antenna
height shall not exceed the height of the reconstructed tower.
4. Reconstruction of an existing tower shall be exempt from the
separation requirements otherwise applicable as conditional use
standards.
§ 28-31.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.8
1:475
§ 28-31.8. Performance and Design Standard for All Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.8]
a. Aesthetics.
1. Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, and be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Color shall be selected to be
consistent with the color scheme of surrounding buildings or
structures.
2. The design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the
extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural
setting and built environment.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
4. The use of stealth designs and camouflage structures, materials
and treatments (trees, steeples, clock towers, etc.) shall be utilized
in locations where vegetative conditions or architectural conditions
warrant such treatments.
b. Wiring. The maximum linear distance of an aboveground cable/wiring
conduit running between an antenna mounting structure and the
equipment structure shall be no greater than 25 feet; cable conduits
longer than 25 feet shall be installed below grade. On building-mounted
sites, no cable/wiring shall be permitted on the front or side facades of
the building; wiring shall be installed within the interior of the building
or on the rear facade only.
c. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the reviewing
board may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the
design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
d. Signs. Other than typical "warning," "emergency" and equipment
information signs, no signs shall be permitted. Emergency signs shall
be on plates attached to the tower or building and shall not exceed two
square feet in area.
e. Parking. Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as needed.
f. Connections to Wired Telephone Service. No antenna shall be located
on any tower in order to provide direct landline telephone service; such
service shall be provided via existing telephone lines if available to the
site or by the underground extension of telephone lines to the site if
necessary.
§ 28-31.8 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.9
1:476
§ 28-31.9. Buildings and Equipment Storage. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I,
28-31.9]
a. Bulk Standards. Equipment cabinet or structures shall comply with the
following requirements which are deemed to be zoning/bulk standards:
1. The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area per carrier.
2. Ground level cabinets shall conform to principal building setback
requirements of the applicable zone district.
3. The cabinet or structure shall not be more than 15 feet in height.
4. For wireless telecommunications facilities on buildings or
structures which are less than 65 feet in height, the related
unmanned equipment structure, if over 200 square feet of gross
floor area or over 12 feet in height, shall not be located on the roof
of the structure or building.
5. If the equipment cabinet or structure is located on the roof of a
building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment
and structures shall not occupy more than 15% of the roof area.
b. Performance and Design Standards. Equipment cabinet or structures
shall comply with the following requirements which are deemed to be
performance and design standards:
1. In a front yard area or visible from a public street, the cabinet/
structure shall be constructed as a building of an identical
architectural design of surrounding buildings. An ornamental
foundation planting shall be provided around the base of the
building.
2. In a side or rear yard area not visible from a public street, the
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height no less than 12 feet and a planted height of at least
six feet.
3. If on a structure other than a tower, the equipment cabinet or
structure must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structures so as to
make the equipment structure as visually unobtrusive as possible.
4. One light may be provided at the entrance of the equipment
structure, provided that the light is attached to the structure, is
focused downward and is switched so that the light is turned on
only when workers are at the site.
5. Collocation facilities shall provide a single integrated and attached
equipment building to be shared by all carriers. The building may
have multiple access doors, each dedicated to each carrier;
however, a single common entryway door is encouraged.
§ 28-31.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.9
1:477
§ 28-31.10. Technical Consultants. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.10]
The Planning Board may retain technical consultants, as it deems necessary,
to provide assistance in the review of the site plan application and site
location alternatives analysis (if so applicable). The applicant (and/or
carrier) shall bear the reasonable cost associated with such consultation,
which cost shall be deposited in accordance with the Towns' escrow
policies.
§ 28-31.11. Site Plan Required; Submission Requirements;
Completeness of Application. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.11]
6. The equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall be sufficiently
insulated so that any noise generated from the equipment shall not
exceed the noise levels permitted by any ordinances of the Town of
Guttenberg or laws or regulations of the State of New Jersey.
7. Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
a. Site Plan Required. Notwithstanding any other provisions excepting
site plan approval, no wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
permitted without site plan approval, unless it is expressly authorized
in this section.
b. Supplementary Submission Checklist Requirements. In addition to a
complete site plan submission, including all site plan detail
requirements as set forth in Chapter 17, Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Review, the following shall be required at the time of submission:
1. Visual impact analysis, including the following:
(a) Computer-generated digital photographs representing "before
and after" construction must be included which depicts all
aspects of the facility such as antennas, support structures,
ancillary facilities and wiring.
(b) Reduction of visual impact statement. A statement that is
certified by the applicant must be provided which states that
every reasonable measure has been taken to assure that the
proposed communications tower, antenna and/or accessory
structure will be placed in a reasonably available location
which will minimize the visual impact of the surrounding area
(i.e., adjacent public rights-of-way) in accordance with
minimum standards of applicable federal and other
regulations.
2. Radio frequency (RF) coverage analysis, including the following:
(a) Computer-generated coverage analysis accompanied by actual
drive test measurements.
§ 28-31.9 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.11
1:478
(b) Drawing or plan of the applicant's existing level of coverage in
the Town of Guttenberg and within 1/2 mile of the municipal
boundary.
(c) Drawing or plans of the applicant's "targeted market coverage
area" of the site plan application.
3. Inventory of Existing Sites. An inventory of all existing towers,
antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas that are either
within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within 1/2 of a
mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height and design of each tower. The Planning Board may
disseminate information pursuant to the Right To Know Law or any
other law or regulation pertaining to the dissemination of public
records to any organization seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the governing authority provided, however, that the
Planning Board is not, by disseminating such information, in any
way representing or warranting that such sites are available or
suitable.
4. Availability of An Alternative Suitable Site/Structure Analysis, if
Applicable. A written report that sufficiently demonstrates the
absence of any other available option that would comply with
minimum separation distance requirements or conditional use
standards of this section. Evidence submitted as part of the report
may consist of any of the following:
(a) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and
related equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antennas on the existing
towers or structures or the antennas on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
(e) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
§ 28-31.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.11
1:479
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are significant other
limit factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
(g) The applicant shall have the affirmative obligation of proving
that it has attempted to enter into a contract with the owners
of an existing tower, structure or other more suitable site.
(1) This obligation shall include copies of all correspondence
as to rates, cost of contributions, etc.
(2) Copies of rejection of the offers propounded on the
applicant by the owners of the existing structure and/or
tower.
(3) Written cost proposals indicating actual quoted figures
required by the owner of the existing structures and/or
tower.
(4) A detailed cost analysis indicating the cost to the applicant
to construct a new tower and/or structure.
(h) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a
cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render
the technology unsuitable.
5. Franchises/Licenses. Wireless telecommunications carriers shall
certify that all franchises and licenses required by law for the
construction and/or operation of a wireless communications system
in the Town of Guttenberg have been obtained and shall file a copy
of all required franchise documentation and licenses.
6. Graphic depiction and numeric specifications for all setback and
separation distances as required by this section.
7. A statement including a full description of compliance with all
applicable requirements of this section.
8. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas
for future users.
9. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
10. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Town of Guttenberg based upon existing
§ 28-31.11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.11
1:480
physical, engineering, technological or geographic limitations in
the event the proposed tower is erected.
11. A noise study determining the ambient sound level associated with
proposed tower.
12. Documentation by a qualified engineer with a demonstrated
expertise in structural engineering regarding the capacity of a
proposed tower for the number and type of antennas.
13. Documentation by a qualified engineer with a demonstrated
expertise in structural engineering that any proposed tower and
antennas will have sufficient structural integrity to support the
proposed antennas and the anticipated future collocated antennas
and that the structural standards developed for antennas by the
Electronic Industry Association (EIA) and/or the
Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) have been met.
14. Any other information deemed by the governing authority to be
necessary to assess compliance with the MLUL and this section.
c. Completeness of Application.
1. Initial Submission Requirements. The applicant, at their option,
may choose to make an initial submission for completeness review
only, in accordance with the submission checklist requirements
stated in this section. Said submission may be modified to include a
total of four sets of required submission materials pursuant to this
section. The submission will be distributed to the Board Engineer
and Board Planner for completeness review. Upon the issuance of a
certificate of completeness, the applicant shall make all required
submissions at least 15 days prior to the scheduled public hearing.
2. Certification of Completeness. An application shall be complete for
the purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action
by the Board when so certified by the Board or its authorized
designee. In the event that the Board or its designee does not
certify the application to be complete within 45 days of the date of
its submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon
expiration of the forty-five-day period for the purposes of
commencing the applicable time period unless:
(a) The application lacks information required in the applicable
checklist; and
(b) The Board or its authorized designee has notified the
applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application
within 45 days of submission of the application.
3. Submission Requirement Waivers. The applicant may request that
one or more of the submission checklist requirements be waived, in
which event the Board or its designee shall grant or deny the
§ 28-31.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.11
1:481
§ 28-31.12. Maintenance and Monitoring Requirements; Fees. [Ord.
No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.12]
request within 45 days. The application shall include a list of all
requested submission waive items and items that are not applicable
to the application. Nothing herein shall be construed as
diminishing the applicant's obligation to offer sufficient proof
during the application process that he or she is entitled to approval
of the application.
4. Correction of Erroneous Information. The Board may subsequently
require correction of any information found to be in error, and the
submission of additional information not specified in this section, or
any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for
development have been met. The application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revision in the accompanying documents so required by the Board.
a. Compliance with Other Laws. The applicant's use of the premises is
contingent upon its obtaining all certificates, permits, zoning and other
approvals that may be required by any Federal, State or local authority.
The applicant shall erect, maintain and operate its antenna facilities in
accordance with site standards, statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations now in effect or that may be issued hereafter by the FCC or
any other governing bodies. Should any conflict arise between local
zoning ordinances and rules or regulations promulgated by the FCC,
the FCC rules and regulations shall govern.
b. Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other agency of the
Federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations unless a more stringent compliance schedule
is mandated by the controlling Federal agency. Failure to bring towers
and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
c. Biannual Maintenance Reports. After the wireless telecommunications
facility is in operation, the applicant shall submit a report within 90
days of commencing operation and at biannual intervals from the
issuance of the building permit. The report shall be submitted to the
Building Department and shall include:
1. A report prepared by a professional engineer certifying the
structural integrity of the facility, together with all antennas
§ 28-31.11 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.12
1:482
§ 28-31.13. Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use. [Ord. No.
005-10 § I, 28-31.13]
mounted thereon and whether they remain in use, and that they
meet all applicable minimum safety and FCC requirements.
2. Such report shall also certify whether or not antenna arrays have
been modified and shall include a detailed listing of all antennas
and equipment so certified.
3. A satisfactory insurance company inspection report shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of this section.
d. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed on the
premises in a good and workmanlike manner. The municipality reserves
the right to require the applicant to paint the antenna facilities in a
manner consistent with the Property Maintenance Code of the
municipality and consistent with the color of the building or to
otherwise shield the antenna facilities from view.
a. At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue
operation of a wireless telecommunications facility, such carrier shall
notify the Town Clerk by certified United States Mail of the proposed
date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall
be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation
of operations. In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give such
notice, the wireless telecommunications facility shall be considered
abandoned if it is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months.
b. The owner of any wireless telecommunications facility that is
abandoned shall physically remove it within 90 days of receipt of notice
from the Building Department notifying the owner of such
abandonment. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security
barriers for the subject property.
2. Proper disposal of waste materials from the site in accordance with
local, County and State solid waste disposal regulations.
3. Restoring the location of the facility to its original and/or natural
condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in
the after-condition as deemed appropriate by the Town Engineer.
c. If a carrier does not physically remove the antenna or tower in
accordance with this section, the Mayor and Council may order the
physical removal of such antenna or tower at the owner's expense and
lien the property for the costs associated therewith, inclusive of
professional fees.
§ 28-31.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-31.14
1:483
§ 28-31.14. Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.14]
§ 28-31.15. Severability. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.15]
§ 28-31.16. Repealer. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.16]
Any ordinances of parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this section
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
a. Not Expansion of Nonconforming Use. Towers that are constructed, and
antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
b. Preexisting Towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
c. Reconstruction of Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers or
Antennas. Bona fide nonconforming preexisting towers or antennas that
are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to obtain site
plan and/or a conditional use permit approval in accordance with all of
the following:
1. The type, height and location of the tower on the site shall be of the
same type and intensity as the original facility approved.
2. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with building
codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the
facility is damaged or destroyed.
3. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or
antenna shall be deemed abandoned.
a. If any provision of this section or the application of said provisions to
any person or circumstance is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect the remaining sections of this section.
b. This section and the provisions herein are declared to be severable.
c. If any provisions of this section or the application of such provision to
any person or circumstance is declared unconstitutional, that provision
shall not affect the remaining sections of this section.
d. All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies to this section and, to this
end, the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.
§ 28-31.14 GUTTENBERG CODE § 28-31.17
1:484
§ 28-31.17. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 005-10 § I, 28-31.17]
This section shall take effect upon final passage and publication in the
manner provided by law.
Chapter 29
SHORT TERM VACATION RENTALS IN RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES PROHIBITED
§ 29-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 29-1.1. Word Usage. [Ord. No. 16-2018 § 1]
As used in this Chapter:
HOSTING PLATFORM — Shall mean a marketplace in whatever form or
format which facilitates the Vacation Rental, through advertising, matchmaking
or any other means, using any medium of facilitation, and from
which the operator of the hosting platform derives revenues, including
booking fees or advertising revenues, from providing or maintaining the
marketplace.
PERMANENT RESIDENTS — Shall mean a person who occupies a dwelling
unit or accessory building or structure, for at least 60 consecutive days with
intent to establish that unit as his or her primary resident and may be an
owner or a lessee.
VACATION RENTAL — Shall mean rental of: (i) any dwelling unit, accessory
building or structure, garage, attic, or basement, in whole or in part; or
(ii) any furniture within any dwelling unit, accessory building or structure,
garage, attic, or basement, within the Town of Guttenberg, to any person(s)
for exclusive transient use of 30 consecutive days or less, regardless of
whether one of the dwelling unit's Permanent Residents is on-site, in the
dwelling unit, throughout the visitors' stay, and whereby the unit is only
approved for permanent residential occupancy and not approved for
transient occupancy by this Chapter. Rental of units within Town approved
hotels, motels and bed and breakfasts shall not be considered Vacation
Rental.
§ 29-2. PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. No. 16-2018 § 2]
No person, including any Hosting Platform operator, shall undertake,
maintain, authorize, aid, facilitate or advertise any Vacation Rental activity
that does not comply with this Code.
§ 29-3. REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 16-2018 § 3]
a. The Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg may promulgate
regulations, which may include but are not limited to permit conditions,
reporting requirements, inspection frequencies, enforcement
procedures, advertising restrictions, disclosure requirements, or
§ 28-31.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-3
1:485
§ 29-4. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 16-2018 § 4]
Chapter 31
CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS
§ 31-1. Purpose and Authority. [Added 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 21-19]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40:49-2, the Town of Guttenberg hereby
authorizes all departments, with the exception of the municipal court, to
accept credit card payments for municipal fees.
§ 31-2. Credit Card Authorization. [Added 8-26-2019 by Ord. No.
21-19]
The Town of Guttenberg shall accept credit card payments for municipal
fees. The credit card payment program shall be implemented and
supervised by the Municipal Administrator and Qualified Purchasing Agent,
in conjunction with the IT Department.
insurance requirements, to implement the provisions of this Chapter.
No person shall fail to comply with any such regulation.
b. The Mayor and Council of the Town of Guttenberg may establish and set
all fees and charges as may be necessary to effectuate the purpose of
this Chapter.
a. Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be cause for a Municipal
Court summons to be issued by the Police Department, Code
Enforcement Official, or Health Officer.
b. Violations of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable for the
first offense of a minimum fine of $500. Every subsequent offense shall
be punishable by a minimum fine of $1,000 payable through the
Municipal Court Violations Bureau.
c. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Chapter in a
criminal case or found to be in violation of this Chapter in a civil case
brought by a law enforcement agency shall be ordered to reimburse the
Town and other participating law enforcement agencies their full
investigative costs and remit all illegally obtained rental revenue to the
Town so that it may be returned to the victims of illegal short term
rental activities.
d. Any interested person may seek an injunction or other relief to prevent
or remedy violations of this Chapter. The prevailing party in such an
action shall be entitled to recover reasonable costs and attorney's fees.
e. The remedies provided in this section are not exclusive, and nothing in
this section shall preclude the use or application of any other remedies,
penalties or procedures established by law.
§ 29-3 GUTTENBERG CODE § 31-3
1:486
§ 31-3. Convenience Fee. [Added 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 21-19]
The convenience fee for credit card payments shall be the actual percentage
charged by the credit card company.
§ 31-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-3
1:487

ZONING
28 Attachment 2
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
(Subsection 28-4.4)
District Permitted
Uses
Minimum Lot Size Maximum Height Maximum
Coverage
Minimum Yard Requirements Minimum Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Open Space
Width
(feet)
Area
(square
feet)
Stories Feet Front One Side
(feet)
Two Side
(feet)
Rear
R-1 Low Density
Residential
See
Section
28-4.5
25 2,500 3 35 Building: 40%
Lot: 75%
Existing
average
2 5 feet, 1 inch 25
R-2 High
Density
Residential
See
Section
28-4.6
None 40,000 50 550 Building: 60% None None None None
R-3 Waterfront
Residential
See
Section
28-4.7
75 7,500 3 35 Building: 60% 5 5 10 25
R-4 Mid-Rise
Mixed-Use
See
Section
28-4.8
Lots less
than 20,000
square feet
in area
50 5,000 With ground floor
parking: 3 residential
stories above parking
level/50 feet Without
ground floor parking:
3 stories/40 feet
Building: 50% 10 5 10 25 50
Lots 20,000
square feet
or greater in
area
100 20,000 Inclusive of indoor
garage parking: 5
stories and 90 feet
exclusive of roof
appurtenances
Impervious
surface
coverage
inclusive of
building
coverage: 90%
10 0 feet. If side
yard proposed
then minimum
is 5 feet
setback
5 200 10%
R-5 High-Rise
Residential
See
Section
28-4.11
100 20,000 Inclusive of indoor
garage parking: 15
stories and 180 feet
exclusive of roof
appurtenances
Impervious
surface
coverage
inclusive of
building
coverage: 90%
10 0 feet. If side
yard proposed
then minimum
setback is 5
feet
5 200 10%
C Commercial See
Section
28-4.9
None 5 55 Building: 60% None None None None
P Parks &
Recreation
See
Section
28-4.10
Site Plan Subject to Planning Board Approval
28 Attachment 2:1 Publication, May 2020